Chapter 12: Of the Strange Adventure That Befell the Valiant Don Quixote with the Brave Knight of the Mirrors

Don Quixote and his squire spent the night that followed the day of their encounter with Death under some tall, shady trees, Don Quixote having eaten, at Sancho's urging, some of what was carried in the grey's store. And in the middle of supper Sancho said to his master:

"Sir, what a fool I should have looked if I had chosen as my reward the spoils of the first adventure your worship finished, instead of the foals of the three mares! In fact, in fact, a bird in the hand is worth more than a vulture on the wing."

"All the same," answered Don Quixote, "if you, Sancho, had let me attack as I wanted, there would have fallen to you as spoils at the very least the Empress's gold crown and Cupid's painted wings; for I would have pulled them off against the grain and put them into your hands."

"The sceptres and crowns of play-acting emperors," answered Sancho Panza, "were never of pure gold but of tinsel or tinplate."

"That is true," replied Don Quixote, "because it would not be right that the trappings of a play should be genuine rather than pretended and merely apparent, as the play itself is — with which I want you to be on good terms, Sancho, keeping it in your favour, and by the same token those who act plays and those who compose them, because they are all instruments of doing a great good to the state, holding a mirror up before us at every step in which the actions of human life are seen to the life. And there is no comparison that shows us more to the life what we are and what we must be than plays and players.

"If not, tell me: have you never seen a play acted where kings, emperors and pontiffs are brought in, and knights and ladies and various other characters? One plays the ruffian, another the trickster, this one the merchant, that one the soldier, another the wise fool, another the foolish lover; and when the play is over and they take off the clothes belonging to it, all the players are left equal."

"Yes, I have seen it," answered Sancho.

"Well, the same thing," said Don Quixote, "happens in the comedy and business of this world, where some play emperors, others pontiffs, and, in short, all the characters that can be brought into a play; but on coming to the end, which is when life is over, death takes off them all the clothes that made them different, and they are left equal in the grave."

"A brave comparison!" said Sancho, "although not so new that I have not heard it many and various times — like the one about the game of chess, where, while the game lasts, each piece has its own particular office; and when the game is over they are all mixed and put together and shuffled, and thrown into a bag, which is like throwing a life into the grave."

"Every day, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "you are becoming less simple and more judicious."

"Yes, some of your worship's good sense is bound to rub off on me," answered Sancho; "for lands that are barren and dry in themselves come to give good fruit when they are manured and cultivated. I mean that your worship's conversation has been the manure that has fallen on the barren land of my dry wits, and the cultivating has been the time I have served you and dealt with you; and with this I hope to give fruits of myself that shall be a blessing, such that they will not fall away or slip from the paths of the good breeding your worship has worked into my parched understanding."

Don Quixote laughed at Sancho's affected speech, and it seemed to him that what he said about his improvement was true; because from time to time he talked in a way that astonished him — although all or most of the times Sancho tried to talk in the formal, courtly manner he ended his speech by hurling himself down from the mountain of his simplicity into the depths of his ignorance. And where he showed himself most elegant and most retentive was in bringing in proverbs, whether or not they came to the point of what he was discussing, as will have been seen and noticed in the course of this history.

In this and other talk a great part of the night went by for them, and Sancho took it into his head to let the floodgates of his eyes fall, as he used to put it when he wanted to sleep; and, unharnessing the grey, he gave him plentiful and free pasture. He did not take the saddle off Rocinante, because it was his master's express command that during the time they were in the field, or were not sleeping under a roof, he should not unharness Rocinante: an ancient usage established and kept by knights errant, to take the bridle off and hang it from the saddlebow — but take the saddle off the horse? Look out for that!

And so Sancho did it, and gave him the same freedom as the grey; whose friendship with Rocinante was so unique and so close that there is a report, by tradition from fathers to sons, that the author of this true history wrote particular chapters about it, but that, to keep the decency and decorum owing to so heroic a history, he did not put them into it — although sometimes he forgets this resolution of his and writes that as soon as the two beasts came together they set to scratching each other; and that afterwards, tired and satisfied, Rocinante would lay his neck across the grey's — with more than half a yard of it left over on the other side — and the two of them, looking attentively at the ground, would generally stay like that for three days, or at least all the time they were left alone and hunger did not compel them to look for food.

I say that they say the author left it written that he had compared them in friendship to the friendship of Nisus and Euryalus, and of Pylades and Orestes; and if this is so, one may see, to universal astonishment, how firm the friendship of these two peaceable animals must have been — and to the confusion of men, who know so badly how to keep friendship with one another. For this reason it was said:

	There is no friend for a friend:
	the reeds turn into lances;

and by the other man who sang:

	Between friend and friend, the bug — and so on.

And let nobody think the author went somewhat off the road in having compared the friendship of these animals to that of men; for men have received many hints from beasts and learnt many important things from them — such as, from the storks, the clyster; from dogs, vomiting and gratitude; from cranes, watchfulness; from ants, foresight; from elephants, modesty; and from the horse, loyalty.

Finally Sancho fell asleep at the foot of a cork tree, and Don Quixote dozed at the foot of a sturdy oak. But a very short space of time had gone by when he was woken by a noise he heard behind him; and getting up with a start, he set himself to look and listen for where the noise was coming from, and saw that it was two men on horseback, and that one of them, letting himself drop out of the saddle, said to the other:

"Get down, my friend, and take the bridles off the horses; for to my mind this place is well provided with grass for them, and with the silence and solitude my loving thoughts need."

To say this and to stretch himself out on the ground were all one moment; and as he threw himself down, the armour he was wearing rang, a plain sign by which Don Quixote knew he must be a knight errant. And going up to Sancho, who was asleep, he took him by the arm, and with no small trouble brought him round to his senses, and said to him in a low voice:

"Brother Sancho, we have an adventure."

"God send us a good one," answered Sancho; "and where is her worship this lady adventure, my dear sir?"

"Where, Sancho?" replied Don Quixote. "Turn your eyes and look, and you will see stretched out there a knight errant who, as far as I can make out, cannot be excessively cheerful; because I saw him throw himself off his horse and stretch out on the ground with certain signs of vexation, and as he fell his armour rang."

"Then how does your worship find," said Sancho, "that this is an adventure?"

"I do not mean to say," answered Don Quixote, "that this is a whole adventure, but the beginning of one; for this is how adventures begin. But listen; for by the sound of it he is tuning a lute or a guitar, and, judging by the way he spits and clears his chest, he must be getting ready to sing something."

"Upon my word it is so," answered Sancho, "and he must be a knight in love."

"There is not one of the knights errant who is not," said Don Quixote. "And let us listen to him, for by the thread we shall get at the ball of his thoughts, if he does sing; because out of the abundance of the heart the tongue speaks."

Sancho was about to answer his master, but he was prevented by the voice of the Knight of the Wood, which was neither very bad nor very good. And while the two of them stood astonished, they heard that what he sang was this sonnet:

	Give me, my lady, some rule that I may follow,
	cut to the pattern of your own will;
	for it will be so valued by mine
	that I shall never depart a point from it.

	If it is your pleasure that I should die
	keeping my suffering silent, count me finished already;
	if you want me to tell it you in some unusual
	way, I shall make love himself tell it.

	I am made proof against opposites,
	of soft wax and of hard diamond,
	and I fit my soul to the laws of love.

	Soft as it is, or strong, I offer you my breast:
	carve on it or stamp on it whatever pleases you,
	for I swear to keep it there for ever.

With an "Ah!" that seemed to be torn from the depths of his heart, the Knight of the Wood made an end of his song; and a little later, in a sorrowful, grieving voice, he said:

"O most beautiful and most ungrateful woman in the world! How can it be possible, most serene Casildea de Vandalia, that you should allow this captive knight of yours to wear himself out and finish in continual wanderings and in rough, hard labours? Is it not enough by now that I have made all the knights of Navarre, all those of León, all those of Tartessus, all the Castilians and, in short, all the knights of La Mancha confess you to be the most beautiful woman in the world?"

"Not that," said Don Quixote at this point; "for I am of La Mancha and I have never confessed any such thing, nor could I nor ought I to confess a thing so damaging to my lady's beauty. And you see for yourself, Sancho, that this knight is raving. But let us listen: perhaps he will explain himself further."

"He will, indeed," replied Sancho; "for he looks like going on complaining for a month at a stretch."

But it was not so, because the Knight of the Wood, having half heard that there were people talking near him, without going any further with his lament, got to his feet and said in a sonorous, well-bred voice:

"Who goes there? What sort of people? Are you by any chance of the number of the contented, or of the afflicted?"

"Of the afflicted," answered Don Quixote.

"Then come to me," answered the Knight of the Wood, "and you may reckon that you are coming to sadness itself and to affliction itself."

Don Quixote, finding himself answered so tenderly and so courteously, went up to him, and Sancho neither more nor less.

The lamenting knight took Don Quixote by the arm, saying:

"Sit down here, sir knight; for to understand that you are one, and one of those who profess knight-errantry, it is enough for me to have found you in this place, where solitude and the night air keep you company — the natural beds and proper dwellings of knights errant."

To which Don Quixote answered:

"A knight I am, and of the profession you name; and although sadnesses, misfortunes and disasters have their own seat in my soul, that has not driven out of it the compassion I feel for other men's troubles. From what you were saying a little while ago I gathered that yours are the troubles of love — I mean of the love you bear that beautiful ingrate you named in your laments."

By the time this was going on they were seated together on the hard ground, in good peace and fellowship, as though at daybreak they were not going to break each other's heads.

"By any chance, sir knight," the Knight of the Wood asked Don Quixote, "are you in love?"

"By misfortune I am," answered Don Quixote; "although the harms that are born of well-placed affections ought to be counted graces rather than misfortunes."

"That is true," replied the Knight of the Wood, "if disdains did not disturb our reason and our understanding — disdains which, when they are many, look like acts of revenge."

"I have never been disdained by my lady," answered Don Quixote.

"Certainly not," said Sancho, who was standing right there; "because my lady is like a tame ewe: she is softer than butter."

"Is this your squire?" asked the Knight of the Wood.

"He is," answered Don Quixote.

"I have never seen a squire," replied the Knight of the Wood, "who dares to speak where his master is speaking. At least there is that one of mine, who is as big as his father, and it will not be proved that he has ever unstitched his lips where I am talking."

"Well, upon my word," said Sancho, "I have talked and I can talk in front of somebody as — but let it stay there, for stirring it only makes it worse."

The Knight of the Wood's squire took Sancho by the arm, saying to him:

"Let the two of us go off where we can talk squire-fashion as much as we like, and leave these gentlemen our masters to lock horns telling each other the histories of their loves; for it is a safe bet that daylight will catch them at it and they will not have finished."

"So be it and welcome," said Sancho; "and I shall tell your worship who I am, so that you may see whether I can be counted in the dozen of the most talkative squires."

With this the two squires drew off, and there passed between them a conversation as amusing as the one that passed between their masters was grave.
