Chapter 13: In Which the Adventure of the Knight of the Wood Is Continued, with the Judicious, New and Agreeable Conversation That Passed Between the Two Squires

Knights and squires were divided, the latter telling each other their lives and the former their loves; but the history relates first the conversation of the men and then goes on with that of the masters. And so it says that, drawing off a little from them, the Knight of the Wood's squire said to Sancho:

"It is a laborious life we lead and live, my dear sir, we who are squires to knights errant: truly we eat our bread in the sweat of our faces, which is one of the curses God laid on our first parents."

"One might also say," added Sancho, "that we eat it in the frost of our bodies; for who has more heat and more cold than the wretched squires of knight-errantry? And it would be less bad if we did eat, since with bread sorrows are less; but sometimes a day or two goes by without our breakfasting on anything but the wind that blows."

"All this can be borne and put up with," said the Knight of the Wood's squire, "for the hope we have of the reward; because unless the knight errant a squire serves is excessively unlucky, at the very least after a few passes he will find himself rewarded with a handsome government of some isle or other, or with a good-looking earldom."

"I," replied Sancho, "have already told my master that I shall be satisfied with the government of some isle; and he is so noble and so generous that he has promised it me many and various times."

"I," said the other, "shall be satisfied for my services with a canonry, and my master has already made it over to me — and such a one!"

"Your worship's master," said Sancho, "must be a knight of the ecclesiastical sort, and can do such favours for his good squires; but mine is merely a layman — although I remember when discerning people, though ill-intentioned to my mind, wanted to advise him to try to be an archbishop. But he would have nothing but being an emperor, and I was trembling all that time in case it came into his head to go into the Church, because I did not find myself fit to hold benefices in it; for I would have your worship know that although I look like a man, I am a beast where the Church is concerned."

"Well, truly your worship is mistaken," said the Knight of the Wood's squire, "on the grounds that island governments are not all of good quality. Some are crooked, some are poor, some are gloomy; and finally the most upright and best appointed of them brings with it a heavy load of anxieties and discomforts, which the unlucky man whose lot it falls to puts on his own shoulders.

"It would be a great deal better if we who profess this accursed servitude withdrew to our own homes and entertained ourselves there with gentler occupations — such as, let us say, hunting or fishing; for what squire is there so poor in the world who is short of a hack and a couple of greyhounds and a fishing rod to entertain himself with in his village?"

"I am short of none of that," answered Sancho. "It is true that I have no hack, but I have an ass that is worth twice as much as my master's horse. May God give me a bad Easter, and let it be the very next one that comes, if I would swap him for it, even if they gave me four bushels of barley on top. Your worship will take it for a joke, the value of my grey — for grey is the colour of my donkey. And I should not be short of greyhounds either, since there are plenty to spare in my village; and what is more, hunting is most enjoyable when it is done at somebody else's cost."

"Really and truly, master squire," answered the other, "I have proposed and determined to give up these drunken follies of these knights and to withdraw to my village and bring up my little children, for I have three like three oriental pearls."

"I have two," said Sancho, "who could be presented to the Pope in person — especially a girl I am bringing up to be a countess, if God is pleased, though in spite of her mother."

"And what age is this lady who is being brought up to be a countess?" asked the Knight of the Wood's squire.

"Fifteen, two more or less," answered Sancho; "but she is as tall as a lance, and as fresh as an April morning, and she has the strength of a porter."

"Those are qualities," answered the other, "not only for being a countess but for being a nymph of the green wood. Oh, the whoreson little whore, what a pair of loins the hussy must have!"

To which Sancho answered, somewhat put out:

"She is no whore, nor was her mother one, nor will either of the two of them be one, God willing, as long as I live. And speak more decently; for considering that your worship has been brought up among knights errant, who are courtesy itself, those words do not strike me as very well arranged."

"Oh, how little your worship understands about the business of praise, master squire!" replied the other. "How is it you do not know that when some knight gives the bull a good lance-thrust in the ring, or when somebody does something well done, the common people generally say: 'Oh, the whoreson rogue, how well he has done it!'? And what looks like abuse is, on those terms, notable praise. And you may disown, sir, the sons and daughters who do not do things that deserve their parents' being given such praises."

"I do disown them," answered Sancho; "and in that way and by that same reasoning your worship might throw a whole whoredom over me and my children and my wife, because everything they do and say is extreme enough to deserve such praises. And to see them again I pray God to get me out of mortal sin — which will be the same thing as getting me out of this dangerous office of squire, which I have fallen into for the second time, baited and taken in by a purse with a hundred ducats in it that I found one day in the heart of the Sierra Morena.

"And the devil sets before my eyes here, there, no, not here but over yonder, a bag full of doubloons, so that I fancy at every step I am touching it with my hand and hugging it and carrying it home and taking out mortgages and setting up rents and living like a prince. And while I am thinking of this, all the labours I suffer with this idiot of a master of mine become easy and bearable — and I know he has more of the madman about him than of the knight."

"That is why they say," answered the other, "that greed bursts the sack; and if we are to talk of madmen, there is no greater one in the world than my master, because he is one of those they mean when they say, 'Other men's cares kill the ass.' For to get another knight to recover the wits he has lost, he plays the madman himself, and goes about looking for something which, once found, may blow up in his face — I do not know."

"And is he in love, by any chance?"

"He is," said the Knight of the Wood's squire: "with a certain Casildea de Vandalia, the rawest and the most roasted lady to be found in the whole world. But it is not on the foot of rawness that he limps; other and greater tricks are rumbling in his belly, and it will show before many hours are out."

"There is no road so smooth," replied Sancho, "that it has not some stumble or ditch in it. In other houses they cook beans, and in mine by the cauldron. Madness must have more companions and hangers-on than good sense has. But if it is true, as people commonly say, that having companions in one's troubles serves as a relief in them, I may console myself with your worship, since you serve another master as foolish as mine."

"Foolish, but brave," answered the other; "and more of a rogue than of a fool or a brave man."

"Mine is not that," answered Sancho: "I mean he has nothing of the rogue about him. On the contrary, he has a soul like a pitcher; he does not know how to do harm to anybody, but good to everybody, nor has he any malice: a child could make him believe it was night in the middle of the day. And for this simplicity I love him like the strings of my heart, and I cannot bring myself to leave him, whatever absurdities he commits."

"For all that, brother and sir," said the Knight of the Wood's squire, "if the blind man leads the blind, they are both in danger of falling into the ditch. It is better for us to retire in good order and go back to our own home ground; for those who look for adventures do not always find good ones."

Sancho was spitting often, apparently a certain kind of sticky and rather dry saliva; which the charitable woodland squire seeing and noticing, he said:

"It seems to me that with all this talking our tongues are sticking to our palates; but I have an unsticker hanging from my horse's saddlebow which is as good as they come."

And getting up, he came back a little later with a great wineskin and a pie half a yard long — and this is no exaggeration, because it was made of a white rabbit so big that Sancho, on touching it, took it to be made of a full-grown goat, not a kid. Which Sancho seeing, he said:

"And your worship carries this about with you, sir?"

"Well, what did you suppose?" answered the other. "Am I by any chance some squire of water and wool? I carry better stores on my horse's hindquarters than a general takes with him when he goes on the march."

Sancho ate without needing to be begged, and in the dark swallowed mouthfuls the size of the knots in a hobble-rope. And he said:

"Your worship is indeed a faithful and lawful squire, running and grinding, magnificent and great, as this banquet shows — which, if it has not come here by art of enchantment, at least looks as if it had. And not like me, poor wretched creature, who carry in my saddlebags nothing but a little cheese so hard that a giant's head could be broken with it, along with four dozen carob beans and as many hazelnuts and walnuts, thanks to my master's stinginess and to the opinion he holds and the rule he keeps that knights errant must keep themselves and live on nothing but dried fruit and the herbs of the field."

"Upon my word, brother," replied the other, "my stomach is not made for golden thistles or wild pears or mountain roots. Let our masters settle it with their opinions and their chivalric laws, and eat whatever they order. I carry cold pies and this wineskin hanging from my saddlebow, just in case; and it is so devoted to me and I love it so much that few moments go by without my giving it a thousand kisses and a thousand embraces."

And saying this, he put it into Sancho's hands; and Sancho, tipping it up and setting it to his mouth, stood looking at the stars for a quarter of an hour; and on finishing his drink he let his head fall to one side, and, giving a great sigh, said:

"Oh, the whoreson rogue, and what a good Catholic it is!"

"There, you see," said the Knight of the Wood's squire, hearing Sancho's "whoreson", "how you have praised this wine by calling it a whoreson?"

"I say," answered Sancho, "that I confess I recognise it is no dishonour to call anybody a son of a whore when it comes under the head of praising him. But tell me, sir, by the memory of what you love most: is this wine from Ciudad Real?"

"A fine taster!" answered the other. "Truly it is from nowhere else, and it has some years of age on it."

"Tell me another!" said Sancho. "Do not think otherwise than that it would be beyond me to hit on knowing it. Is it not a fine thing, master squire, that I have so great and so natural an instinct in this matter of knowing wines that, if you give me any at all to smell, I can hit on its country, its family, its flavour and how long it will keep and the changes it will go through, with every circumstance belonging to the wine?

"But there is nothing to wonder at in it, since I had in my family on my father's side the two most excellent wine-tasters La Mancha has known for many years past. As a proof of which, this is what happened to them.

"They were both given some wine out of a cask to try, and were asked their opinion on the condition, quality, goodness or badness of the wine. One of them tried it with the tip of his tongue; the other did no more than put it to his nose. The first said the wine tasted of iron; the second said it tasted more of Cordovan leather. The owner said the cask was clean and that the wine had had nothing put in it that could have given it a taste of iron or of leather. For all that, the two famous tasters stood by what they had said. Time went on, the wine was sold, and on cleaning out the cask they found in it a small key hanging from a strap of Cordovan leather.

"So your worship may see whether a man who comes of this stock can give his opinion in such cases."

"That is why I say," said the Knight of the Wood's squire, "that we should give up going about looking for adventures; and since we have loaves, let us not go looking for cakes, and let us get back to our huts, for God will find us there if he chooses."

"I shall serve my master until he gets to Saragossa; and after that we shall all come to an understanding."

Finally the two good squires talked so much and drank so much that sleep had to tie up their tongues and take the edge off their thirst — for to quench it would have been impossible. And so, both of them clutching the now almost empty wineskin, with their mouthfuls half chewed in their mouths, they fell asleep; where we shall leave them for the present, to tell what passed between the Knight of the Wood and the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance.
