Chapter 14: In Which the Adventure of the Knight of the Wood Is Carried Further

Among many things that passed between Don Quixote and the Knight of the Wood, the history says that the Knight of the Wood said to Don Quixote:

"In short, sir knight, I want you to know that my destiny — or rather my own choice — brought me to fall in love with the peerless Casildea de Vandalia. I call her peerless because she has no peer, either in the size of her body or in the height of her rank and her beauty.

"This Casildea, then, that I am telling you about, repaid my honourable thoughts and respectful desires by making me busy myself, as Hercules's stepmother made him, in many and various dangers, promising me at the end of each one that at the end of the next the end of my hopes would come. But my labours have gone on linking themselves together in such a way that they are beyond counting, and I do not know which is to be the last one that will make a beginning to the fulfilling of my good desires.

"Once she ordered me to go and challenge that famous giantess of Seville called the Giralda, who is as strong and valiant as though she were made of bronze, and who, without moving from one place, is the most movable and changeable woman in the world. I went, I saw her and I conquered her, and I made her stand still and keep in her place — because for more than a week nothing blew but north winds.

"There was also a time when she ordered me to go and weigh in my hands the ancient stones of the mighty Bulls of Guisando, an enterprise fitter to be entrusted to porters than to knights. Another time she ordered me to hurl myself down and sink into the chasm of Cabra — an unheard-of and fearful danger — and to bring her a particular account of what is shut up in that dark depth.

"I stopped the Giralda's movement, I weighed the Bulls of Guisando, I threw myself into the chasm and brought to light what was hidden in its abyss; and my hopes were as dead as dead, and her commands and her disdains as alive as alive.

"In short, she has now finally ordered me to travel through all the provinces of Spain and to make all the knights errant who wander through them confess that she alone is the most excellent in beauty of all the women alive today, and that I am the bravest and most truly enamoured knight in the world. On which demand I have now travelled the greater part of Spain, and in it I have defeated many knights who have dared to contradict me.

"But what I most pride and plume myself on is having defeated in single combat that so famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, and having made him confess that my Casildea is more beautiful than his Dulcinea; and in this one victory alone I reckon I have defeated all the knights in the world, because this Don Quixote I speak of has defeated them all — and, having defeated him, his glory, his fame and his honour have been transferred and passed over to my person;

	and the conqueror is honoured the more,
	the more the conquered man is esteemed.

"So that the innumerable exploits of the said Don Quixote now stand to my account and are mine."

Don Quixote was astonished to hear the Knight of the Wood, and a thousand times he was on the point of telling him he lied, and he already had the "you lie" on the tip of his tongue; but he restrained himself as best he could, so as to make him confess his lie out of his own mouth. And so he said to him calmly:

"That your worship, sir knight, may have defeated most of the knights errant in Spain, and even in the whole world, I say nothing about; but that you should have defeated Don Quixote of La Mancha, I put in doubt. It might have been some other man who looked like him — although there are few who look like him."

"How, not?" replied the Knight of the Wood. "By the sky that covers us, I fought with Don Quixote and I beat him and overcame him; and he is a tall man, dry in the face, with long, lean, wiry limbs, going grey, with an aquiline and somewhat hooked nose, and with big black drooping moustaches. He campaigns under the name of the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, and has for a squire a farmer called Sancho Panza; he presses the back and rules the bridle of a famous horse called Rocinante; and, in short, he has for the lady of his affections a certain Dulcinea of El Toboso, at one time called Aldonza Lorenzo — as mine, being called Casilda and being from Andalusia, I call Casildea de Vandalia. If all these details are not enough to prove my truth, here is my sword, which will make incredulity itself believe it."

"Calm yourself, sir knight," said Don Quixote, "and listen to what I want to say to you. You must know that this Don Quixote you speak of is the greatest friend I have in this world — so much so that I could say I hold him in the place of my own person; and by the details you have given me of him, so exact and so certain, I cannot think anything but that he is the very man you defeated.

"On the other hand, I see with my eyes and touch with my hands that it is not possible that he should be the same man — unless it were that, as he has many enchanters for enemies, and one in particular who ordinarily persecutes him, one of them may have taken his shape and let himself be beaten, so as to cheat him of the fame his lofty chivalries have won and earned him throughout the whole of the discovered earth.

"And in confirmation of this I want you to know too that these enchanters who are his enemies not two days ago transformed the shape and person of the beautiful Dulcinea of El Toboso into a low and coarse country girl; and in this same way they must have transformed Don Quixote. And if all this is not enough to satisfy you of this truth I am telling, here is Don Quixote himself, who will maintain it with his arms on foot, or on horseback, or in whatever way pleases you."

And saying this he got to his feet and gripped his sword, waiting to see what decision the Knight of the Wood would take; who, in a voice equally calm, answered and said:

"A good payer does not mind giving pledges: the man who was once able to defeat you transformed, Señor Don Quixote, may well hope to overcome you in your own being. But since it is not right that knights should do their feats of arms in the dark, like highwaymen and ruffians, let us wait for daylight, so that the sun may see our deeds. And it must be a condition of our battle that the loser is to remain at the winner's will, so that he may do with him whatever he likes, provided that what is laid on him is fitting for a knight."

"I am more than content with that condition and agreement," answered Don Quixote.

And on saying this, they went to where their squires were and found them snoring, and in the same posture they had been in when sleep took them by surprise. They woke them and ordered them to have the horses ready, because at sunrise the two of them were to fight a bloody, single and unequal battle. At which news Sancho was appalled and thunderstruck, fearing for his master's safety on account of the brave deeds he had heard the Knight of the Wood's squire tell of his own master. But without saying a word, the two squires went off to look for their beasts, for by now all three horses and the grey had smelt one another and were all standing together.

On the way the Knight of the Wood's squire said to Sancho:

"You must know, brother, that the fighting men of Andalusia have a custom, when they are seconds in some quarrel, of not standing idle with their hands folded while their principals fight it out. I say this so that you may be warned that while our masters fight, we too are to fight and knock each other to splinters."

"That custom, master squire," answered Sancho, "may hold and pass among the ruffians and fighting men you speak of, but among the squires of knights errant, not in a hundred years. At least I have never heard my master speak of any such custom, and he knows by heart all the ordinances of knight-errantry.

"What is more, I am willing to grant that it is true and an express ordinance that squires must fight while their masters fight; but I do not want to keep it — I would rather pay the penalty laid down for such peaceable squires, which I am sure comes to no more than two pounds of wax. And I would rather pay those two pounds, which I know will cost me less than the lint I might spend on doctoring my head, which I already count as split and divided into two parts. And there is more: that I am made incapable of fighting by having no sword, since I have never worn one in my life."

"For that I know a good remedy," said the Knight of the Wood's squire. "I have here two linen sacks of the same size: you shall take one and I the other, and we shall fight with sack-blows, with equal arms."

"In that way, so be it and welcome," answered Sancho, "because such a fight will serve rather to dust us down than to wound us."

"It must not be like that," replied the other; "because we must put inside the sacks, so that the wind does not carry them off, half a dozen nice smooth pebbles, weighing the same on both sides; and in this way we shall be able to sack each other without doing ourselves any harm or damage."

"Just look, body of my father," answered Sancho, "what onion-sables, or what flakes of carded cotton he is putting in the sacks so that our skulls should not be pounded and our bones ground to powder! But even if they were filled with silk cocoons, let me tell you, my dear sir, that I am not going to fight. Let our masters fight and let them settle it, and let us drink and live; for time takes care to take our lives away without our going about looking for appetisers to make them end before their proper season and term and before they fall ripe of themselves."

"For all that," replied the Knight of the Wood's squire, "we must fight for half an hour at least."

"Not that," answered Sancho. "I shall not be so discourteous or so ungrateful as to pick any quarrel at all, however small, with a man I have eaten and drunk with. What is more, being without anger or annoyance, who the devil is going to bring himself to fight cold?"

"For that," said the Knight of the Wood's squire, "I shall provide a sufficient remedy: which is that before we begin the fight I shall come up quietly to your worship and give you three or four slaps that will lay you at my feet; with which I shall wake up your anger even if you are sleepier than a dormouse."

"Against that stroke I know another," answered Sancho, "which is not a whit behind it: I shall pick up a cudgel, and before your worship comes to wake up my anger I shall put yours to sleep with such blows that it will not wake up except in the other world — where it is known that I am not a man who lets anybody handle his face.

"And let every man look to his own arrow, although the soundest thing would be for each man to let his own anger sleep, for nobody knows anybody else's soul; and many a man goes for wool and comes back shorn. And God blessed peace and cursed quarrels; because if a cat, hunted and shut in and squeezed, turns into a lion, God knows what I, who am a man, might turn into. And so from now on I give your worship notice, master squire, that all the harm and damage that comes of our quarrel is to be on your account."

"Very well," replied the Knight of the Wood's squire. "God will send the morning and we shall get on."

At this a thousand kinds of painted little birds were beginning to warble in the trees, and in their various cheerful songs they seemed to be greeting and welcoming the fresh dawn, who was already showing the beauty of her face at the doors and balconies of the east, shaking from her hair an endless number of liquid pearls; in whose sweet liquor the grasses bathed themselves and seemed likewise to be sprouting and raining fine white seed-pearl. The willows dripped a savoury manna, the springs laughed, the streams murmured, the woods grew glad and the meadows grew rich at her coming.

But the light of day had hardly given room to see and tell things apart when the first thing that offered itself to Sancho Panza's eyes was the nose of the Knight of the Wood's squire, which was so big that it almost cast a shadow over his whole body. It is related, in fact, that it was of excessive size, hooked in the middle and all covered with warts, of a purplish colour like an aubergine; it came down two fingers below his mouth; and its size, colour, warts and hooking so disfigured his face that on seeing him Sancho began to kick with his feet and beat with his hands, like a child in a fit, and resolved in his heart to let himself be given two hundred slaps rather than wake his anger to fight with that monster.

Don Quixote looked at his opponent and found that he had already put on his helmet and closed it, so that he could not see his face; but he noticed that he was a well-built man and not very tall. Over his armour he wore a surcoat or tunic of a stuff apparently of the finest gold, sown all over with a great many little moons of shining mirrors, which made him extremely elegant and showy. Over his helmet there floated a great quantity of green, yellow and white plumes; the lance, which he had leaning against a tree, was enormous and thick, with a steel head more than a hand's breadth long.

Don Quixote looked at it all and noted it all, and judged from what he had seen and looked at that this knight must be a man of great strength. But he was not for that afraid, as Sancho Panza was; on the contrary, with a fine boldness he said to the Knight of the Mirrors:

"If your great eagerness to fight, sir knight, has not used up your courtesy, by that courtesy I beg you to raise your visor a little, so that I may see whether the gallantry of your face answers to that of your build."

"Whether you come out of this enterprise beaten or victorious, sir knight," answered the Knight of the Mirrors, "you will have time and room enough to see me; and if I do not satisfy your wish now, it is because I think I am doing a notable wrong to the beautiful Casildea de Vandalia in wasting the time it would take me to raise my visor without making you confess what you know already I am after."

"Well, while we are mounting," said Don Quixote, "you may perfectly well tell me whether I am that Don Quixote you said you had defeated."

"To that we answer you," said the Knight of the Mirrors, "that you look like the very knight I defeated as one egg looks like another; but since you say he is persecuted by enchanters, I shall not dare to state whether you are the man in question or not."

"That is enough for me," answered Don Quixote, "to make me believe you are deceived. But to get you out of it altogether, let our horses be brought; for in less time than it would have taken you to raise your visor, if God and my lady and my arm stand by me, I shall see your face, and you will see that I am not the beaten Don Quixote you suppose."

With this, cutting short their words, they mounted; and Don Quixote turned Rocinante's reins to take the necessary ground for coming back and meeting his opponent, and the Knight of the Mirrors did the same. But Don Quixote had not gone twenty paces when he heard the Knight of the Mirrors calling him; and the two of them dividing the distance, the Knight of the Mirrors said to him:

"Note, sir knight, that the condition of our battle is that the loser, as I have said before, is to be at the winner's discretion."

"I know it already," answered Don Quixote, "provided that what is laid on and ordered the loser is something that does not go outside the limits of chivalry."

"That is understood," answered the Knight of the Mirrors.

At this the squire's strange nose came into Don Quixote's view, and he was no less astonished at seeing it than Sancho had been — so much so that he judged him to be some monster, or a new kind of man of a sort not in use in the world.

Sancho, who saw his master ride off to take his run, would not stay alone with the man with the nose, being afraid that with one single flick of that nose against his own his quarrel would be finished, and he would be left stretched on the ground either by the blow or by the fright. And he went after his master, hanging on to one of Rocinante's stirrup-leathers; and when it seemed to him that it was time for his master to turn back, he said to him:

"I beg your worship, my dear sir, that before you go back to meet him you will help me up onto that cork tree, from where I shall be able to see the gallant encounter your worship is going to have with this knight more to my liking and better than from the ground."

"I rather think, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that you want to perch and climb onto a scaffold to watch the bulls without danger."

"To tell the truth," answered Sancho, "that squire's outrageous nose has me appalled and full of terror, and I do not dare to stay near him."

"It is such," said Don Quixote, "that if I were not who I am, it would appal me too. So come: I shall help you up where you say."

While Don Quixote was delayed getting Sancho up the cork tree, the Knight of the Mirrors took as much ground as he thought necessary; and believing Don Quixote had done the same, without waiting for the sound of a trumpet or any other signal to warn them, he turned his horse's reins — which was no lighter or better-looking than Rocinante — and at his full gallop, which was a middling trot, went to meet his enemy.

But seeing him busy getting Sancho up, he pulled up his reins and stopped in the middle of his run — at which his horse was extremely grateful, on the grounds that it could not move any longer. Don Quixote, who thought his enemy was coming at him on wings, dug his spurs hard into Rocinante's shrunken flanks and made him get on in such a way that the history relates this was the only time he was known to have run at all, because all the rest of the time it was always plain trotting. And with this unheard-of fury he came to where the Knight of the Mirrors was digging his spurs into his horse up to the rowel-buttons, without being able to move him a single finger's breadth from the place where he had brought his charge to a standstill.

At this good moment and juncture Don Quixote found his opponent hampered with his horse and busy with his lance, which he either never managed or never had time to set in its rest. Don Quixote, who was not looking at these difficulties, safely and without any danger at all met the Knight of the Mirrors with such force that, much against his will, he brought him down to the ground over his horse's hindquarters, with such a fall that, without stirring hand or foot, he gave signs of being dead.

Sancho had hardly seen him fall when he slid down from the cork tree and came in all haste to where his master was; who, dismounting from Rocinante, went over to the Knight of the Mirrors and undid the laces of his helmet to see whether he was dead and to let the air get to him if he happened to be alive.

And he saw — who could tell what he saw without causing astonishment, wonder and dread in those who hear it? He saw, says the history, the very face, the very figure, the very aspect, the very physiognomy, the very effigy, the very perspecktive of the bachelor Sansón Carrasco. And as soon as he saw it he said in a loud voice:

"Come here, Sancho, and see what you are to see and not to believe! Hurry, my son, and mark what magic can do, what wizards and enchanters can do!"

Sancho came; and when he saw the bachelor Carrasco's face, he began to cross himself a thousand times and to bless himself as many. In all this the fallen knight gave no signs of being alive, and Sancho said to Don Quixote:

"I am of the opinion, my dear sir, that just in case, your worship should stick and drive your sword into the mouth of this man who looks like the bachelor Sansón Carrasco: perhaps in him you will kill one of your enemies the enchanters."

"You do not speak badly," said Don Quixote, "because of enemies, the fewer the better."

And drawing his sword to put Sancho's advice into effect, up came the Knight of the Mirrors' squire, without the nose that had made him so ugly, and said in a loud voice:

"Look what you are doing, Señor Don Quixote; for that man you have at your feet is the bachelor Sansón Carrasco, your friend, and I am his squire."

And Sancho, seeing him without that first ugliness, said to him:

"And the nose?"

To which he answered:

"I have it here, in my pocket."

And putting his hand to the right one, he pulled out a nose of pasteboard and varnish, of the masquerade kind, of the make already described. And Sancho, looking at him more and more, said in a loud, wondering voice:

"Holy Mary help me! Is this not Tomé Cecial, my neighbour and my gossip?"

"That I am indeed!" answered the now unnosed squire. "Tomé Cecial I am, gossip and friend Sancho Panza; and presently I shall tell you the channels, tricks and tangles by which I have come here. And meanwhile, ask and beg your master not to touch, ill-treat, wound or kill the Knight of the Mirrors he has at his feet; because beyond any doubt he is that rash and ill-advised bachelor Sansón Carrasco, our fellow-countryman."

At this the Knight of the Mirrors came to himself; which Don Quixote seeing, he put the naked point of his sword over his face and said to him:

"You are a dead man, knight, unless you confess that the peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso excels your Casildea de Vandalia in beauty. And besides this you must promise, if you come alive out of this contest and fall, to go to the city of El Toboso and present yourself before her on my behalf, so that she may do with you whatever she pleases; and if she leaves you at your own disposal, you must likewise come back and look for me — the trail of my exploits will serve you as a guide to bring you where I am — and tell me what has passed between you and her: conditions which, in accordance with those we laid down before our battle, do not go outside the terms of knight-errantry."

"I confess," said the fallen knight, "that the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso's unstitched and dirty shoe is worth more than Casildea's badly combed, though clean, beard; and I promise to go and to come back from her presence to yours, and to give you a full and particular account of what you ask me."

"You must also confess and believe," added Don Quixote, "that the knight you defeated was not and could not have been Don Quixote of La Mancha, but some other man who looked like him — as I confess and believe that you, although you look like the bachelor Sansón Carrasco, are not he but another man who looks like him, and that my enemies have put him here in front of me in his shape, so as to hold back and cool the force of my anger and so that I may use the glory of my victory mildly."

"I confess, judge and feel it all as you believe, judge and feel it," answered the battered knight. "Let me get up, I beg you, if the blow of my fall allows it, for it has left me in a bad enough state."

Don Quixote helped him up, along with Tomé Cecial, his squire, from whom Sancho never took his eyes, asking him things whose answers gave him plain signs that he really was the Tomé Cecial he said he was. But the notion his master's words had put into Sancho — that the enchanters had changed the shape of the Knight of the Mirrors into that of the bachelor Carrasco — did not let him give credit to the truth he was looking at with his own eyes.

Finally master and man stayed with this delusion; and the Knight of the Mirrors and his squire, downcast and out of luck, went off away from Don Quixote and Sancho, meaning to look for some place where they could plaster and splint his ribs. Don Quixote and Sancho went back to their road to Saragossa, where the history leaves them, so as to give an account of who the Knight of the Mirrors and his big-nosed squire were.
