Chapter 15: In Which Is Told and Made Known Who the Knight of the Mirrors and His Squire Were

Don Quixote went along extremely contented, proud and boastful at having won a victory over so valiant a knight as he imagined the Knight of the Mirrors to be — from whose knightly word he expected to learn whether his lady's enchantment was still going on, since that defeated knight was obliged, on pain of not being one, to come back and give him an account of what had happened to him with her. But Don Quixote was thinking one thing and the Knight of the Mirrors another, since for the moment his only thought was to look for somewhere to be plastered, as has been said.

The history says, then, that when the bachelor Sansón Carrasco advised Don Quixote to go back to his abandoned chivalries, it was because he had first gone into council with the curate and the barber about what means might be taken to bring Don Quixote round to staying quietly and peacefully at home, without his badly sought adventures upsetting him.

Out of which consultation there came, by the common vote of them all and the particular opinion of Carrasco, that they should let Don Quixote go out, since holding him back seemed impossible; and that Sansón should come out on the road as a knight errant and pick a fight with him — there would be no lack of grounds — and defeat him, holding this to be an easy matter; and that it should be an agreed compact that the loser should stay at the winner's mercy.

And so, Don Quixote being defeated, the bachelor knight was to order him to go back to his village and his house and not to leave it for two years, or until such time as he should be ordered otherwise by him; which it was clear that Don Quixote, once defeated, would undoubtedly carry out, so as not to go against and fail the laws of chivalry. And it might be that in the time of his confinement he would forget his vain notions, or there would be room to look for some suitable remedy for his madness.

Carrasco accepted it, and Tomé Cecial, Sancho Panza's gossip and neighbour, offered himself as his squire — a cheerful man with a slippery skull. Sansón armed himself as has been related, and Tomé Cecial fitted over his own natural nose the false masquerade one already described, so that he should not be recognised by his gossip when they met.

And so they followed the same road Don Quixote was taking, and came near to being present at the adventure of the Cart of Death. And finally they came upon them in the wood, where everything happened to them that the prudent reader has read. And if it had not been for Don Quixote's extraordinary notions, in giving himself to understand that the bachelor was not the bachelor, the master bachelor would have been made incapable for ever of taking his licentiate's degree, for having found no nests where he thought he would find birds.

Tomé Cecial, seeing how badly he had achieved what he wanted and what a bad end his journey had come to, said to the bachelor:

"Certainly, Señor Sansón Carrasco, we have got what we deserved: an enterprise is thought of and undertaken easily, but most often a man gets out of it with difficulty. Don Quixote mad, we sane: he goes off sound and laughing, your worship is left pounded and sad. Now let us know which is the greater madman: the man who is mad because he cannot help it, or the man who is mad by his own choice?"

To which Sansón answered:

"The difference between those two madmen is that the one who is mad by necessity will always be so, and the one who is mad of his own accord will leave off being so whenever he likes."

"Then since that is so," said Tomé Cecial, "I was mad of my own accord when I chose to make myself your worship's squire, and by the same accord I choose to leave off being one and to go back home."

"That is your affair," answered Sansón; "but to think that I am going back to mine before I have pounded Don Quixote with a stick is to think of what will not happen. And what will take me to look for him now is not the wish that he should recover his wits but the wish for revenge; for the great pain in my ribs does not let me make any more merciful reflections."

In this talk the two of them went along until they came to a village where they had the good luck to find a bone-setter, who treated the unfortunate Sansón. Tomé Cecial went back and left him, and he was left planning his revenge; and the history will speak of him again in its own time, so as not to leave off making merry now with Don Quixote.
