Chapter 16: Of What Happened to Don Quixote with a Judicious Gentleman of La Mancha

Don Quixote went on his journey with the gladness, contentment and pride that has been described, imagining himself, on account of his late victory, to be the bravest knight errant the world had in that age. He counted as finished and brought to a happy end all the adventures that might happen to him from then on; he thought little of enchantments and enchanters; he did not remember the innumerable beatings he had been given in the course of his chivalries, or the stone that knocked out half his teeth, or the ingratitude of the galley slaves, or the boldness and hail of staves of the Yangüesans.

In short, he said to himself that if he could only find the art, the way or the means of disenchanting his lady Dulcinea, he would not envy the greatest good fortune the most fortunate knight errant of past ages ever attained or could have attained. He was wholly taken up with these fancies when Sancho said to him:

"Is it not a fine thing, sir, that I still have in front of my eyes the outrageous nose, and above regulation size, of my gossip Tomé Cecial?"

"And do you believe, Sancho, by any chance, that the Knight of the Mirrors was the bachelor Carrasco, and his squire Tomé Cecial your gossip?"

"I do not know what to say to that," answered Sancho; "I only know that the details he gave me about my house and my wife and children nobody but he himself could have given me. And his face, once the nose was off, was the very face of Tomé Cecial, as I have seen it many times in my village and with one wall between our two houses; and the tone of his voice was all one."

"Let us be reasonable, Sancho," replied Don Quixote. "Come here: on what consideration can it be supposed that the bachelor Sansón Carrasco should come as a knight errant, armed with offensive and defensive arms, to fight with me? Have I by any chance been his enemy? Have I ever given him occasion to bear me a grudge? Am I his rival, or does he profess arms, so as to be envious of the fame I have won by them?"

"Well, what are we to say, sir," answered Sancho, "about that knight's being so like the bachelor Carrasco, whoever he may be, and his squire like Tomé Cecial my gossip? And if it is enchantment, as your worship has said, were there no other two men in the world for them to look like?"

"It is all contrivance and design," answered Don Quixote, "of the malignant magicians who persecute me; who, foreseeing that I was going to come out the winner of the contest, provided that the defeated knight should show the face of my friend the bachelor, so that the friendship I bear him should set itself between the edge of my sword and the force of my arm and should cool the just anger of my heart, and in this way the man who by tricks and falsehoods was trying to take my life should be left alive.

"As a proof of which you know already, Sancho, by an experience that will not let you lie or be deceived, how easy it is for enchanters to change one face into another, making the beautiful ugly and the ugly beautiful; since not two days ago you saw with your own eyes the beauty and gallantry of the peerless Dulcinea in her whole entirety and natural form, and I saw her in the ugliness and lowness of a coarse country girl, with cataracts on her eyes and a bad smell in her mouth.

"And what is more, since the perverse enchanter dared to work so wicked a transformation, it is no great matter that he should have worked that of Sansón Carrasco and that of your gossip, so as to take the glory of the victory out of my hands. But for all that, I comfort myself; because in the end, in whatever shape it was, I have come out the winner over my enemy."

"God knows the truth of it all," answered Sancho.

And as he knew that Dulcinea's transformation had been his own contrivance and trick, his master's chimeras did not satisfy him; but he did not want to argue back, in case he should say some word that would reveal his deception.

They were in this talk when they were overtaken by a man who was coming behind them along the same road on a very handsome dapple-grey mare, dressed in a coat of fine green cloth panelled with tawny velvet, with a cap of the same velvet. The mare's harness was of the field sort and short-stirruped, likewise in purple and green. He wore a Moorish scimitar hanging from a broad baldric of green and gold, and his buskins were of the same work as the baldric. His spurs were not gilded but coated with a green varnish, so smooth and burnished that, matching the whole of the rest of his dress, they looked better than if they had been of pure gold.

When he came up to them the traveller greeted them courteously, and, spurring his mare, was going on past; but Don Quixote said to him:

"Fine sir, if your worship is going our road and is not in a hurry, I should take it as a kindness if we might travel together."

"Truly," answered the man on the mare, "I would not go past like this if it were not for fear that the company of my mare might excite that horse."

"You may perfectly well, sir," answered Sancho at this, "you may perfectly well hold in your mare, because our horse is the most virtuous and best-behaved in the world: he has never done anything base on such occasions, and the one time he broke out to do it my master and I paid for it sevenfold. I say again that your worship may stop if you like; for even if they served her to him between two plates, it is a safe bet that the horse would not face her."

The traveller reined in, marvelling at Don Quixote's bearing and face — for he was riding without his helmet, which Sancho was carrying like a bag on the front of the grey's pack-saddle. And if the man in green looked hard at Don Quixote, Don Quixote looked far harder at the man in green, thinking him a man of substance. He seemed to be about fifty years old; his grey hairs were few and his face aquiline; his look was between cheerful and grave; in short, in his dress and bearing he gave one to understand that he was a man of good qualities.

What the man in green judged of Don Quixote of La Mancha was that he had never seen such a manner or such an appearance of a man. He marvelled at the length of his horse, the size of his body, the thinness and yellowness of his face, his armour, his bearing and his composure: a figure and portrait not seen in that country for long ages past.

Don Quixote noticed clearly the attention with which the traveller was looking at him, and read his wish in his suspense; and, being so courteous and so fond of pleasing everybody, before he could ask him anything he met him halfway, saying:

"This figure your worship has seen in me, being so new and so far outside the ones that are commonly in use, I should not be surprised if it had surprised you. But your worship will stop being surprised when I tell you, as I do tell you, that I am a knight —

	the sort of men that people say
	go riding to their adventures.

"I left my own country, mortgaged my estate, gave up my comforts and threw myself into Fortune's arms to carry me wherever she was best pleased. I chose to bring back to life the now dead order of knight-errantry, and for many days now, stumbling here, falling there, hurling myself down in this place and getting up in that, I have carried out a great part of my wish, helping widows, protecting maidens and favouring married women, orphans and wards — the proper and natural office of knights errant.

"And so, by my valorous, many and Christian exploits I have deserved to go about in print by now in almost all, or most, of the nations of the world. Thirty thousand copies of my history have been printed, and it is on the way to being printed thirty thousand thousand times, if heaven does not put a stop to it.

"In short, to shut it all up in a few words, or in one: I say that I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, otherwise called the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance. And although self-praise debases, I am sometimes forced to speak my own — and this is to be understood as when nobody is present to speak it for me. So that, sir gentleman, neither this horse, nor this lance, nor this shield, nor my squire, nor all these arms together, nor the yellowness of my face, nor my wasted thinness can astonish you from now on, since you know now who I am and the profession I follow."

Having said this, Don Quixote fell silent; and the man in green, by the time he took to answer him, seemed unable to manage it. But after a good while he said to him:

"You hit rightly, sir knight, on knowing my wish from my suspense; but you have not hit on taking away the wonder that having seen you causes in me. For although, as you say, sir, my knowing who you are might take it away, it has not been so; on the contrary, now that I know it, I am left more taken aback and more full of wonder.

"How is it possible that there are knights errant in the world today, and that there are printed histories of genuine chivalries? I cannot persuade myself that there is anybody on earth today who favours widows, protects maidens, honours married women or helps orphans; and I would not have believed it if I had not seen it with my own eyes in your worship.

"Blessed be heaven! For by that history your worship says is in print of your lofty and truthful chivalries, the innumerable ones of the invented knights errant that the world was full of will have been consigned to oblivion — so harmful to good morals and so much to the prejudice and discredit of good histories."

"There is a great deal to say," answered Don Quixote, "on the question of whether the histories of knights errant are invented or not."

"Why, is there anybody who doubts," answered the man in green, "that such histories are false?"

"I doubt it," answered Don Quixote, "and let it stay there; for if our journey lasts, I hope in God to give your worship to understand that you have done wrong to go with the current of those who hold it certain that they are not true."

From this last speech of Don Quixote's the traveller got an inkling that Don Quixote must be some sort of idiot, and waited for him to confirm it with more of the same. But before they got on to other conversation, Don Quixote begged him to tell him who he was, since he had told him about his own condition and his life. To which the man in the Green Coat answered:

"I, Sir Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, am a gentleman, a native of a village where we shall go and dine today, if God is pleased. I am more than moderately rich and my name is Don Diego de Miranda. I pass my life with my wife and my children and my friends; my pastimes are hunting and fishing, but I keep neither hawk nor greyhounds, only a tame decoy-partridge or a bold ferret.

"I have some six dozen books, some in Spanish and some in Latin, some of history and others of devotion; books of chivalry have not yet come over the thresholds of my doors. I look through the secular ones more than the devotional, so long as they are decent entertainment, delighting with their language and astonishing and holding one with their invention — although there are very few of these in Spain.

"Sometimes I eat with my neighbours and friends, and often I invite them; my invitations are clean and neat and not at all mean. I have no taste for backbiting, nor do I allow backbiting in front of me; I do not pry into other men's lives, nor am I a lynx for other people's doings; I hear Mass every day; I share my goods with the poor, without making a display of my good works, so as not to give hypocrisy and vainglory an entry into my heart — enemies that gently take possession of the most guarded heart. I try to make peace between those I know are at odds; I am devoted to Our Lady; and I always trust in the infinite mercy of God our Lord."

Sancho was most attentive to the account of the gentleman's life and pastimes; and thinking it good and holy, and that the man who led it must work miracles, he threw himself off the grey and in great haste went and seized his right stirrup, and with a devout heart and almost in tears kissed his feet again and again. Which the gentleman seeing, he asked him:

"What are you doing, brother? What kisses are these?"

"Let me kiss," answered Sancho, "because your worship seems to me the first saint in the saddle I have seen in all the days of my life."

"I am no saint," answered the gentleman, "but a great sinner. You are the one, brother, who must be good, as your simplicity shows."

Sancho went back to his pack-saddle, having brought his master's deep melancholy out into laughter and caused fresh astonishment in Don Diego. Don Quixote asked him how many children he had, and told him that one of the things in which the ancient philosophers, who lacked the true knowledge of God, placed the highest good was in the goods of nature, in those of fortune, in having many friends and in having many good children.

"I, Señor Don Quixote," answered the gentleman, "have one son who, if I did not have him, would perhaps make me judge myself happier than I am — and not because he is bad, but because he is not as good as I would like.

"He must be about eighteen; six of those years he has been at Salamanca learning the Latin and Greek languages. And when I wanted him to go on to study other sciences, I found him so steeped in that of poetry — if that can be called a science — that it is not possible to make him face the science of law, which I would have liked him to study, or the queen of them all, theology.

"I would have liked him to be the crown of his family, since we live in an age when our kings highly reward virtuous and good letters; for letters without virtue are pearls on a dunghill. He spends the whole day settling whether Homer said well or badly in such a line of the Iliad; whether Martial was indecent or not in such an epigram; whether such and such lines of Virgil are to be understood in one way or another. In short, all his conversation is with the books of the poets I have mentioned, and with those of Horace, Persius, Juvenal and Tibullus; for of the modern writers in Spanish he takes little account.

"And with all the ill will he shows towards poetry in Spanish, his mind is now taken up with making a gloss on four lines that have been sent him from Salamanca, and I think they are for a literary competition."

To all which Don Quixote answered:

"Children, sir, are pieces of their parents' entrails, and so they must be loved, good or bad as they may be, as we love the souls that give us life. It is for parents to guide them from small children along the steps of virtue, of good breeding and of good Christian habits, so that when they are grown they may be the staff of their parents' old age and the glory of their posterity.

"And as for forcing them to study this or that science, I do not hold it sound — although persuading them will do no harm. And when a man does not have to study pane lucrando, the student being fortunate enough that heaven gave him parents who can leave him something, I should be of the opinion that they should let him follow whatever science they see him most inclined to. And although poetry is less useful than delightful, it is not one of those that generally dishonour the man who possesses them.

"Poetry, sir gentleman, is in my opinion like a tender young girl, extremely beautiful, whom a great many other girls take care to enrich, polish and adorn — and these are all the other sciences; and she must make use of them all, and they must all get their authority from her. But this girl does not want to be handled, or dragged through the streets, or published at the street corners of the squares or in the corners of palaces.

"She is made of an alchemy of such virtue that whoever knows how to treat her will turn her into the purest gold of inestimable price. Whoever has her must keep her within bounds, not letting her run into filthy satires or soulless sonnets; she must not be for sale in any way at all, unless it is in heroic poems, in lamentable tragedies or in cheerful, skilfully made comedies; she must not let herself be handled by clowns or by the ignorant crowd, incapable of knowing or valuing the treasures shut up in her.

"And do not think, sir, that I am calling only the low and humble people the crowd here; for everybody who does not know, even if he is a lord and a prince, may and must be counted in the number of the crowd. And so the man who handles and keeps poetry with the requirements I have described will be famous, and his name esteemed in all the civilised nations of the world.

"And as for what you say, sir, that your son does not think much of poetry in Spanish, I give myself to understand that he is not very sound in it, and the reason is this: the great Homer did not write in Latin, because he was a Greek, nor did Virgil write in Greek, because he was a Latin. In short, all the ancient poets wrote in the language they sucked in with their milk, and did not go looking for foreign ones to declare the loftiness of their ideas.

"And this being so, it would be reasonable that this custom should spread through all the nations, and that the German poet should not be undervalued because he writes in his own language, nor the Castilian, nor even the Basque who writes in his.

"But your son, as I imagine, sir, must be out of temper not with poetry in Spanish but with poets who are mere Spanish versifiers, without knowing other languages or other sciences to adorn and rouse and help their natural impulse. And even in this there may be a mistake; because, according to true opinion, the poet is born — meaning that the natural poet comes out of his mother's womb a poet, and with that inclination heaven gave him, without any more study or contrivance, composes things that make the man true who said: est Deus in nobis, and so on.

"I say too that the natural poet who helps himself with art will be far better and will have the advantage over the poet who wants to be one merely by knowing the art. The reason is that art does not go beyond nature but perfects it; so that, nature and art being mixed together, and art with nature, they will produce a most perfect poet.

"Let this, then, be the conclusion of my talk, sir gentleman: that your worship should let your son travel where his star calls him. For being as good a student as he must be, and having already happily climbed the first step of the sciences, which is that of the languages, with them he will by himself climb to the summit of humane letters — which look as well in a gentleman of cloak and sword, and adorn, honour and dignify him as much, as mitres do bishops or robes do learned lawyers.

"Let your worship scold your son if he writes satires that damage other people's honour, and punish him and tear them up; but if he writes discourses in the manner of Horace, where he reproves the vices in general, as he did it so elegantly, then praise him. Because it is lawful for a poet to write against envy and to speak ill of the envious in his verses, and so of the other vices, provided he does not point at any particular person. But there are poets who, for the sake of saying one malicious thing, will risk being banished to the islands of Pontus.

"If the poet is chaste in his habits, he will be chaste in his verses too: the pen is the tongue of the soul; as the ideas are that are conceived in it, so will his writings be. And when kings and princes see the miraculous science of poetry in prudent, virtuous and grave subjects, they honour them, esteem them and enrich them, and even crown them with the leaves of the tree that lightning does not harm — as a sign that those whose brows they see honoured and adorned with such crowns are not to be harmed by anybody."

The man in the Green Coat was astonished at Don Quixote's discourse — so much so that he began to lose the opinion he had of him as an idiot. But halfway through this talk Sancho, as it was not much to his taste, had turned off the road to ask for a little milk from some shepherds who were milking sheep nearby.

And at this the gentleman was going to take up the conversation again, extremely satisfied with Don Quixote's good sense and good reasoning, when Don Quixote, raising his head, saw coming along the road they were travelling a cart full of royal flags. And believing that it must be some new adventure, he called Sancho at the top of his voice to come and give him his helmet. And Sancho, hearing himself called, left the shepherds and in all haste whipped up the grey and came to where his master was — to whom there happened a terrifying and preposterous adventure.
