Chapter 17: Where the Highest Point Don Quixote's Unheard-of Courage Reached or Could Reach Is Shown, with the Happily Finished Adventure of the Lions

The history tells that when Don Quixote was shouting to Sancho to bring him his helmet, Sancho was buying some curds that the shepherds were selling him; and, harried by his master's great haste, he did not know what to do with them or what to carry them in, and, so as not to lose them, since he had already paid for them, he decided to throw them into his master's helmet. And with this good provision made, he came back to see what was wanted of him; and when he arrived his master said to him:

"Give me that helmet, my friend; for either I know little about adventures, or what I make out over there is one that will oblige me — and does oblige me — to take up my arms."

The man in the Green Coat, hearing this, cast his eyes all around, and made out nothing but a cart coming towards them with two or three little flags on it, which gave him to understand that the cart must be carrying money belonging to His Majesty; and he said so to Don Quixote. But Don Quixote gave him no credit, always believing and thinking that whatever happened to him must be adventures and more adventures; and so he answered the gentleman:

"A man forewarned is half the battle fought: nothing is lost by my arming myself, for I know by experience that I have visible and invisible enemies, and I do not know when, or where, or at what time, or in what shapes they will attack me."

And turning to Sancho, he asked him for the helmet; and Sancho, as he had had no chance to get the curds out, was forced to hand it over as it was. Don Quixote took it, and, without noticing what was inside, jammed it on his head in all haste. And as the curds were squeezed and pressed, the whey began to run down all over Don Quixote's face and beard; at which he took such a fright that he said to Sancho:

"What can this be, Sancho? It seems as if my skull were going soft, or my brains were melting, or as if I were sweating from my feet to my head. And if I am sweating, it is truly not from fear; no doubt I believe the adventure that is about to happen to me now is a terrible one. Give me something to wipe myself with, if you have it, for this copious sweat is blinding my eyes."

Sancho said nothing and gave him a cloth, and along with it gave thanks to God that his master had not tumbled to the case. Don Quixote wiped himself and took off his helmet to see what the thing was that, as it seemed to him, was making his head cold; and, seeing that white porridge inside the helmet, he put it to his nose, and, smelling it, said:

"By the life of my lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, those are curds you have put in here, you traitor, you rascal, you ill-mannered squire!"

To which, with great coolness and dissimulation, Sancho answered:

"If they are curds, let your worship give them to me and I shall eat them... But no, let the devil eat them, for it must have been he who put them there. Was I likely to have the impudence to dirty your worship's helmet? You have hit on the impudent man, haven't you! Upon my word, sir, by what God gives me to understand, I too must have enchanters persecuting me as a creature and a limb of your worship, and they will have put that filth there to move your patience to anger and to make you grind my ribs as you generally do. Well, truly this time they have jumped short, because I trust the good sense of my master, who will have considered that I have no curds, nor milk, nor anything else worth as much; and that if I had, I should have put it in my stomach sooner than in the helmet."

"It may all be," said Don Quixote.

The gentleman watched it all and marvelled at it all — especially when, after Don Quixote had cleaned his head, face, beard and helmet, he jammed it on again; and, settling himself firmly in the stirrups, feeling for his sword and gripping his lance, said:

"Now, let come what may come; for here I stand with a mind to take on Satan himself in person."

At this the cart with the flags came up, in which there were no people but the carter, on the mules, and a man sitting on the front. Don Quixote placed himself in front of it and said:

"Where are you going, brothers? What cart is this, what are you carrying in it, and what flags are these?"

To which the carter answered:

"The cart is mine; what is going in it is two brave caged lions that the governor of Oran is sending to court as a present to His Majesty; the flags are the king our lord's, as a sign that something of his is travelling here."

"And are the lions big?" asked Don Quixote.

"So big," answered the man who was riding at the door of the cart, "that bigger ones, or as big, have never crossed from Africa to Spain. I am the lion-keeper, and I have brought over others, but none like these. They are a male and a female; the male is in this first cage and the female in the one behind. And they are hungry at the moment, because they have not eaten today. So your worship had better get out of the way, for we must reach our stage quickly and feed them."

To which Don Quixote said, smiling a little:

"Lion cubs to me? To me, lion cubs, and at such an hour? Well, by God, those gentlemen who are sending them here shall see whether I am a man to be frightened by lions! Get down, my good fellow, and, since you are the lion-keeper, open those cages and throw those beasts out here; for in the middle of this open country I shall let them know who Don Quixote of La Mancha is, in spite and in defiance of the enchanters who are sending them to me."

"Ha, ha!" said the gentleman to himself at this. "Our good knight has given a sign of what he is: the curds have certainly softened his skull and ripened his brains."

At this Sancho came up to him and said:

"Sir, for the love of God, will your worship manage it somehow so that my master Don Quixote does not take on these lions? Because if he does, they will tear us all to pieces here."

"Why, is your master so mad," answered the gentleman, "that you are afraid of it and believe he will take on such savage animals?"

"He is not mad," answered Sancho, "he is reckless."

"I shall see to it that he is not," replied the gentleman.

And going up to Don Quixote, who was urging the lion-keeper to open the cages, he said to him:

"Sir knight, knights errant should undertake the adventures that hold out some hope of coming well out of them, not those that take that hope away altogether; because valour that trespasses into the jurisdiction of rashness has more of madness in it than of fortitude. What is more, these lions are not coming against your worship, nor do they dream of it: they are being carried as a present to His Majesty, and it will not be right to hold them up or hinder them on their journey."

"Let your worship go, sir gentleman," answered Don Quixote, "and see to your tame decoy-partridge and your bold ferret, and let each man do his own office. This is mine, and I know whether these gentlemen the lions are coming at me or not."

And turning to the lion-keeper, he said:

"I swear, you scoundrel, that if you do not open the cages this instant, I shall pin you to the cart with this lance!"

The carter, seeing the determination of that armed apparition, said to him:

"My dear sir, may it please your worship, out of charity, to let me unyoke the mules and get myself to safety with them before the lions are unsheathed; because if they kill them I am ruined for the rest of my life, since I have no other property but this cart and these mules."

"O man of little faith!" answered Don Quixote. "Get down and unyoke and do whatever you like, for you will soon see that you have worked for nothing and might have saved yourself the trouble."

The carter got down and unyoked in great haste, and the lion-keeper said in a loud voice:

"Let all here present be my witnesses that against my will and under compulsion I am opening the cages and letting the lions loose, and that I protest to this gentleman that all the harm and damage these beasts may do will run and go to his account, together with my wages and my dues. Your worships, gentlemen, get yourselves under cover before I open, for I am safe enough that they will do me no harm."

Once more the gentleman urged him not to commit such a folly, for it was tempting God to undertake such an absurdity. To which Don Quixote answered that he knew what he was doing. The gentleman answered him that he should think it over carefully, for he was of the opinion that he was deceiving himself.

"Now, sir," replied Don Quixote, "if your worship does not care to be a spectator of what in your view is going to be a tragedy, spur the dapple mare and get yourself to safety."

Which Sancho hearing, he begged him with tears in his eyes to give up such an enterprise, in comparison with which the windmills, and the fearful business of the fulling-mills, and, in short, all the exploits he had undertaken in the whole course of his life, had been cakes and fancy bread.

"Look, sir," said Sancho, "there is no enchantment here nor anything like it; because I have seen through the bars and chinks of the cage a real lion's claw, and I gather from it that the lion whose claw it must be is bigger than a mountain."

"Fear, at any rate," answered Don Quixote, "will make him look to you bigger than half the world. Withdraw, Sancho, and leave me; and if I die here, you know our old agreement: you will go to Dulcinea, and I say no more to you."

To these he added other arguments, by which he took away any hope that he would leave off pursuing his deranged intention. The man in the Green Coat would have liked to oppose him, but he saw himself unequal in arms, and it did not seem to him good sense to take on a madman, which was what Don Quixote had by now seemed to him at every point. And Don Quixote, going back to urging the lion-keeper and repeating his threats, gave the gentleman occasion to spur his mare, and Sancho his grey, and the carter his mules, all of them trying to get as far away from the cart as they could before the lions were unbasketed.

Sancho was weeping for the death of his master, which this time he undoubtedly believed was coming to him in the lions' claws; he cursed his luck and called it a wretched hour when it came into his head to go back into his service; but for all his weeping and lamenting he did not leave off drubbing the grey to get him away from the cart. The lion-keeper, then, seeing that the runaways were now a good way off, went back to putting to Don Quixote and formally notifying him of what he had already put to him and notified him of; to which he answered that he heard him, and that he need not trouble with any more notifications and formalities, since they would all bear little fruit, and that he should hurry up.

In the space of time the lion-keeper took to open the first cage, Don Quixote was considering whether it would be better to do the battle on foot rather than on horseback; and in the end he decided to do it on foot, fearing that Rocinante would take fright at the sight of the lions. For this reason he leapt off the horse, threw down his lance, gripped his shield and, drawing his sword, step by step, with marvellous boldness and a valiant heart, went and planted himself in front of the cart, commending himself to God with his whole heart and then to his lady Dulcinea.

And it is to be noted that at this point the author of this true history breaks out and says: "O strong and, beyond all extolling, spirited Don Quixote of La Mancha, mirror in which all the brave men of the world may look at themselves, second and new Don Manuel de León, who was the glory and honour of Spanish knights! With what words shall I tell this so astounding exploit, or with what arguments shall I make it credible to the ages to come, or what praises will there be that do not befit and suit you, though they be hyperboles above all hyperboles? You on foot, you alone, you fearless, you great-souled, with only a sword — and not one of the sharp ones with the little dog on the blade — with a shield of no very bright and clean steel, standing there waiting and watching for the two fiercest lions the African forests ever bred. Let your own deeds be the ones to praise you, valiant Manchegan, for I leave them here at their height for want of words to extol them."

Here the author's outburst just quoted stopped, and he went on, knotting up the thread of the history, saying that the lion-keeper, seeing Don Quixote already in position, and that he could not avoid loosing the male lion on pain of falling into the bad graces of the indignant and daring knight, threw the first cage wide open, in which, as has been said, was the lion, who turned out to be of extraordinary size and of a frightful and hideous aspect.

The first thing he did was to roll over in the cage, where he had been lying, and put out his claw and stretch himself all over. Then he opened his mouth and yawned very slowly, and with nearly a foot and a half of tongue that he put out, he dusted his eyes and washed his face. That done, he put his head out of the cage and looked in every direction with eyes like live coals — a sight and a bearing to strike terror into rashness itself. Only Don Quixote was watching him attentively, longing for him to jump down from the cart at last and come to grips with him, between which he expected to tear him to pieces.

Up to this point went the extreme of his never-before-seen madness. But the generous lion, more well-bred than arrogant, taking no notice of childishness or of bravado, after looking one way and the other as has been said, turned his back and showed his hindquarters to Don Quixote, and with great coolness and calm went and lay down again in the cage. Which Don Quixote seeing, he ordered the lion-keeper to beat him with a stick and provoke him to bring him out.

"That I will not do," answered the lion-keeper, "because if I goad him, the first man he will tear to pieces will be myself. Let your worship, sir knight, be satisfied with what has been done — which is everything that can be said in the way of valour — and not try a second fortune. The lion has his door open: it is in his own hands to come out or not to come out; but since he has not come out so far, he will not come out all day. Your worship's greatness of heart is well enough declared: no brave fighter, as far as I understand it, is obliged to more than to challenge his enemy and wait for him in the field; and if his opponent does not turn up, the disgrace stays with him, and the man who waited wins the crown of victory."

"That is true," answered Don Quixote. "Shut the door, my friend, and give me a certificate, in the best form you can, of what you have seen me do here — namely, how you opened to the lion, I waited for him, he did not come out; I waited for him again, he again did not come out and went and lay down. I am obliged to no more; and enchantments be gone, and God help right and truth, and true chivalry. And shut the door, as I have said, while I make signs to the runaways and absentees, so that they may learn of this exploit from your own mouth."

The lion-keeper did so, and Don Quixote, putting on the point of his lance the cloth with which he had wiped his face after the shower of curds, began to call to those who had not stopped running and looking back at every step, all in a body with the gentleman at their head. But Sancho, happening to see the signal of the white cloth, said:

"May they kill me if my master has not beaten the savage beasts, since he is calling us."

They all stopped, and recognised that the man making the signals was Don Quixote; and, losing some part of their fear, little by little they came nearer until they could plainly hear Don Quixote's shouts as he called them. Finally they came back to the cart, and when they arrived Don Quixote said to the carter:

"Go back, brother, to yoking your mules and carrying on with your journey; and you, Sancho, give him two gold crowns, for him and for the lion-keeper, in recompense for the time they have been held up on my account."

"I shall give them very willingly," answered Sancho; "but what has become of the lions? Are they dead or alive?"

Then the lion-keeper, in detail and with his own pauses, told the end of the contest, exaggerating as best he could and knew how the valour of Don Quixote, at the sight of whom the lion, turned coward, would not and dared not come out of the cage, although the cage door had stood open for a good while; and how, because he had told that knight that it was tempting God to provoke the lion into coming out by force, as he wanted him provoked, he had — much against his own grain and against his whole will — allowed the door to be shut.

"What do you think of that, Sancho?" said Don Quixote. "Are there any enchantments that can prevail against true valour? The enchanters may well take my luck away from me, but my strength and my spirit will be impossible."

Sancho handed over the crowns, the carter yoked up, the lion-keeper kissed Don Quixote's hands for the bounty he had received, and promised him to tell that valorous exploit to the king himself when he found himself at court.

"Well, if His Majesty should happen to ask who did it, tell him it was the Knight of the Lions; for from now on I want the name I have had until now, of the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, to be traded, changed, turned and altered into this one. And in this I am following the ancient usage of knights errant, who changed their names whenever they liked, or whenever it suited them."

The cart went on its way, and Don Quixote, Sancho and the man in the Green Coat went on theirs.

In all this time Don Diego de Miranda had not spoken a word, being wholly intent on watching and noting Don Quixote's deeds and words, and thinking that he was a sane madman and a madman veering towards sane. The first part of his history had not yet come to his notice; for if he had read it, the astonishment his deeds and words put him into would have ceased, since he would already have known the kind of his madness. But as he did not know it, he took him now for sane and now for mad, because what he said was orderly, elegant and well put, and what he did was preposterous, foolhardy and stupid. And he said to himself:

"What greater madness can there be than putting on a helmet full of curds and giving oneself to understand that the enchanters were softening one's skull? And what greater rashness and absurdity than wanting to fight lions by main force?"

Out of these imaginings and out of this soliloquy he was drawn by Don Quixote, who said to him:

"Who doubts, Señor Don Diego de Miranda, that your worship holds me in your own opinion to be an absurd and mad man? And it would be no great wonder if it were so, because my works can bear witness to nothing else. Well, for all that, I should like your worship to notice that I am not so mad or so wanting as I must have seemed to you.

"A gallant knight makes a fine show in the eyes of his king, in the middle of a great square, driving his lance home with a happy stroke into a brave bull; a knight makes a fine show, armed in glittering arms, passing down the lists in cheerful jousts before the ladies; and all those knights make a fine show who in military exercises, or in what look like them, entertain and gladden and, if one may say so, honour the courts of their princes.

"But better than all these is the show made by a knight errant who, through the deserts, through the solitudes, through the crossroads, through the forests and over the mountains, goes about looking for dangerous adventures, meaning to bring them to a happy and well-fortuned end, and all only to win glorious and lasting fame. Better, I say, is the show made by a knight errant helping a widow in some unpeopled place than by a courtier knight paying compliments to a young lady in the cities.

"All knights have their particular exercises: let the courtier serve the ladies; let him give lustre to his king's court with liveries; let him keep poor knights going with the splendid dishes on his table; let him arrange jousts, hold tournaments and show himself great, generous and magnificent, and a good Christian above all — and in this way he will meet his exact obligations.

"But let the knight errant search out the corners of the world; let him get into the most tangled labyrinths; let him attempt the impossible at every step; let him endure on the unpeopled wastes the burning rays of the sun in the middle of summer, and in winter the hard inclemency of the winds and the frosts; let no lions dismay him, no phantoms frighten him, no monsters terrify him — since to look for these, to attack those and to conquer them all are his chief and truest exercises.

"I, then, since it fell to my lot to be one of the number of knight-errantry, cannot leave off attempting everything that seems to me to fall under the jurisdiction of my exercises; and so, attacking the lions I attacked just now was directly my business, even though I knew it was exorbitant rashness. Because I know very well what valour is: it is a virtue set between two vicious extremes, which are cowardice and rashness; but it will be less bad for the man who is brave to touch and rise to the point of rashness than for him to sink and touch the point of cowardice. For just as it is easier for the spendthrift to become generous than it is for the miser, so it is easier for the rash man to end in true bravery than for the coward to rise to true valour. And in this business of attempting adventures, believe me, your worship, Señor Don Diego: it is better to lose by a card too many than by a card too few, because it sounds better in the ears of those who hear it that 'such and such a knight is rash and daring' than that 'such and such a knight is timid and cowardly'."

"I say, Señor Don Quixote," answered Don Diego, "that everything your worship has said and done is levelled by the pointer of reason itself, and that in my view, if the ordinances and laws of knight-errantry were lost, they would be found in your worship's breast as in their own strongroom and archive. And let us hurry, for it is getting late, and let us reach my village and my house, where your worship will rest from the labour you have been through — which, if it has not been of the body, has been of the spirit, and that sometimes overflows into a weariness of the body."

"I take the offer as a great favour and kindness, Señor Don Diego," answered Don Quixote.

And, spurring on harder than they had until then, it must have been about two in the afternoon when they reached the village and the house of Don Diego, whom Don Quixote called the Knight of the Green Coat.
