Chapter 18: Of What Happened to Don Quixote in the Castle or House of the Knight of the Green Coat, with Other Extravagant Matters

Don Quixote found Don Diego de Miranda's house to be roomy, in the village way; the coat of arms, though of rough stone, over the street door; the wine-store in the courtyard; the cellar under the entry, and a great many earthenware jars standing round it — which, being from El Toboso, brought back to him the memory of his enchanted and transformed Dulcinea. And sighing, and without looking at what he was saying or at whose presence he was in, he said:

	O sweet tokens, found to my sorrow,
	sweet and joyful when God was willing!

"O Tobosan jars, you have brought back to my memory the sweet token of my greatest bitterness!"

The student poet, Don Diego's son, heard him say this, having come out with his mother to receive him; and mother and son were left astonished at the sight of Don Quixote's strange figure. And Don Quixote, dismounting from Rocinante, went with great courtesy to ask for her hands to kiss them, and Don Diego said:

"Receive, my lady, with your usual graciousness, Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha, who is the man you have before you: a knight errant, and the bravest and the most judicious the world has."

The lady, who was called Doña Cristina, received him with signs of much affection and much courtesy, and Don Quixote offered himself to her service in quite enough judicious and well-turned phrases. Almost the same civilities passed with the student, who, on hearing Don Quixote speak, took him for a judicious and sharp-witted man.

Here the author paints all the circumstances of Don Diego's house, painting for us in them what a rich farming gentleman's house contains; but the translator of this history thought it best to pass over these and other such small details in silence, because they did not fit well with the main purpose of the history, which has more of its force in the truth than in cold digressions.

They brought Don Quixote into a hall, Sancho unarmed him, and he was left in his wide breeches and a chamois doublet, all greasy with the grime of his armour. His collar was a plain student's falling band, without starch and without lace; his buskins were date-coloured and his shoes were waxed. He belted on his good sword, which hung from a baldric of sealskin — for it is held that he was for many years troubled with his kidneys; he threw on a short cloak of good grey cloth. But before all this, with five buckets of water, or six — for on the number of buckets there is some difference of opinion — he washed his head and face, and even so the water was left the colour of whey, thanks to Sancho's greediness and to the buying of those black curds of his that turned his master so white.

With the said finery, and with a graceful, gallant air, Don Quixote went out into another hall, where the student was waiting for him to entertain him while the tables were being laid; for on the coming of so noble a guest the lady Doña Cristina wanted to show that she knew how, and was able, to make much of those who came to her house.

While Don Quixote was being unarmed, Don Lorenzo — for that was the name of Don Diego's son — had the chance to say to his father:

"What are we to say this knight is, sir, that your worship has brought home to us? For his name, his figure and his saying that he is a knight errant have my mother and me astonished."

"I do not know what to tell you, my son," answered Don Diego. "All I shall know how to say to you is that I have seen him do things belonging to the greatest madman in the world, and say things so judicious that they rub out and undo his deeds. Talk to him yourself and feel the pulse of what he knows; and, since you are judicious, judge of his good sense or his silliness whichever seems most reasonable — although, to tell the truth, I take him for mad rather than sane."

With this Don Lorenzo went to entertain Don Quixote, as has been said; and, among other talk that passed between the two of them, Don Quixote said to Don Lorenzo:

"Señor Don Diego de Miranda, your worship's father, has given me notice of the rare ability and subtle intelligence your worship has, and, above all, that your worship is a great poet."

"A poet, that may well be," answered Don Lorenzo, "but great, not by any stretch of thought. It is true that I am somewhat fond of poetry and of reading the good poets, but not in such a way that I can be given the name of great, as my father says."

"That modesty does not strike me badly," answered Don Quixote, "because there is no poet who is not arrogant and does not think of himself that he is the greatest poet in the world."

"There is no rule without an exception," answered Don Lorenzo, "and there will be somebody who is one and does not think so."

"Few," answered Don Quixote. "But tell me, your worship: what verses are these you have in hand at the moment, that your father tells me are making you somewhat restless and thoughtful? And if it is some gloss, I understand something in the matter of glosses, and I should be glad to hear them; and if they are for a literary competition, let your worship try to carry off the second prize, because the first is always carried off by favour or by the great rank of the person, the second is carried off by plain justice, and the third comes to be the second, and the first, on this reckoning, will be the third — after the manner of the degrees they give in the universities. But for all that, the name of first is a great personage."

"So far," Don Lorenzo said to himself, "I shall not be able to judge you a madman. Let us go on."

And he said to him:

"It seems to me that your worship has been through the schools: what sciences have you attended?"

"That of knight-errantry," answered Don Quixote, "which is as good as that of poetry, and a couple of finger-widths better."

"I do not know what science that may be," replied Don Lorenzo, "and up to now it has not come to my notice."

"It is a science," replied Don Quixote, "that shuts up in itself all the sciences in the world, or most of them — on the grounds that the man who professes it has to be a jurist, and know the laws of distributive and commutative justice, so as to give each man what is his and what belongs to him; he has to be a theologian, so as to know how to give an account of the Christian law he professes, clearly and distinctly, wherever he may be asked for it; he has to be a physician, and chiefly a herbalist, so as to recognise in the middle of unpeopled places and deserts the herbs that have the virtue of healing wounds, since the knight errant cannot go looking at every turn for somebody to cure them for him; he has to be an astronomer, so as to know by the stars how many hours of the night have gone by, and in what part and in what climate of the world he finds himself; he has to know mathematics, because at every step he will find himself needing them.

"And, leaving aside that he has to be adorned with all the theological and cardinal virtues and coming down to other small matters, I say that he has to know how to swim as they say the fish Nicholas swam; he has to know how to shoe a horse and to mend a saddle and a bridle. And, coming back to what was said above, he has to keep faith with God and with his lady; he has to be chaste in his thoughts, decent in his words, generous in his works, valiant in his deeds, patient in hardships, charitable to the needy, and, finally, an upholder of the truth, though defending it should cost him his life.

"Of all these great and least parts a good knight errant is made up. So let your worship see, Señor Don Lorenzo, whether it is a snivelling science that the knight learns who studies it and professes it, and whether it can be set level with the loftiest ones taught in the colleges and the schools."

"If that is so," replied Don Lorenzo, "I say that this science has the advantage over all of them."

"What do you mean, if it is so?" answered Don Quixote.

"What I mean to say," said Don Lorenzo, "is that I doubt whether there have been, or whether there are now, knights errant adorned with so many virtues."

"Many times I have said what I say again now," answered Don Quixote: "that the greater part of the people of the world are of the opinion that there have never been knights errant in it. And since it seems to me that unless heaven miraculously gives them to understand the truth that there were such men and that there are such men, any labour a man takes on must be in vain — as experience has shown me many times — I do not want to stop now to draw your worship out of the error you share with the many. What I mean to do is to pray heaven to draw you out of it, and to give you to understand how profitable and how necessary knights errant were to the world in the past ages, and how useful they would be in the present if they were in use. But what triumph now, for the sins of the people, are sloth, idleness, gluttony and self-indulgence."

"Our guest has got away from us," Don Lorenzo said to himself at this. "But for all that, he is a splendid madman, and I should be a slack-witted fool if I did not believe so."

Here they made an end of their talk, because they were called to dinner. Don Diego asked his son what he had got clear about the guest's wits; to which he answered:

"All the doctors and good clerks in the world will not get him out of the rough draft of his madness: he is a streaky madman, full of lucid intervals."

They went in to dinner, and the dinner was such as Don Diego had said on the road that he generally gave his guests: clean, plentiful and tasty. But what most contented Don Quixote was the marvellous silence there was throughout the house, which was like a Carthusian monastery.

The cloth being taken away, then, and thanks given to God and water given for the hands, Don Quixote pressed Don Lorenzo hard to say the verses for the literary competition; to which he answered that, so as not to look like one of those poets who refuse their verses when they are begged for them and vomit them up when nobody asks —

"— I shall say my gloss, for which I expect no prize at all, since I made it only to exercise my wits."

"A judicious friend of mine," answered Don Quixote, "was of the opinion that nobody ought to wear himself out glossing verses; and the reason, he said, was that the gloss could never come up to the text, and that many times, or most times, the gloss went wide of the intention and purpose of what the glossed lines called for; and, what is more, that the laws of the gloss were excessively narrow, since they allow no questions, no 'said he' and no 'shall I say', no turning verbs into nouns, no shifting of the sense, along with other bindings and tightnesses that those who gloss go tied up in — as your worship must know."

"Truly, Señor Don Quixote," said Don Lorenzo, "I keep wanting to catch your worship out in one sustained piece of bad Latin, and I cannot, because you slip out of my hands like an eel."

"I do not understand," answered Don Quixote, "what your worship says or means to say in that about my slipping."

"I shall make myself understood," answered Don Lorenzo; "and for the moment let your worship be attentive to the glossed verses and to the gloss, which go in this way:

	If only my "was" turned back into "is,"
	without waiting for more "will be" —
	or if the time would come already
	of what is to be hereafter!

Gloss

	In the end, since everything passes,
	the good that Fortune gave me passed —
	Fortune, no niggard at that time —
	and she never gave it back to me,
	neither in plenty nor by measure.
	Centuries now you have seen me,
	Fortune, laid here at your feet;
	turn me back into a lucky man,
	for my being will be a happy one
	if only my "was" turned back into "is."

	I want no other pleasure or glory,
	no other palm or conquest,
	no other triumph, no other victory,
	but to go back to that contentment
	which is a grief in my memory.
	If you take me back there,
	Fortune, then all the fierceness
	of my fire is tempered —
	and the more so if this good comes at once,
	without waiting for more "will be."

	I am asking for impossible things,
	since to make time be again
	after it has once been
	is a thing no power on earth
	has ever stretched itself so far as.
	Time runs, it flies, it goes
	light-footed, and it will not come back,
	and he would be wrong who asked
	either that the time were gone already
	or that the time would come back already.

	I live a perplexed life,
	now hoping, now fearing:
	it is a death I know well,
	and it is far better, by dying,
	to look for a way out of the pain.
	It would be to my own advantage
	to make an end; but it is not,
	since, by better reasoning,
	what keeps me alive is the fear
	of what is to be hereafter.

When Don Lorenzo had finished saying his gloss, Don Quixote stood up, and in a raised voice that was more like a shout, gripping Don Lorenzo's right hand in his own, said:

"By the highest heavens there are, generous young man, you are the best poet in the world, and you deserve to be crowned with laurel, not by Cyprus or by Gaeta, as a certain poet said, God forgive him, but by the academies of Athens, if they were alive today, and by those that are alive today in Paris, Bologna and Salamanca! May it please heaven that the judges who take the first prize from you should be shot through by Phoebus, and that the Muses should never cross the thresholds of their houses. Say me some longer verses, sir, if you will be so good; for I want to take the whole pulse of your admirable wit from end to end."

Is it not a fine thing that they say Don Lorenzo was pleased at hearing himself praised by Don Quixote, even though he took him for mad? O power of flattery, how far you stretch, and how wide are the limits of your agreeable jurisdiction! Don Lorenzo bore this truth out, since he agreed to Don Quixote's request and wish, saying him this sonnet on the fable or history of Pyramus and Thisbe:

Sonnet

	The beautiful maiden breaks the wall
	that opened the gallant breast of Pyramus:
	Love sets out from Cyprus and goes straight
	to see the narrow and prodigious crack.
	Silence speaks there, because the voice
	does not dare go in by so narrow a narrows;
	but souls do — for love is used, in fact,
	to making easy the most difficult thing.
	Desire went out of all measure, and the step
	of the imprudent girl solicits,
	for her own pleasure, her own death: see what a story —
	that both of them in one instant, oh strange case,
	are killed, are hidden and are brought back to life
	by one sword, one tomb, one memory.

"Blessed be God!" said Don Quixote, having heard Don Lorenzo's sonnet, "that among the infinite consumptive poets there are, I have seen one consummate poet, as your worship is, my dear sir; which is what the workmanship of this sonnet gives me to understand."

Four days Don Quixote spent, most royally entertained, in Don Diego's house, at the end of which he asked leave to go, telling him that he thanked him for the kindness and good treatment he had received in his house; but that, since it did not look well for knights errant to give many hours to leisure and comfort, he wanted to go and fulfil his office by looking for the adventures that he was informed that country abounded in, where he hoped to pass the time until the day of the jousts at Saragossa came, which was the straight line of his course. And that first he had to go into the cave of Montesinos, of which so many and such wonderful things were told in those parts, finding out and inquiring at the same time about the birth and true springs of the seven lagoons commonly called the Lagoons of Ruidera.

Don Diego and his son praised his honourable determination, and told him to take from their house and their estate anything that suited him, for they would serve him with all possible good will, since the worth of his person and his honourable profession obliged them to it.

The day of his departure came at last, as glad for Don Quixote as it was sad and ill-starred for Sancho Panza, who found himself very well off with the abundance of Don Diego's house and refused to go back to the hunger that is customary in the woods and the unpeopled places, and to the tightness of his badly provided saddlebags. So he filled them and heaped them up with the most necessary things he could think of; and on taking his leave Don Quixote said to Don Lorenzo:

"I do not know whether I have told your worship before, and if I have told you I say it again: that whenever your worship wants to save roads and labour in reaching the inaccessible summit of the temple of Fame, you have nothing else to do but to leave the path of poetry to one side, which is somewhat narrow, and take the very narrowest one of knight-errantry, which is enough to make you an emperor in the time it takes to say so."

With these arguments Don Quixote finished closing the case for his madness, and still more with the ones he added, saying:

"God knows whether I should like to take Señor Don Lorenzo with me, to teach him how the humble are to be pardoned and the proud trampled and put underfoot — virtues attached to the profession I profess. But since his few years do not call for it, and his praiseworthy exercises will not want to allow it, I content myself only with pointing out to your worship that, being a poet, you will be able to be famous if you are guided more by other people's opinion than by your own; because there is no father or mother to whom their own children look ugly, and in the children of the understanding this deception runs stronger still."

Father and son marvelled afresh at Don Quixote's interlarded speeches, now judicious and now preposterous, and at the theme and the doggedness with which he kept to going out at all costs in search of his unfortunate adventures, which he held to be the end and the target of his desires. The offers and civilities were repeated, and, with the good leave of the lady of the castle, Don Quixote and Sancho set off on Rocinante and the grey.
