Chapter 19: Where the Adventure of the Lovesick Shepherd Is Told, with Other Truly Amusing Events

Don Quixote had gone only a short stretch away from Don Diego's village when he came upon two men who looked like priests or like students, and two farm labourers, all four mounted on donkeys. One of the students was carrying, done up in a piece of green buckram like a portmanteau, what looked like a little white cloth and two pairs of ribbed woollen stockings; the other was carrying nothing but two blunt fencing swords, new, with their buttons on. The labourers were carrying other things which gave a sign and an indication that they were coming from some large town where they had bought them, and were taking them home to their village.

And students and labourers alike fell into the same astonishment that everybody fell into who saw Don Quixote for the first time, and they were dying to know what sort of man this was, so far outside the use of other men.

Don Quixote greeted them, and, after learning the road they were taking, which was the same one he was making, he offered them his company and asked them to hold back their pace, because their she-donkeys walked faster than his horse. And, to oblige them, in a few words he told them who he was, and his office and profession, which was that of a knight errant who went about looking for adventures in all the parts of the world. He told them that his own name was Don Quixote of La Mancha, and his by-name the Knight of the Lions.

All this, for the labourers, was talking to them in Greek or in thieves' cant; but not for the students, who saw at once the weakness of Don Quixote's brain. Even so, they looked at him with wonder and with respect, and one of them said to him:

"If your worship, sir knight, is not taking any settled road — as those who look for adventures generally do not — let your worship come along with us: you will see one of the best and richest weddings that has been celebrated to this day in La Mancha, or for a great many leagues round about it."

Don Quixote asked him whether it was some prince's, that he made so much of it.

"It is not," answered the student, "but a farmer's and a farmer's daughter's: he the richest in all this country, and she the most beautiful that men have seen. The show they are to be made with is out of the ordinary and new, because they are to be celebrated in a meadow next to the bride's village — she is called, by way of eminence, Quiteria the Beautiful, and the bridegroom is called Camacho the Rich. She is eighteen years old and he twenty-two; both a match for each other, although some inquisitive people who have all the world's pedigrees by heart will have it that beautiful Quiteria's family is a step above Camacho's. But nobody looks at that any more, since riches have the power to solder over a great many cracks.

"In fact this Camacho is open-handed, and he has taken a fancy to roofing over the whole meadow with branches, in such a way that the sun will have his work cut out if he wants to come in and visit the green grass the ground is covered with. He has also got up dances, both sword dances and little-bell dances, since there are men in his village who can ring them and shake them out to perfection; of clog-dancers I say nothing, for the crowd of them he has mustered is a judgement. But none of the things I have mentioned, nor a great many others I have left unmentioned, will make this wedding more memorable than what I imagine the despairing Basilio will do at it.

"This Basilio is a young fellow from the same place as Quiteria, whose house stood a wall and a half from the house of Quiteria's parents — from which love took the occasion to make the world over again the by now forgotten loves of Pyramus and Thisbe. Because Basilio fell in love with Quiteria from his tender first years, and she went on answering his desire with a thousand honourable favours, so much so that the loves of the two children Basilio and Quiteria were told as an entertainment in the village.

"Their years went on growing, and Quiteria's father decided to block Basilio's ordinary entry into his house; and, to save himself from going about wary and full of suspicions, he arranged to marry his daughter to the rich Camacho, since it did not seem to him a good thing to marry her to Basilio, who did not have as many of fortune's goods as he had of nature's. For if the truth is to be told without envy, he is the nimblest young man we know: a great thrower of the bar, an outstanding wrestler and a great pelota player; he runs like a fallow deer, jumps better than a goat and knocks down the skittles as if by enchantment; he sings like a lark and plays a guitar until he makes it talk, and, above all, he handles a sword with the best of them."

"For that one accomplishment alone," said Don Quixote at this point, "that young man would deserve to marry not merely the beautiful Quiteria but Queen Guinevere herself, if she were alive today, in spite of Lancelot and of all those who might want to prevent it."

"Try that on my wife!" said Sancho Panza, who up to then had been going along silent and listening. "She will have nothing but that everybody should marry his equal, holding to the proverb that says 'every ewe to her own mate'. What I should like is that this good Basilio, whom I am beginning to take a fancy to, should marry that lady Quiteria; and may they have a good long life and a good rest — I was going to say it the other way round — those who stop the marriage of people who love each other well."

"If all those who love each other well had to marry," said Don Quixote, "the choice and jurisdiction of marrying their children to whom and when they should would be taken away from parents. And if the choosing of husbands were left to the will of daughters, there would be one who would choose her father's servant, and one who would choose a man she saw going past in the street and thought dashing and well set up, even if he were a broken-down swashbuckler. For love and fondness easily blind the eyes of the understanding, which are so necessary for choosing one's state; and the state of matrimony is in great danger of being got wrong, and it needs great care and a particular favour from heaven to get it right.

"A man means to take a long journey, and if he is prudent, before setting out he looks for some safe and agreeable company to travel with. Well then, why should not the same be done by the man who has to travel all his life, right to the stopping-place of death — and the more so if the company is to keep him company in bed, at table and everywhere, as a wife's does her husband's? A man's own wife is not merchandise that, once bought, can be given back or traded or exchanged, because she is an inseparable accident that lasts as long as life lasts: she is a noose that, once you have put it round your neck, turns into the Gordian knot, and unless death's scythe cuts it there is no untying it. A great many more things I could say on this matter, if I were not stopped by my wish to know whether the licentiate has anything more to say about Basilio's history."

To which the bachelor student — or licentiate, as Don Quixote had called him — answered:

"Of the whole business I have nothing more to say except that from the moment Basilio learned that the beautiful Quiteria was marrying Camacho the Rich, nobody has ever seen him laugh again or say a sensible word, and he goes about always thoughtful and sad, talking to himself, by which he gives certain and clear signs that his wits have turned. He eats little and sleeps little, and what he eats is fruit, and where he sleeps, if he sleeps, is out in the fields on the hard ground, like a brute animal. Every now and then he looks at the sky, and other times he fixes his eyes on the ground with such a trance on him that he looks like nothing but a dressed statue whose clothes are moved by the air. In short, he gives such signs of having a heart in torment that all of us who know him are afraid that beautiful Quiteria's saying yes tomorrow will be the sentence of his death."

"God will manage it better," said Sancho. "For God, who gives the wound, gives the medicine. Nobody knows what is to come: between now and tomorrow there are a great many hours, and in one of them, and even in a moment, a house falls down. I have seen it rain and shine at one and the same instant; a man goes to bed healthy at night and cannot move the next day. And tell me: is there by any chance anybody who can boast that he has driven a nail into Fortune's wheel? Certainly not. And between a woman's yes and her no I would not dare to put the point of a pin, because it would not fit. Only give me Quiteria loving Basilio with a good heart and a good will, and I shall give him a sackful of good luck; for love, as I have heard it said, looks through a pair of spectacles that make copper seem gold, poverty riches and gummy eyes pearls."

"Where are you going to end up, Sancho, curse you?" said Don Quixote. "When you start threading proverbs and tales together, there is nobody who can wait for you but Judas himself, and may he carry you off. Tell me, animal, what do you know about nails, or wheels, or anything else at all?"

"Oh! Well, if they do not understand me," answered Sancho, "it is no wonder that my judgements are taken for nonsense. But it does not matter: I understand myself, and I know I have not said many foolish things in what I have said. It is only that your worship, my dear sir, is always the persecutor of my sayings, and even of my doings."

"Prosecutor you should say," said Don Quixote, "and not persecutor, you perverter of good language, and God confound you."

"Do not go setting on me, your worship," answered Sancho, "since you know I was not brought up at Court and have not studied at Salamanca, so as to know whether I am adding or taking away a letter from my words. Why, God bless me, there is no call to oblige a man from the back country to talk like a man of Toledo; and there may be men of Toledo who are no great hands at this business of polished speech either."

"That is so," said the licentiate, "because those who are brought up in the Tanneries and in the Zocodover market cannot speak as well as those who walk up and down almost all day in the cloister of the cathedral, and they are all men of Toledo. Pure language, proper, elegant and clear, is found in judicious men of the court, even though they were born in Majalahonda. I said judicious, because there are many who are not; and judiciousness is the grammar of good language, which goes along with usage. I, gentlemen, for my sins, have studied canon law at Salamanca, and I pride myself a little on saying what I mean in clear, plain, meaningful words."

"If you did not pride yourself more on knowing how to wave about those black swords you are carrying than on your tongue," said the other student, "you would have come out first in your licentiate examinations instead of coming out last."

"Look here, bachelor," answered the licentiate, "you hold the most mistaken opinion in the world about swordsmanship, in taking it for an empty thing."

"For me it is not an opinion but a settled truth," replied Corchuelo. "And if you want me to show you so by experience, you have the swords, there is room, I have wrists and strength, which, backed by my spirit — and that is not small — will make you confess that I am not deceiving myself. Get down and use your footwork and your circles and your angles and your science; for I expect to make you see stars at midday with my modern, clumsy skill, in which, after God, I trust that the man is still to be born who will make me turn my back, and that there is nobody in the world I cannot make give ground."

"As to turning your back or not, I do not go into that," replied the fencer. "Though it might well be that in the very place where you first planted your foot, there they would dig your grave — I mean that you would be left dead there by the swordsmanship you despise."

"We shall see about that now," answered Corchuelo.

And, getting off his donkey with great quickness, he furiously snatched one of the swords the licentiate was carrying on his.

"It must not be like this," said Don Quixote at this instant, "for I mean to be the master of this fencing bout and the judge of this many times unsettled question."

And, dismounting from Rocinante and gripping his lance, he planted himself in the middle of the road, just as the licentiate, with a graceful carriage of his body and neat footwork, was going at Corchuelo, who came at him throwing, as the saying goes, fire out of his eyes. The other two labourers of the party, without getting down off their donkeys, served as spectators of the mortal tragedy.

The slashes, thrusts, downstrokes, backhands and two-handed cuts that Corchuelo let fly were beyond counting: thicker than liver and finer than hail. He charged like an angry lion, but out to meet him would come a shut-your-mouth from the button of the licentiate's sword, which stopped him in the middle of his fury and made him kiss it as if it were a relic — though not with as much devotion as relics ought to be and generally are kissed.

Finally the licentiate counted him out, thrust by thrust, all the buttons of a short cassock he was wearing, making ribbons of its skirts like octopus tails; he knocked his hat off twice, and wore him out to such a degree that out of spite, choler and rage Corchuelo seized the sword by the hilt and flung it through the air with such force that one of the labourers there, who was a notary, went after it and afterwards gave it in his official testimony that he had thrown it nearly three-quarters of a league from himself — which testimony serves and has served to make it known and seen in all truth how force is beaten by art.

Corchuelo sat down, tired out, and Sancho, coming up to him, said:

"Upon my faith, master bachelor, if your worship takes my advice, from now on you should not challenge anybody to fence, but to wrestle or to throw the bar, since you have the years and the strength for it. Because of these men they call fencers, I have heard it said that they will put the point of a sword through the eye of a needle."

"I am content," answered Corchuelo, "to have fallen off my donkey, and to have had experience show me the truth I was so far from."

And, getting up, he embraced the licentiate, and they were left better friends than before; and, not wanting to wait for the notary, who had gone after the sword, since it seemed to them he would be a long time, they decided to go on, so as to get early to Quiteria's village, which was where they all came from.

For what was left of the road, the licentiate went on telling them about the excellences of the sword, with so many demonstrative arguments and so many mathematical figures and demonstrations that they were all convinced of the goodness of the science, and Corchuelo was brought round from his obstinacy.

Night had fallen; but before they arrived it seemed to all of them that there was a sky full of innumerable shining stars in front of the village. They also heard confused, soft sounds of various instruments — flutes, little drums, psalteries, pipes, tabors and jingles. And when they got near they saw that the trees of an arbour that had been set up by hand at the entrance to the village were all full of lamps, which the wind did not trouble, for it was not blowing then but so gently that it had no strength to move the leaves of the trees.

The musicians were the merrymakers of the wedding, who were going about that pleasant place in various parties, some dancing, others singing and others playing the diversity of the instruments already named. In fact it looked like nothing but gladness running and contentment leaping all over that meadow.

A great many others were busy putting up stands from which, the next day, they could conveniently see the plays and dances that were to be performed in that place set aside for solemnising the wedding of Camacho the Rich and the funeral rites of Basilio. Don Quixote would not go into the place, though both the labourer and the bachelor asked him to; but he gave as his excuse, sufficient enough in his own view, that it was the custom of knights errant to sleep in the fields and the woods rather than in inhabited places, even under gilded roofs. And with this he turned a little off the road, much against Sancho's will, the memory coming back to him of the good lodging he had had in Don Diego's castle or house.
