Chapter 20: Where the Wedding of Camacho the Rich Is Told, with What Happened to Basilio the Poor

Hardly had the white dawn given shining Phoebus room to dry the liquid pearls out of her golden hair with the heat of his warm rays, when Don Quixote, shaking the sloth out of his limbs, got to his feet and called his squire Sancho, who was still snoring. Which Don Quixote seeing, before he woke him he said to him:

"O you, more blessed than any who live on the face of the earth, since without envying or being envied you sleep with a quiet spirit, and no enchanters persecute you and no enchantments startle you! Sleep, I say again, and I shall say it another hundred times, with no jealousy over your lady keeping you in perpetual watchfulness, and no thought of paying the debts you owe keeping you awake, nor of what you must do to feed yourself and your small, distressed family tomorrow.

"Ambition does not disturb you, and the vain pomp of the world does not tire you, since the limits of your desires do not stretch any further than to thinking about your donkey — for the thinking about your person you have laid on my shoulders: a counterweight and a load that nature and custom have laid on masters. The servant sleeps and the master lies awake, thinking how he is to keep him, better him and do him favours. The anguish of seeing the sky turn to bronze and not come to the earth with the dew it needs does not afflict the servant but the master, who must keep in barrenness and hunger the man who served him in fertility and abundance."

To all this Sancho made no answer, because he was asleep, nor would he have woken up so soon if Don Quixote had not brought him round with the butt of his lance. He woke at last, sleepy and lazy, and, turning his face in every direction, said:

"From over by that arbour, if I am not mistaken, there comes a whiff and a smell a great deal more of grilled bacon than of rushes and thyme. Weddings that begin with smells like that, by my blessed self, must be plentiful and open-handed ones."

"Have done, glutton," said Don Quixote. "Come, we shall go and see this wedding, to see what the scorned Basilio does."

"Let him do whatever he likes," answered Sancho. "He should not have been poor, and then he would have married Quiteria. Is there nothing more to it than having not a farthing and wanting to raise yourself up above the clouds? Upon my word, sir, I am of the opinion that a poor man should be content with what he finds, and not go asking for oysters up a tree.

"I would bet an arm that Camacho could bury Basilio in silver; and if that is so, as it must be, Quiteria would be a great fool to throw away the finery and the jewels Camacho must have given her and can still give her, and choose instead Basilio's bar-throwing and his play with the black sword. They will not give you a quarter-pint of wine in the tavern for a good throw of the bar or a fine pass with a sword. Talents and gifts that are not saleable — let Count Dirlos have them and welcome; but when such gifts fall on a man who has good money, may my life be as good as they look. On a good foundation you can raise a good building, and the best foundation and trench in the world is money."

"For God's sake, Sancho," said Don Quixote at this, "make an end of your harangue. It is my belief that if you were let go on with the ones you start at every step, you would have no time left for eating or for sleeping, since you would spend it all in talking."

"If your worship had a good memory," replied Sancho, "you would remember the articles of our agreement before we came out of the house this last time. One of them was that you were to let me talk as much as I liked, so long as it was not against my neighbour or against your worship's authority; and up to now I do not think I have gone against that article."

"I do not remember, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "any such article. And granting that it is so, I want you to be quiet and to come along; for the instruments we heard last night are beginning to gladden the valleys again, and no doubt the wedding will be celebrated in the cool of the morning and not in the heat of the afternoon."

Sancho did as his master ordered him, and, putting the saddle on Rocinante and the pack-saddle on the grey, the two of them mounted and went at a walking pace in under the arbour.

The first thing that offered itself to Sancho's sight was a whole young bullock spitted on a whole elm tree; and in the fire where it was to be roasted a middling mountain of wood was burning. Six pots that stood round the bonfire had not been cast in the common mould of the rest of the world's pots, because they were six half-jars, each one of which would hold a whole slaughterhouse of meat: they soaked up and shut inside themselves whole sheep without its showing, as though they were pigeons. The skinned hares and the plucked hens hanging from the trees to be buried in the pots were beyond number; the birds and game of various sorts were infinite, hanging from the trees so that the air could cool them.

Sancho counted more than sixty wineskins of over sixteen gallons each, and all of them full, as it later turned out, of generous wines. There were stacks of the whitest bread, like the heaps of wheat there generally are on the threshing floors; the cheeses, laid up like lattice-work bricks, made a wall; and two cauldrons of oil, bigger than a dyer's, served for frying things of batter, which they lifted out fried with two stout paddles and plunged into another cauldron of prepared honey that stood alongside.

The cooks, men and women, came to more than fifty: all clean, all busy and all contented. In the swollen belly of the bullock were twelve tender little sucking pigs, sewn up inside, which served to give it flavour and make it tender. The spices of various kinds looked as though they had been bought not by the pound but by the hundredweight, and they were all on show in a great chest. In short, the show made by the wedding was rustic, but so abundant that it could have fed an army.

Sancho Panza looked at it all and contemplated it all and took a fancy to it all. First the pots captured and conquered his desire, out of which he would very willingly have taken a middling stewpot; then the wineskins won over his good will; and last of all the fritters, if such round-bellied cauldrons could be called frying pans. And so, unable to bear it and unable to help himself, he went up to one of the busy cooks and, with courteous and hungry words, begged him to let him dip a crust of bread in one of those pots. To which the cook answered:

"Brother, this day is not one of those over which hunger has any jurisdiction, thanks to the rich Camacho. Get down and see whether there is a ladle about, and skim off a hen or two, and much good may it do you."

"I do not see one," answered Sancho.

"Wait," said the cook. "Sinner that I am, what a squeamish, useless creature you must be!"

And saying this he seized a small cauldron, and, plunging it into one of the half-jars, brought up in it three hens and two geese, and said to Sancho:

"Eat, my friend, and breakfast on this skimming while the dinner hour comes round."

"I have nothing to put it in," answered Sancho.

"Then take the ladle and all," said the cook; "Camacho's riches and Camacho's contentment make up for everything."

While this was happening to Sancho, then, Don Quixote was watching some twelve labourers coming in at one side of the arbour on twelve most beautiful mares, with rich and showy country harness and a great many little bells on their breast-bands, all dressed in their merrymaking and holiday clothes. In an ordered troop they ran not one but a great many courses across the meadow, with a merry uproar and shouting, calling out:

"Long live Camacho and Quiteria: he as rich as she is beautiful, and she the most beautiful in the world!"

Which Don Quixote hearing, he said to himself:

"It is plain enough that these men have never seen my Dulcinea of El Toboso, because if they had seen her they would hold their hands in praising this Quiteria of theirs."

A little after that, many and various dances began to come in at different parts of the arbour, among them a sword dance of some twenty-four young men of gallant looks and spirit, all dressed in fine, very white linen with their head-cloths worked in various colours of fine silk. And one of the men on the mares asked the young fellow leading them, who was a nimble lad, whether any of the dancers had been wounded.

"So far, blessed be God, nobody has been wounded: we are all going sound."

And at once he began to weave in and out with the rest of his companions, with so many turns and so much skill that, although Don Quixote was used to seeing dances of the sort, none had ever pleased him as much as that one.

He was also pleased by another that came in, of the most beautiful girls, so young that to look at them none was under fourteen or over eighteen, all dressed in fine green cloth, their hair partly braided and partly loose, but all of it so fair that it could have competed with the sun's; and over it they wore garlands made up of jasmine, roses, amaranth and honeysuckle. A venerable old man and an elderly matron led them, but nimbler and more loose-limbed than their years promised. A Zamoran bagpipe made the music for them; and they, carrying decency in their faces and their eyes and nimbleness in their feet, showed themselves the best dancers in the world.

After this one came in another dance, one of the contrived sort and of those they call spoken dances. It was of eight nymphs, divided into two files. Of one file the god Cupid was the leader, and of the other Self-Interest — Cupid decked out with wings, bow, quiver and arrows, Self-Interest dressed in rich and various colours of gold and silk.

The nymphs who followed Love carried their names written on their backs on white parchment in large letters: the title of the first was poetry, that of the second good sense, that of the third good birth and that of the fourth valour. In the same way those who followed Self-Interest came labelled: the title of the first said liberality, that of the second largesse, that of the third treasure and that of the fourth peaceful possession.

In front of them all came a wooden castle drawn by four wild men, all dressed in ivy and in hemp dyed green, so much to the life that they came near frightening Sancho. On the front of the castle and on all four sides of it was written: the castle of modesty. Four skilled players of the tabor and pipe made the music for them.

Cupid began the dance, and, having made two figures, he raised his eyes and drew his bow at a girl who placed herself between the battlements of the castle, to whom he spoke in this way:

	I am the god who is powerful
	in the air and on the earth
	and in the wide and billowing sea,
	and in everything the abyss shuts up
	in its terrifying pit.
	I have never known what fear is;
	whatever I want, I can do,
	even when I want the impossible,
	and in everything that is possible
	I command, take away, set up and forbid.

He finished the stanza, shot an arrow over the top of the castle and withdrew to his place. Then Self-Interest came out and made two more figures; the little drums fell silent, and he said:

	I am the one who can do more than Love,
	and it is Love who guides me;
	I am of the best stock
	that heaven breeds on earth,
	the best known and the greatest.
	I am Self-Interest, in whom
	few are used to doing well,
	and to do anything without me is a great miracle;
	and such as I am, I consecrate myself to you
	for ever and ever, amen.

Self-Interest withdrew and Poetry came forward, who, after making her figures like the rest, fixed her eyes on the girl on the castle and said:

	In the sweetest of conceits,
	the sweetest Poetry,
	lofty, grave and judicious,
	sends you her soul, my lady,
	wrapped up in a thousand sonnets.
	If my insistence does not
	trouble you, then your fortune,
	envied by a great many others,
	will be lifted up by me
	above the circle of the moon.

Poetry moved off, and from Self-Interest's side came Liberality, and, having made her figures, said:

	They give the name of Liberality
	to the giving that runs from the extreme
	of prodigality,
	and from the opposite one, which argues
	a lukewarm and slack will.
	But I, to make you great,
	mean from today on to be prodigal;
	for though it is a vice, it is an honourable vice
	and the vice of a heart in love,
	which shows itself in giving.

In this way all the figures of the two squadrons came out and withdrew, and each one made his figures and said his verses, some of them elegant and some of them ridiculous; and Don Quixote took down by heart — and his memory was a great one — only the ones already given. Then they all mixed together, making and unmaking knots with graceful ease and freedom; and when Love went past in front of the castle he shot his arrows over the top, but Self-Interest broke gilded money-pots against it.

Finally, after they had danced a good while, Self-Interest brought out a large purse made from the skin of a great tabby cat, which looked as if it were full of money, and, throwing it at the castle, the boards were knocked out of their sockets with the blow and fell down, leaving the girl uncovered and without any defence at all. Self-Interest came up with the figures of his party, and, throwing a great gold chain round her neck, they made a show of seizing her, conquering her and carrying her off captive. Which Love and his supporters seeing, they made as if to take her from him; and all the demonstrations they made were in time to the little drums, dancing and stepping in order. The wild men made peace between them, who with great quickness set the boards of the castle up and fitted them together again, and the girl shut herself up in it as before; and with this the dance ended, to the great contentment of those who were watching it.

Don Quixote asked one of the nymphs who had composed and arranged it. She answered that it was a beneficed priest of that village, who had a fine head for inventions of the kind.

"I would bet," said Don Quixote, "that this bachelor or beneficed priest must be more Camacho's friend than Basilio's, and that he must have more of the satirist in him than of the vespers-singer. He has fitted Basilio's talents and Camacho's riches into the dance very neatly!"

Sancho Panza, who was listening to all of it, said:

"My money's on the king: I stand by Camacho."

"In short," said Don Quixote, "it is plain enough, Sancho, that you are a peasant and one of those who say, 'Long live the winner!'"

"I do not know which sort I am," answered Sancho, "but I do know that I shall never take such elegant skimmings out of Basilio's pots as this that I have taken out of Camacho's."

And he showed him the cauldron full of geese and hens, and, seizing one of them, began to eat with great charm and appetite, and said:

"In the teeth of Basilio's talents! You are worth as much as you have, and you have as much as you are worth. There are only two families in the world, as a grandmother of mine used to say — the Haves and the Have-nots — although she stood by the Haves. And these days, my lord Don Quixote, they take the pulse of the purse sooner than of the person: a donkey covered in gold looks better than a horse under a pack-saddle. So I say again that I stand by Camacho, out of whose pots the skimmings are plentiful geese and hens, hares and rabbits; while out of Basilio's, if it comes to hand, and even if it only comes to foot, they will be dishwater."

"Have you finished your harangue, Sancho?" said Don Quixote.

"I shall have finished it," answered Sancho, "because I see that your worship takes it heavily; for if that did not come in between, I had work cut out here for three days."

"Please God, Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "that I may see you dumb before I die."

"At the rate we are going," answered Sancho, "before your worship dies I shall be chewing earth, and then it may be that I shall be so dumb that I shall not speak a word until the end of the world, or at least until the day of Judgement."

"Even if that should happen so, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "your silence will never come up to what you have talked, are talking and are going to talk in your lifetime. And besides, it is very much in the order of nature that the day of my death should come before the day of yours; and so I never expect to see you dumb, not even when you are drinking or sleeping, which is as far as I can go."

"Upon my faith, sir," answered Sancho, "there is no trusting the fleshless lady — I mean death, who eats lamb as readily as mutton. And I have heard our curate say that she treads with an equal foot on the high towers of kings and on the humble huts of the poor. This lady has more of power about her than of squeamishness: she is not at all fussy, she eats everything and makes do with anything, and she stuffs her saddlebags with people of every sort, age and rank. She is no reaper who sleeps through the noonday, for she reaps at all hours and cuts the dry grass along with the green; and she does not seem to chew but to bolt and swallow whatever is put in front of her, because she has a dog's hunger that is never satisfied. And although she has no belly, she gives you to understand that she is dropsical and thirsty enough to drink down the lives of all who live, the way a man drinks down a jug of cold water."

"No more, Sancho," said Don Quixote at this point. "Hold yourself at your best and do not let yourself fall; for truly what you have said about death in your rustic terms is what a good preacher could have said. I tell you, Sancho, that if along with the good nature and good sense you have you could take a pulpit in hand, you might go about this world preaching fine things."

"He preaches well who lives well," answered Sancho, "and I know no other 'ologies."

"Nor do you need any," said Don Quixote; "but I cannot for the life of me understand or make out how, the fear of God being the beginning of wisdom, you, who are more afraid of a lizard than of Him, know so much."

"Let your worship judge of your chivalries, sir," answered Sancho, "and not go meddling in judging other people's fears or bravery; for I am as fine a fearer of God as anybody's son in the parish. And let your worship let me polish off this skimming, since all the rest is idle words that they will call us to account for in the other life."

And saying this he began afresh to storm his cauldron, with such good appetite that he woke Don Quixote's; and he would no doubt have helped him, if he had not been stopped by what must of necessity be told further on.
