Chapter 21: Where Camacho's Wedding Is Carried Further, with Other Delightful Events

While Don Quixote and Sancho were in the talk reported in the last chapter, loud shouts and a great noise were heard; and the men on the mares were making them and causing it, going at full gallop and shouting to meet the bride and bridegroom, who came surrounded by a thousand kinds of instruments and contrivances, accompanied by the curate and by the relations of both, and by all the most distinguished people of the neighbouring places, everybody dressed for the holiday.

And as soon as Sancho saw the bride he said:

"Upon my faith, she does not come dressed as a farm girl but as a fine court lady! By God, as far as I can make out, the medallions she was to have worn are rich coral, and the green cloth of Cuenca is thirty-pile velvet! And I'll be bound the trimming is strips of white linen — I swear it is satin! And take a look at her hands, decked out with jet rings: strike me down if they are not gold rings, and very gold, and set with pearls as white as curds, each one of which must be worth an eye out of your head. Oh, the whoreson, and what hair! If it is not false, I have never seen it longer or fairer in all my life. No, go on, find a fault in her spirit or in her figure, and don't compare her to a palm tree swaying loaded down with clusters of dates — because that is just what the trinkets look like that she has hanging from her hair and her throat. I swear on my soul she is a fine, well-built girl, and she could sail past the shoals of Flanders and come through."

Don Quixote laughed at Sancho Panza's rustic praises; but it seemed to him that, apart from his lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, he had never seen a more beautiful woman. Beautiful Quiteria came along somewhat pale, and it must have been from the bad night that brides always spend getting themselves up for the coming day of their wedding.

They were drawing near a platform that stood at one side of the meadow, decked out with carpets and boughs, where the marriage was to be made and from where they were to watch the dances and the contrivances. And just as they were reaching the place, they heard great shouting behind them, and a voice saying:

"Wait a little, you people, as thoughtless as you are in a hurry."

At which shouts and words they all turned their heads, and saw that the man making them was dressed, by the look of it, in a black tunic slashed with crimson in the shape of flames. He came crowned — as was seen at once — with a crown of funereal cypress, and in his hands he carried a great staff.

As he came nearer he was recognised by everybody as the gallant Basilio, and they were all left in suspense, waiting to see where his shouts and his words were going to end, and fearing some bad outcome from his coming at such a moment.

He arrived at last, tired and out of breath; and, planting himself in front of the couple, driving his staff into the ground — for it had a steel point at the end of it — with his colour changed and his eyes fixed on Quiteria, in a trembling and hoarse voice he said these words:

"You know very well, ungrateful Quiteria, that by the holy law we profess, while I am alive you cannot take a husband; and at the same time you are not ignorant that, because I was waiting for time and my own efforts to improve the goods of my fortune, I never chose to stop keeping the decorum your honour called for. But you, throwing behind you all the obligations you owe to my honest desire, want to make another man lord of what is mine — a man whose riches serve him not only as good fortune but as the very best of luck.

"And so that he may have it in full measure, and not as I think he deserves it but as the heavens choose to give it him, I shall with my own hands undo the impossibility or the obstacle that could stand in its way, by taking myself out from between. Long live, long live the rich Camacho with the ungrateful Quiteria, for long and happy ages; and let him die, let him die, poor Basilio, whose poverty cut the wings of his happiness and put him in the grave!"

And saying this he seized the staff he had driven into the ground; and, half of it staying in the earth, he showed that it served as the sheath of a middling rapier that was hidden inside it. And, setting what might be called the hilt on the ground, with a light unconcern and a settled purpose he threw himself upon it, and in an instant showed the bloody point coming out at his back, with half the steel blade — the wretched man left bathed in his own blood and stretched on the ground, run through by his own weapon.

His friends ran up at once to help him, grieved by his misery and pitiful misfortune; and Don Quixote, leaving Rocinante, ran to help him and took him in his arms, and found that he had not yet expired. They wanted to draw the rapier out, but the curate, who was there, was of the opinion that they should not draw it out before confessing him, because drawing it out and his expiring would be all in one moment. But Basilio, coming round a little, said in a pained and fainting voice:

"If you would only, cruel Quiteria, in this last and forced extremity give me your hand as my wife, I should still think my rashness had some excuse, since in it I attained the good of being yours."

The curate, hearing this, told him to attend to the health of his soul before the pleasures of the body, and to ask God very earnestly for pardon for his sins and for his desperate decision. To which Basilio answered that on no account would he confess unless Quiteria first gave him her hand as his wife: that this contentment would set his will to rights and give him breath to confess.

As soon as Don Quixote heard the wounded man's request, he said in a loud voice that Basilio was asking a thing that was very just and reasonable, and, besides, very easily done; and that Señor Camacho would be left just as honoured in receiving the lady Quiteria as the widow of the valorous Basilio as if he had received her from her father's side.

"Here there need be no more than a single yes, which will have no other effect than the pronouncing of it, since the marriage bed of this wedding is to be the grave."

Camacho heard it all, and it all left him bewildered and confused, not knowing what to do or what to say. But the voices of Basilio's friends were so many, begging him to consent to Quiteria's giving him her hand so that his soul should not be lost by departing this life in despair, that they moved him and even forced him to say that if Quiteria wanted to give it, he was content, since it was all only putting off the fulfilling of his desires for a moment.

Then they all turned to Quiteria, and some with entreaties, and others with tears, and others with forcible arguments, urged her to give her hand to poor Basilio; and she, harder than marble and more motionless than a statue, showed that she neither knew how, nor was able, nor wanted to answer a word — and she would not have answered if the curate had not told her to make up her mind quickly about what she was going to do, because Basilio already had his soul between his teeth and there was no room to wait for undecided decisions.

Then the beautiful Quiteria, without answering a single word, troubled, and to all appearances sad and sorry, came to where Basilio was lying with his eyes already turned up, his breath short and hurried, murmuring Quiteria's name between his teeth and giving signs of dying like a pagan and not like a Christian. Quiteria came, then, and, going down on her knees, asked him for his hand by signs and not by words. Basilio unfixed his eyes, and, looking at her attentively, said to her:

"O Quiteria, you have come to be merciful at a moment when your mercy must serve as the knife that finishes taking my life away, since I no longer have the strength to bear the glory you give me in choosing me for your own, or to hold off the pain that is so quickly covering my eyes with the terrible shadow of death! What I beg of you is this, O fatal star of mine: that the hand you ask of me and want to give me should not be for form's sake, nor to deceive me all over again, but that you should confess and say that, with no force put on your will, you hand it over and give it to me as to your lawful husband. For it is not reasonable that at a moment like this you should deceive me, or use any pretence with a man who has dealt in so many truths with you."

In the middle of these words he kept fainting away, so that all who were present thought that each faint was going to carry his soul off with it. Quiteria, all decency and all modesty, taking Basilio's hand in her right hand, said to him:

"No force would be enough to twist my will; and so, with the freest will I have, I give you my hand as your lawful wife and take yours — if it is that you give it me of your own free choice, without its being troubled or crossed by the calamity your hasty reasoning has put you in."

"I do give it," answered Basilio, "not troubled or confused, but with the clear understanding heaven chose to give me; and so I give myself and hand myself over as your husband."

"And I as your wife," answered Quiteria, "whether you live long years or whether they carry you out of my arms to the grave."

"For a young man as badly wounded as this," said Sancho Panza at this point, "he does a great deal of talking. Make him leave off the sweet nothings and attend to his soul, which to my mind he has more in his tongue than between his teeth."

Basilio and Quiteria being joined hand in hand, then, the curate, tender and in tears, gave them his blessing and asked heaven to give a good rest to the soul of the newly married man — who, as soon as he had received the blessing, jumped nimbly to his feet and with unheard-of coolness pulled out the rapier that had his own body for a sheath.

All the bystanders were left astonished, and some of them, simpler than they were curious, began to cry out at the tops of their voices:

"A miracle, a miracle!"

But Basilio answered:

"Not 'a miracle, a miracle', but a trick, a trick!"

The curate, disconcerted and thunderstruck, ran up with both hands to feel the wound, and found that the blade had gone not through Basilio's flesh and ribs but through a hollow iron tube, full of blood, that he had fitted neatly in that place — the blood, as was learnt afterwards, prepared in such a way that it would not congeal.

In short, the curate and Camacho and all the rest of the bystanders held themselves to have been fooled and made game of. The bride gave no sign of being sorry about the trick; on the contrary, hearing it said that the marriage, having been a deception, could not hold good, she said that she confirmed it afresh. From which they all gathered that the whole business had been arranged by the agreement and knowledge of the two of them — at which Camacho and his supporters were left so put out that they referred their revenge to their hands, and, drawing a great many swords, charged at Basilio, in whose favour almost as many were drawn in an instant.

And Don Quixote, taking the lead on horseback with his lance on his arm and well covered by his shield, made everybody give way to him. Sancho, who never took any pleasure or delight in doings of the kind, took refuge among the jars where he had drawn off his agreeable skimmings, that place seeming to him a sanctuary that ought to be held in respect. Don Quixote was saying in a loud voice:

"Hold, gentlemen, hold; for there is no reason for you to take revenge for the wrongs love does us. And note that love and war are one and the same thing; and just as in war it is lawful and customary to use tricks and stratagems to overcome the enemy, so in the contests and rivalries of love the deceits and dodges that are worked to get the end desired are held to be good, provided they are not to the damage and dishonour of the thing loved.

"Quiteria was Basilio's, and Basilio Quiteria's, by the just and favourable disposition of the heavens. Camacho is rich, and will be able to buy his pleasure when, where and how he likes. Basilio has nothing but this one ewe, and nobody is going to take her from him, however powerful he may be; for those two whom God has joined, man cannot separate — and whoever tries it must first come past the point of this lance."

And with that he brandished it so strongly and so skilfully that he struck terror into all who did not know him. And Quiteria's slight fixed itself so deeply in Camacho's imagination that it rubbed her out of his memory in an instant; and so the persuasions of the curate, who was a prudent and well-meaning man, took effect with him, by which Camacho and those of his party were left peaceable and quiet. In sign of which they put their swords back in their places, blaming Quiteria's readiness more than Basilio's trickery — Camacho reasoning that if Quiteria loved Basilio as a girl, she would love him as a married woman too, and that he ought to give thanks to heaven more for having taken her from him than for having given her.

Camacho and his troop being consoled and pacified, then, all those of Basilio's side quieted down; and the rich Camacho, to show that he did not feel the trick and set no store by it, wanted the festivities to go on as though he were really being married. But Basilio and his wife and their followers would not stay for them, and so they went off to Basilio's village — for the virtuous and judicious poor also have people to follow them, honour them and stand by them, as the rich have people to flatter them and keep them company.

They took Don Quixote away with them, valuing him as a man of worth and with hair on his chest. Sancho alone had his soul darkened, at seeing himself unable to wait for Camacho's splendid dinner and festivities, which lasted until night. And so, worn out and sad, he followed his master, who was going along with Basilio's party, and so he left behind him the fleshpots of Egypt — though he carried them in his soul, the by now nearly finished and used-up skimming he had in his cauldron standing for the glory and abundance of the good thing he was losing. And so, distressed and thoughtful, though not hungry, without getting down off the grey he followed in Rocinante's tracks.
