Chapter 22: Where an Account Is Given of the Great Adventure of the Cave of Montesinos, in the Heart of La Mancha, Which the Valorous Don Quixote of La Mancha Brought to a Happy Conclusion

Great and many were the attentions the newly married couple paid Don Quixote, feeling themselves obliged by the show he had made in defending their cause; and along with his valour they rated his good sense, holding him for a Cid in arms and a Cicero in eloquence. Good Sancho took his ease for three days at the bride and bridegroom's expense, from whom it was learnt that the mock wounding had not been a plan arranged with the beautiful Quiteria but a device of Basilio's, expecting from it exactly the outcome that had been seen. It is true, though, that he confessed he had let some of his friends into his idea, so that at the necessary moment they might back up his intention and warrant his deception.

"They cannot and should not be called deceptions," said Don Quixote, "when they have virtuous ends in view."

And he said that the marrying of two people in love was the most excellent of ends, pointing out that the greatest enemy love has is hunger and continual need, because love is all gladness, merriment and contentment, and the more so when the lover is in possession of the thing loved, against which need and poverty are opposed and declared enemies. And he said all this with the intention that Señor Basilio should leave off practising the talents he had, which, though they gave him fame, did not give him money, and should attend to getting himself an estate by lawful and industrious means, which are never wanting to the prudent and hard-working.

"The honourable poor man — if a poor man can be honourable — has a treasure in having a beautiful wife; and when she is taken from him, his honour is taken from him and killed. The beautiful and honourable woman whose husband is poor deserves to be crowned with the laurels and palms of conquest and triumph. Beauty by itself draws the good will of all who look at it and know it, and the royal eagles and the high-flying birds swoop down on it as on a delicious lure; but if need and hardship are joined to such beauty, then the crows and the kites and the other birds of prey attack it too — and the woman who stands firm against so many assaults well deserves to be called her husband's crown.

"Look here, judicious Basilio," Don Quixote added. "It was the opinion of some wise man or other that there was only one good woman in the whole world, and he gave it as his advice that every man should think and believe that this one good woman was his own, and in that way he would live contented. I am not married, nor has it come into my mind so far to be so; and, for all that, I should venture to give advice to any man who asked me for it about the way he ought to look for the woman he meant to marry.

"First of all, I should advise him to look more at her reputation than at her property, because a good woman does not attain a good reputation merely by being good but by seeming so; for public forwardness and freedom do a great deal more damage to women's honour than secret wickednesses. If you bring a good woman into your house, it will be an easy thing to keep her, and even improve her, in that goodness; but if you bring in a bad one, you will have your work cut out mending her — for it is not very easily done to pass from one extreme to the other. I do not say it is impossible, but I hold it to be difficult."

Sancho was listening to all this, and he said to himself:

"This master of mine, when I talk about things with pith and substance in them, generally says that I might take a pulpit in my hands and go about the world preaching fine things; and I say of him that when he starts threading judgements together and giving advice, he could take not only one pulpit in his hands but two on every finger, and go about the market squares saying whatever he pleased. The devil take you for a knight errant, and all the things you know! I thought, upon my soul, that he could only know what had to do with his chivalries; but there is nothing he does not peck at and stick his spoon into."

Sancho was muttering this a little out loud, and his master half heard him, and asked him:

"What are you muttering, Sancho?"

"I am not saying anything or muttering about anything," answered Sancho. "I was only saying to myself that I wish I had heard what your worship has said here before I married, for perhaps I should be saying now: 'the ox that is loose licks himself best'."

"Is your Teresa as bad as that, Sancho?" said Don Quixote.

"She is not very bad," answered Sancho, "but she is not very good; at least she is not as good as I should like."

"You do wrong, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "in speaking ill of your wife, who is, after all, the mother of your children."

"We owe each other nothing," answered Sancho, "because she speaks ill of me too whenever she takes it into her head — especially when she is jealous, and then Satan himself may put up with her."

Finally they spent three days with the newly married couple, where they were entertained and served like royal persons. Don Quixote asked the licentiate swordsman to give him a guide to take him to the cave of Montesinos, because he had a great desire to go into it and see with his own eyes whether the marvels that were told of it all through those parts were true.

The licentiate told him he would give him a cousin of his, a famous student and very fond of reading books of chivalry, who would very willingly put him at the mouth of the cave itself and would show him the Lagoons of Ruidera, likewise famous through all La Mancha and even through all Spain. And he told him he would find pleasant entertainment in him, since he was a young man who knew how to make books for printing and for dedicating to princes.

At last the cousin came on a pregnant she-ass whose pack-saddle was covered with a bright striped rug or piece of sacking. Sancho saddled Rocinante and got the grey ready, provided his saddlebags — which were joined by the cousin's, likewise well provided — and, commending themselves to God and taking their leave of everybody, they set out, taking the road to the famous cave of Montesinos.

On the way Don Quixote asked the cousin what kind and quality his pursuits, his profession and his studies were; to which he answered that his profession was to be a humanist, and his pursuits and studies to compose books for the press, all of them of great profit and no less entertainment to the commonwealth. That one of them was called The Book of Liveries, in which he painted seven hundred and three liveries with their colours, mottoes and devices, out of which courtier knights could pick and take whichever they liked at times of festival and merrymaking, without going about begging them from anybody or distilling their brains, as they say, to get them to fit their wishes and intentions.

"Because I give to the jealous man, to the scorned man, to the forgotten man and to the absent man the ones that suit them, and they will fit them better than their own skins. I have another book too, which I mean to call The Metamorphoses, or the Spanish Ovid, of a new and rare invention; because in it, imitating Ovid in the burlesque style, I paint who the Giralda of Seville was, and the Angel of the Magdalen, who the Vecinguerra Conduit of Cordova was, who the Bulls of Guisando were, and the Sierra Morena, and the fountains of Leganitos and Lavapiés in Madrid, not forgetting the Louse Fountain, the Gilded Spout and the Prioress — and this with their allegories, metaphors and transferences, so that they gladden, astonish and instruct all at once.

"I have another book that I call A Supplement to Polydore Vergil, which deals with the invention of things and is of great erudition and study, on the grounds that the things of great substance Polydore left unsaid, I find out and set forth in a graceful style. Vergil forgot to declare to us who was the first man in the world to have a cold, and the first to take the mercury cure for the French disease; and I declare it to the letter and back it up with more than twenty-five authors — so your worship may see whether I have worked well and whether such a book will be useful to all the world."

Sancho, who had been very attentive to the cousin's account, said to him:

"Tell me, sir, and so may God give you good luck in the printing of your books: could you tell me — and of course you could, since you know everything — who was the first man to scratch his head? For I hold for my own part that it must have been our father Adam."

"It must have been," answered the cousin, "because there is no doubt that Adam had a head and hair; and, this being so, and his being the first man in the world, he would have scratched himself at some time."

"So I believe," answered Sancho. "But tell me now: who was the first tumbler in the world?"

"Truly, brother," answered the cousin, "I shall not be able to settle that for the moment, until I have studied it. I shall study it when I get back to where my books are, and I shall satisfy you next time we see each other, for this must not be the last."

"Well look, sir," replied Sancho, "do not put yourself to any trouble over it, because I have just this minute hit on the answer to what I asked you. Know that the first tumbler in the world was Lucifer, when they threw him or hurled him out of heaven, and he came tumbling all the way down to the pit."

"You are right, my friend," said the cousin.

And Don Quixote said:

"That question and that answer are not yours, Sancho: you have heard somebody else say them."

"Be quiet, sir," replied Sancho, "for upon my faith, if I take to asking and answering, I shall not have finished between now and tomorrow. Why, to ask foolish questions and answer nonsense I have no need to go about looking for help from the neighbours."

"You have said more, Sancho, than you know," said Don Quixote; "for there are some men who wear themselves out learning and establishing things which, once learnt and established, are not worth a farthing to the understanding or to the memory."

In these and other pleasant conversations that day went by for them, and at night they lodged in a small village, where the cousin told Don Quixote that from there to the cave of Montesinos was no more than two leagues, and that if he had made up his mind to go into it, it would be necessary to provide themselves with ropes to tie himself with and let himself down into its depths.

Don Quixote said that even if it went down to the abyss, he had to see where it ended; and so they bought nearly a hundred fathoms of rope, and the next day at two in the afternoon they reached the cave, whose mouth is spacious and wide but full of thorn bushes and wild fig trees, of brambles and undergrowth so thick and tangled that they altogether blind and cover it.

On seeing it, the cousin, Sancho and Don Quixote dismounted, and the two of them at once tied Don Quixote very tightly with the ropes; and while they were swathing and girding him, Sancho said to him:

"Look what you are doing, my dear sir. Do not go burying yourself alive, or put yourself where you will look like a bottle being let down into a well to cool. Why, it is nothing to do with your worship and none of your business to be the explorer of this place, which must be worse than a dungeon."

"Tie and be quiet," answered Don Quixote; "for an undertaking like this one, Sancho my friend, was reserved for me."

And then the guide said:

"I beg your worship, Señor Don Quixote, to look hard and to examine with a hundred eyes what is down there: perhaps there will be things I can put into my book of Transformations."

"The tambourine is in the hands of a man who knows how to play it," answered Sancho Panza.

This said, and the tying of Don Quixote finished — which was not over his armour but over his arming doublet — Don Quixote said:

"We have been careless in not providing ourselves with some small cowbell, which could have been tied next to me on this same rope, and by whose sound it would be understood that I was still going down and was still alive. But since that is not possible now, into the hand of God, who will guide me."

And then he went down on his knees and said a prayer in a low voice to heaven, asking God to help him and give him good success in that apparently dangerous and untried adventure; and then he said in a loud voice:

"O lady of my actions and my movements, most illustrious and peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso! If it is possible for the pleas and prayers of this fortunate lover of yours to reach your ears, by your unheard-of beauty I beg you to hear them, which are nothing but a prayer that you should not deny me your favour and protection, now that I have such need of it. I am about to hurl myself down, to sink myself and to plunge into the abyss that is opening here in front of me, only so that the world may know that if you favour me, there is no impossibility I shall not attempt and carry through."

And, saying this, he went up to the chasm and saw that it was not possible to let himself down or to make room for the entry except by main force or by sword-strokes; and so, laying his hand on his sword, he began to knock down and cut away the undergrowth at the mouth of the cave. At whose noise and racket there came out of it an infinite number of enormous crows and jackdaws, so thick and in such haste that they knocked Don Quixote to the ground; and if he had been as much of a believer in omens as he was a Catholic Christian, he would have taken it for a bad sign and excused himself from shutting himself up in such a place.

Finally he got up, and, seeing that no more crows were coming out, nor other night birds such as the bats that had come out among the crows, with the cousin and Sancho paying out the rope he let himself sink to the bottom of the terrible cavern. And as he went in, Sancho gave him his blessing and made a thousand crosses over him, saying:

"God guide you, and Our Lady of the Rock of France along with the Trinity of Gaeta, flower and cream and froth of knights errant! There you go, champion of the world, heart of steel, arms of bronze! God guide you again, and bring you back free, sound and without a scratch to the light of this life you are leaving to bury yourself in this darkness you are looking for!"

Almost the same prayers and supplications were made by the cousin.

Don Quixote went down calling out for them to give him rope and more rope, and they gave it to him little by little; and when the shouts, coming out channelled up the cave, stopped being heard, they had already paid out the hundred fathoms of rope, and were of the opinion that they should haul Don Quixote up again, since they could give him no more line.

Even so, they waited about half an hour, at the end of which space they set to hauling in the rope again — with great ease and with no weight at all, a sign that made them imagine that Don Quixote was staying down there. And believing so, Sancho wept bitterly and hauled away in a great hurry to find out the truth; but, coming to a little over eighty fathoms as far as they could judge, they felt a weight, at which they were extremely glad. Finally, at ten fathoms, they saw Don Quixote distinctly, and Sancho called out to him, saying:

"Very welcome back, my dear sir, for we were already thinking you were staying down there for breeding stock."

But Don Quixote did not answer a word; and, getting him right out, they saw that he had his eyes shut, with every sign of being asleep. They laid him out on the ground and untied him, and even so he did not wake; but they turned him and rolled him and shook him and shifted him about so much that at the end of a good while he came to himself, stretching, exactly as if he were waking from some heavy, deep sleep. And, looking one way and the other, as if terrified, he said:

"God forgive you, my friends; for you have taken me away from the sweetest and most agreeable life and sight that any human being has ever seen or passed through. In fact I now know for certain that all the contentments of this life pass like a shadow and a dream, or wither like the flower of the field. O unfortunate Montesinos! O sorely wounded Durandarte! O luckless Belerma! O weeping Guadiana, and you unhappy daughters of Ruidera, who show in your waters the tears your beautiful eyes have wept!"

The cousin and Sancho listened to Don Quixote's words, which he said as though he were dragging them out of his entrails with immense pain. They begged him to give them to understand what he was saying, and to tell them what he had seen in that hell.

"Do you call it a hell?" said Don Quixote. "Well, do not call it that, because it does not deserve the name, as you will see presently."

He asked them to give him something to eat, for he was extremely hungry. They spread the cousin's sacking on the green grass, went to the store in their saddlebags and, all three of them sitting down in good love and fellowship, took their tea and their supper all at once. The sacking taken up, Don Quixote of La Mancha said:

"Let nobody get up, and all of you, my sons, be attentive to me."
