Chapter 23: Of the Wonderful Things the Matchless Don Quixote Said He Had Seen in the Deep Cave of Montesinos, Whose Impossibility and Magnitude Make This Adventure Pass for Apocryphal

It must have been four in the afternoon when the sun, covered over among the clouds, with scanty light and tempered rays, gave Don Quixote room to tell his two most distinguished listeners, without heat and discomfort, what he had seen in the cave of Montesinos. And he began in the following way:

"About twelve or fourteen times a man's height down in this dungeon, on the right-hand side, there opens a hollow and a space big enough to hold a great cart with its mules. A little light comes into it through some chinks or holes that answer to it a long way off, opening on the surface of the earth. I saw this hollow and this space at a time when I was already tired and vexed at finding myself hanging and dangling from the rope, travelling down through that dark region without any certain or settled road; and so I decided to go into it and rest a little.

"I shouted, asking you not to let down any more rope until I told you to, but you must not have heard me. I went on gathering in the rope you were sending down and, making a coil or a heap of it, I sat down on it, deep in thought, considering what I ought to do to get down to the bottom, having nobody to hold me up. And while I was in this thought and confusion, suddenly and without my seeking it, a very deep sleep came over me. And when I least expected it, without knowing how or why, I woke out of it and found myself in the middle of the most beautiful, pleasant and delightful meadow that nature can breed or the most judicious human imagination imagine.

"I opened my eyes wide, I rubbed them, and I saw that I was not asleep but was really awake. For all that, I felt my head and my chest to make certain whether it was I myself who was there, or some empty and counterfeit phantom; but the touch, the feeling, the ordered reasoning I was doing inside me, all made me certain that I was there then the same man that I am here now.

"Then there offered itself to my sight a royal and sumptuous palace or castle whose walls seemed to be built of transparent, clear crystal; and, two great doors of it opening, I saw a venerable old man coming out through them and towards me, dressed in a long cloak of purple baize that trailed on the ground. Over his shoulders and his chest ran a collegiate sash of green satin; his head was covered with a black Milanese cap, and his beard, snow-white, came down past his waist. He carried no weapon at all, only a rosary in his hand with beads larger than middling walnuts, and its every tenth bead like a middling ostrich egg. His bearing, his walk, his gravity and his enormously broad presence, each thing by itself and all of them together, astonished me and filled me with wonder.

"He came up to me, and the first thing he did was to embrace me tightly, and then to say to me: 'For long ages now, valorous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, those of us who are enchanted in these solitudes have been waiting to see you, so that you might give the world notice of what is shut up and covered by the deep cave you have come into, called the cave of Montesinos: an exploit reserved to be undertaken by nothing but your invincible heart and your stupendous spirit. Come with me, most illustrious sir, for I want to show you the marvels this transparent castle hides, of which I am the governor and perpetual chief warden — because I am Montesinos himself, from whom the cave takes its name.'

"Hardly had he told me that he was Montesinos when I asked him whether it was true what was told in the world up here: that he had cut the heart out of the middle of the breast of his great friend Durandarte with a small dagger, and carried it to the lady Belerma, as Durandarte had ordered him at the point of his death. He answered me that they told the truth in everything except about the dagger, because it was no dagger, nor small, but a keen-pointed poniard, sharper than an awl."

"The poniard must have been," said Sancho at this point, "one of Ramón de Hoces's, the Sevillian's."

"I do not know," Don Quixote went on, "but it would not be that dagger-maker's, because Ramón de Hoces was yesterday, and the business at Roncesvalles, where this misfortune happened, was many years ago. And this point is of no importance, and it neither disturbs nor alters the truth and the tenor of the history."

"That is so," answered the cousin. "Go on, your worship, Señor Don Quixote, for I am listening to you with the greatest pleasure in the world."

"And with no less do I tell it," answered Don Quixote. "And so I say that the venerable Montesinos took me into the crystal palace, where in a low chamber, extremely cool and all of alabaster, there was a marble tomb, made with great craftsmanship, on which I saw a knight stretched out at full length — not made of bronze, or of marble, or of jasper, as they generally are on other tombs, but of pure flesh and pure bone. He had his right hand — which to my mind is somewhat hairy and sinewy, a sign that its owner had great strength — laid over the region of his heart.

"And before I could ask Montesinos anything, seeing me hanging astonished over the man on the tomb, he said to me: 'This is my friend Durandarte, the flower and mirror of the loving and valiant knights of his time. Merlin holds him enchanted here, as he holds me and a great many other men and women — Merlin, that French enchanter who they say was the devil's son; and what I believe is that he was not the devil's son, but that he knew, as they say, one point more than the devil. How or why he enchanted us nobody knows, and time will tell — and it is not very far off, as I imagine.

"'What astonishes me is that I know, as surely as I know it is day now, that Durandarte ended the days of his life in my arms, and that after he was dead I took out his heart with my own hands; and truly it must have weighed two pounds, because, according to the naturalists, the man who has the bigger heart is endowed with more valour than the man whose heart is small. Well then, this being so, and this knight having really died, how is it that he now complains and sighs from time to time as if he were alive?'

"This said, the wretched Durandarte, giving a great cry, said:

	O my cousin Montesinos!
	The last thing that I begged of you
	was that when I should be dead
	and my soul torn out of me,
	you would carry off my heart
	to where Belerma was,
	cutting it out of my breast
	with a poniard or a dagger.

"Which hearing, the venerable Montesinos went down on his knees before the grieving knight, and with tears in his eyes said to him: 'Long ago, Señor Durandarte, dearest cousin of mine, long ago I did what you ordered me on the ill-starred day of our loss. I took out your heart as best I could, without leaving the least part of it in your breast; I cleaned it with a lace handkerchief; I set off with it at a gallop for France, having first laid you in the bosom of the earth with tears enough to wash my hands and clean off with them the blood they had on them from having been about in your entrails.

"'And, for still better proof, cousin of my soul, at the first place I came to on the way out of Roncesvalles I put a little salt on your heart, so that it should not smell badly and should come, if not fresh then at least cured, into the presence of the lady Belerma — whom, along with you, and me, and Guadiana your squire, and the duenna Ruidera and her seven daughters and two nieces, and a great many others of your acquaintances and friends, the wise Merlin has kept enchanted here these many years. And though more than five hundred have gone by, not one of us has died. Only Ruidera and her daughters and nieces are missing, whom Merlin, out of the compassion he must have felt for their weeping, turned into as many lagoons, which now, in the world of the living and in the province of La Mancha, they call the Lagoons of Ruidera. Seven of them belong to the kings of Spain, and the two nieces to the knights of a most holy order they call the Order of Saint John.

"'Guadiana your squire, likewise lamenting your misfortune, was turned into a river called by his own name; and when he reached the surface of the earth and saw the sun of that other sky, the grief he felt at seeing that he was leaving you was so great that he plunged into the bowels of the earth. But since it is impossible not to follow his natural current, from time to time he comes out and shows himself where the sun and the people can see him. The lagoons I have named keep feeding him with their waters, and with these and a great many others that join him he goes into Portugal, grand and pompous. But for all that, wherever he goes he shows his sadness and melancholy, and he does not pride himself on breeding fine and valuable fish in his waters, but coarse and unpalatable ones, very different from those of the golden Tagus.

"'And what I am telling you now, my cousin, I have told you many times; and, since you do not answer me, I imagine that you do not believe me, or do not hear me, at which I take as much pain as God knows. Some news I want to give you now which, even if it does not serve to relieve your grief, will not increase it in any way. Know that you have here in your presence — and open your eyes and you will see him — that great knight of whom the wise Merlin has prophesied so many things: that Don Quixote of La Mancha, I mean, who has brought the by now forgotten order of knight-errantry back to life in the present age, freshly and with greater advantages than in the ages past; and by whose means and favour it might be that we should be disenchanted, for great exploits are reserved for great men.'

"'And if it should not be so,' answered the grieving Durandarte in a faint, low voice, 'if it should not be so, cousin, I say: patience, and shuffle the cards.'

"And, turning on his side, he went back to his accustomed silence without speaking another word.

"At this there were heard great howls and weeping, along with deep groans and anguished sobs. I turned my head, and saw through the crystal walls that a procession was passing through another chamber, in two files of the most beautiful girls, all dressed in mourning, with white turbans on their heads in the Turkish fashion. At the very end of the files came a lady — for so her gravity made her look — likewise dressed in black, with white veils so long and flowing that they kissed the ground. Her turban was twice as big as the biggest of any of the others'. Her eyebrows met, and her nose was somewhat flat; her mouth was large, but her lips were red; her teeth, when she now and then let them show, proved to be thin-set and badly arranged, though they were as white as peeled almonds. In her hands she carried a fine cloth, and in it, as far as I could make out, a heart of mummified flesh, so dried and cured did it come.

"Montesinos told me that all those people in the procession were the servants of Durandarte and Belerma, who were enchanted there with their two masters, and that the last, who carried the heart in the cloth in her hands, was the lady Belerma, who with her maidens made that procession four days a week and sang — or, better said, wept — laments over the body and over the grieving heart of her cousin. And that if she had seemed to me somewhat ugly, or not as beautiful as her fame made her, the cause was the bad nights and the worse days she went through in that enchantment, as I could see by the great rings under her eyes and by her broken colour.

"'And her sallowness and the rings under her eyes,' he said, 'do not come from her being in the monthly trouble that is ordinary in women, because it is many months, and even years, since she has had it or since it has looked in at her door; they come from the pain her heart feels for the one she has in her hands all the time, which renews and brings back to her memory the misfortune of her ill-fated lover. If it were not for that, the great Dulcinea of El Toboso, so celebrated in all these parts and even in all the world, would scarcely come up to her in beauty, grace and spirit.'

"'Hold hard there!' I said then. 'Señor Don Montesinos, let your worship tell his history as he ought; for you know very well that all comparison is odious, and so there is no call to compare anybody with anybody. The peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso is who she is, and the lady Doña Belerma is who she is and who she has been, and let it stay there.'

"To which he answered me: 'Señor Don Quixote, forgive me, for I confess I did wrong, and I did not speak well in saying that the lady Dulcinea would scarcely come up to the lady Belerma; since it was enough for me to have gathered, from certain hints or other, that your worship is her knight, for me to bite my tongue before comparing her with anything but heaven itself.'

"With this satisfaction the great Montesinos gave me, my heart quieted down from the shock I received at hearing my lady compared with Belerma."

"And I do wonder," said Sancho, "how your worship did not get on top of the old fellow and grind all his bones with kicking and pluck his beard until there was not a hair left in it."

"No, Sancho my friend," answered Don Quixote, "it would not have been becoming in me to do that, because we are all obliged to have respect for the old, even if they are not knights, and chiefly for those who are knights and are under enchantment. I know very well that in a great many other questions and answers that passed between the two of us, neither of us was left owing the other anything."

At this point the cousin said:

"I do not know, Señor Don Quixote, how in as little time as your worship has been down there, you can have seen so many things and talked and answered so much."

"How long ago did I go down?" asked Don Quixote.

"A little over an hour," answered Sancho.

"That cannot be," replied Don Quixote, "because down there night fell on me and day broke, and night fell and day broke again, three times over; so that by my reckoning I have been three days in those remote parts, hidden from our sight."

"My master must be telling the truth," said Sancho; "for since everything that has happened to him is by enchantment, perhaps what seems to us an hour must seem three days and nights down there."

"That will be it," answered Don Quixote.

"And has your worship eaten in all this time, my dear sir?" asked the cousin.

"I have not broken my fast with a mouthful," answered Don Quixote, "and I have not even been hungry, or thought about it."

"And do the enchanted eat?" said the cousin.

"They do not eat," answered Don Quixote, "nor have they any of the grosser needs of the body; although it is held that their nails, their beards and their hair go on growing."

"And do the enchanted sleep, by any chance, sir?" asked Sancho.

"Certainly not," answered Don Quixote; "at least in these three days I have been with them, none of them has shut an eye, and neither have I."

"Here the proverb fits well," said Sancho: "'tell me who you go with and I will tell you who you are'. Your worship goes about with the enchanted, who are fasters and wakers — no wonder if you neither eat nor sleep while you are about with them. But forgive me, my dear sir, if I tell you that of everything you have said here, God take me — I was going to say the devil — if I believe a single thing."

"How not?" said the cousin. "Was Señor Don Quixote going to lie? Why, even if he had wanted to, he has not had time to compose and imagine so many million lies."

"I do not believe my master lies," answered Sancho.

"Then what do you believe?" Don Quixote asked him.

"I believe," answered Sancho, "that that Merlin, or those enchanters who enchanted the whole crew your worship says you saw and dealt with down there, jammed into your fancy or your memory this whole machine you have told us, and everything else you have left to tell."

"All that might be, Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "but it is not so, because what I have told I saw with my own eyes and touched with my own hands.

"But what will you say when I tell you now how, among an infinite number of other things and marvels Montesinos showed me — which, at leisure and in their own good time, I shall go on telling you in the course of our journey, since they do not all belong in this place — he showed me three country girls who were going about those most delightful fields skipping and jumping like goats? And hardly had I seen them when I knew that one of them was the peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso, and the other two those very country girls who were coming with her, whom we spoke to on the way out of El Toboso.

"I asked Montesinos whether he knew them; he answered me that he did not, but that he imagined they must be some great ladies under enchantment who had appeared in those meadows a few days before, and that I should not wonder at it, because there were a great many other ladies there of the past and present ages, enchanted in different and strange shapes, among whom he recognised Queen Guinevere and her duenna Quintañona, pouring out the wine for Lancelot

	when he came from Britain."

When Sancho Panza heard his master say this, he thought he would lose his wits or die laughing; for as he knew the truth about the pretended enchantment of Dulcinea, of which he himself had been the enchanter and the raiser of the false witness, he came to know beyond any doubt that his master was out of his senses and mad at every point. And so he said to him:

"In an unlucky conjunction and in a worse season and on an ill-starred day did your worship go down, my dear patron, to the other world, and in a bad moment did you meet with Señor Montesinos, who has sent you back to us like this. You were very well off up here with your whole judgement such as God had given it to you, speaking judgements and giving advice at every step, and not as you are now, telling the greatest absurdities that can be imagined."

"As I know you, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "I take no notice of your words."

"Nor I of your worship's," replied Sancho, "even if you wound me, even if you kill me for the ones I have said to you, or for the ones I mean to say if you do not correct and mend your own. But tell me, your worship, now that we are at peace: how, or by what, did you recognise our lady and mistress? And if you spoke to her, what did you say, and what did she answer you?"

"I recognised her," answered Don Quixote, "by her wearing the same clothes she was wearing when you showed her to me. I spoke to her, but she did not answer me a word; on the contrary, she turned her back on me and went off in flight so fast that an arrow would not have caught her. I wanted to follow her, and I should have done it if Montesinos had not advised me not to wear myself out over it, because it would be in vain, and the more so because the hour was coming round when it was proper for me to come out of the chasm again. He told me too that in the course of time I should be given notice how he, and Belerma and Durandarte, with all who were there, were to be disenchanted.

"But what gave me the most pain of all I saw and noted there was this: that while Montesinos was saying these things to me, one of the two companions of the luckless Dulcinea came up to me at my side, without my seeing her come, and, her eyes full of tears, said to me in a troubled, low voice: 'My lady Dulcinea of El Toboso kisses your worship's hands, and begs your worship to do her the kindness of letting her know how you are; and, being in great need, she likewise begs your worship, as earnestly as she can, to be so good as to lend her, on the security of this new cotton petticoat I have here, half a dozen reals, or whatever your worship may have; and she gives her word to give them back to you very shortly.'

"This message astonished and amazed me, and, turning to Señor Montesinos, I asked him: 'Is it possible, Señor Montesinos, that the enchanted people of quality suffer want?' To which he answered me: 'Believe me, your worship, Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha, that this thing they call want is in use everywhere, and stretches over everything, and reaches everybody, and does not spare even the enchanted. And since the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso sends to ask for those six reals, and the pledge is a good one by the look of it, there is nothing for it but to give them to her; for without doubt she must be in some great strait.'

"'A pledge I shall not take,' I answered him, 'nor shall I give her what she asks, because I have only four reals' — which I gave her (and they were the ones you gave me the other day, Sancho, to give in alms to the poor I met on the roads) — and I said to her: 'Tell your lady, my friend, that her troubles grieve me to the soul, and that I wish I were a Fugger to put them right; and let her know that I neither can nor ought to have any health while I go without the sight of her and her judicious conversation; and that I beg her, as earnestly as I can, that her worship be pleased to let herself be seen and dealt with by this captive servant of hers and worn-out knight.

"'You shall tell her too that when she least expects it she will hear how I have made an oath and a vow, in the manner of the one the Marquis of Mantua made to avenge his nephew Baldwin when he found him at the point of death in the middle of the mountain — which was not to eat bread off a tablecloth, with the other odds and ends he added there, until he had avenged him. And so I shall make mine, not to rest, and to travel the seven parts of the world more punctually than the Infante Don Pedro of Portugal travelled them, until I have disenchanted her.'

"'All that and more your worship owes to my lady,' the girl answered me. And, taking the four reals, instead of making me a curtsey she cut a caper and sprang two full measuring-yards into the air."

"O holy God!" said Sancho at this, letting out a great shout. "Is it possible that there is such a thing in the world, and that enchanters and enchantments have such force in it that they have turned my master's good judgement into so preposterous a madness? Oh sir, sir, for God's sake, let your worship look to yourself and stand up for your honour, and give no credit to these emptinesses that have left your senses short and out of true!"

"You talk that way, Sancho, because you love me," said Don Quixote; "and, since you are not experienced in the things of the world, everything that has any difficulty in it seems impossible to you. But time will go on, as I have said before, and I shall tell you some of the things I have seen down there that will make you believe the ones I have told here, whose truth admits of neither reply nor dispute."
