Chapter 24: Where a Thousand Trifles Are Told, as Impertinent as They Are Necessary to the True Understanding of This Great History

The man who translated this great history from the original written by its first author, Cide Hamete Benengeli, says that when he came to the chapter of the adventure of the cave of Montesinos, there were written in the margin of it, in Hamete's own hand, these very words:

"I cannot bring myself to understand, nor can I persuade myself, that everything written in the foregoing chapter happened exactly so to the valorous Don Quixote. The reason is that all the adventures that have happened up to here have been possible and probable; but for this one of the cave I can find no way in to holding it for true, since it goes so far outside the bounds of reason.

"For me to think that Don Quixote lied, he being the most truthful gentleman and the noblest knight of his time, is not possible: he would not have told a lie if they had shot him full of arrows. On the other hand, I consider that he told it and said it with all the circumstances given, and that he could not have manufactured so great a machine of absurdities in so short a space. And if this adventure seems apocryphal, the fault is not mine; and so, without affirming it to be false or true, I write it down.

"You, reader, since you are prudent, judge whatever seems best to you; for I neither ought nor am able to do more — although it is held for certain that at the time of his end and death they say he took it back, and said he had invented it because it seemed to him to fit and square well with the adventures he had read in his histories."

And then he goes on, saying:

The cousin was astonished, both at Sancho Panza's boldness and at his master's patience, and judged that the mild temper Don Quixote was showing just then was born of the contentment he felt at having seen his lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, even under enchantment; because if it had not been so, Sancho had said him words and arguments that deserved a beating with a stick, since it really seemed to the cousin that he had been getting a little bold with his master, to whom he said:

"I, Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha, count the day I have spent with your worship as most excellently well spent, because in it I have gained four things. The first, to have come to know your worship, which I hold to be a great piece of happiness. The second, to have learnt what is shut up in this cave of Montesinos, along with the transformations of the Guadiana and of the Lagoons of Ruidera, which will serve me for the Spanish Ovid I have in hand.

"The third, to have made out the antiquity of playing cards, which were at least already in use in the time of the emperor Charlemagne, as may be gathered from the words your worship says Durandarte spoke when, at the end of that long space Montesinos spent talking to him, he woke up saying: 'Patience, and shuffle the cards.' And that expression and manner of speaking he cannot have learnt while he was enchanted, but when he was not, in France and in the time of the said emperor Charlemagne. And this discovery comes to me exactly to the pattern for that other book I am composing, which is the Supplement to Polydore Vergil on the invention of antiquities; and I believe that in his he forgot to put in the invention of playing cards, which I shall put in now, and it will be of great importance, and the more so when I cite an author as grave and as truthful as Señor Durandarte. The fourth is to have learnt with certainty the source of the river Guadiana, until now unknown to the world."

"Your worship is right," said Don Quixote; "but I should like to know, granting that God does you the favour of giving you licence to print these books of yours — which I doubt — whom you mean to dedicate them to."

"There are lords and grandees in Spain they can be dedicated to," said the cousin.

"Not many," answered Don Quixote; "and not because they do not deserve it, but because they do not want to accept them, so as not to be obliged to the recompense that seems to be owing to their authors' labour and courtesy. I know one prince who can make up for the failure of all the rest, with so many advantages that if I dared to name them I should perhaps wake envy in more than four generous breasts. But let this stay here for another and more convenient time, and let us go and look for somewhere to shelter tonight."

"Not far from here," answered the cousin, "there is a hermitage where a hermit makes his dwelling, who they say has been a soldier, and who is held to be a good Christian and very judicious and charitable besides. Next to the hermitage he has a small house he has built at his own expense; but for all that, small though it is, it can take in guests."

"Does this hermit by any chance keep hens?" asked Sancho.

"Few hermits are without them," answered Don Quixote, "because the ones in use nowadays are not like those of the deserts of Egypt, who dressed in palm leaves and ate roots out of the ground. And it is not to be understood that by speaking well of those I do not speak well of these; I only mean that the penances of the present ones do not come up to the rigour and hardness of those days. But that does not stop them all from being good men; at least I judge them for good; and, when everything is running murky, the hypocrite who pretends to be good does less harm than the open sinner."

While they were at this, they saw a man coming on foot towards where they were, walking fast and beating with a stick at a mule loaded with lances and halberds. When he came up to them he greeted them and passed straight on. Don Quixote said to him:

"Good man, stop; for it looks as if you are going faster than that mule needs."

"I cannot stop, sir," answered the man, "because the arms you see I am carrying here are to be used tomorrow; and so I am forced not to stop, and God be with you. But if you want to know what I am carrying them for, I mean to lodge tonight at the inn that is above the hermitage; and if you are taking this same road, you will find me there, and I shall tell you marvels. And God be with you again."

And he prodded the mule on in such a way that Don Quixote had no chance to ask him what marvels these were that he meant to tell them; and, as he was somewhat curious and was always worn down by his desire to know new things, he ordered that they should set off at once and go and spend the night at the inn, without touching at the hermitage, where the cousin would have liked them to stay.

So it was done: they mounted, and all three followed the straight road to the inn, which they reached a little before nightfall. The cousin told Don Quixote they should call at the hermitage to drink a draught. As soon as Sancho Panza heard this he turned the grey towards the hermitage, and Don Quixote and the cousin did the same; but Sancho's bad luck seems to have arranged that the hermit should not be at home, for that was what an under-hermit they found at the hermitage told them. They asked her for some of the good stuff; she answered that her master had none, but that if they wanted cheap water, she would give it them very willingly.

"If it were water I was thirsty for," answered Sancho, "there are wells on the road where I could have satisfied myself. Oh, Camacho's wedding and the abundance of Don Diego's house, how many times am I going to miss you!"

With this they left the hermitage and spurred on towards the inn; and a little way along they came upon a young lad who was walking ahead of them, not in any great hurry, so that they caught him up. He was carrying his sword over his shoulder, with a bundle or wrapper on it, apparently of his clothes — which, by the look of it, must have been his breeches or wide trousers, and a short cloak and a shirt or two, because he had on a velvet jerkin with a few glimmers of satin about it, and his shirt was hanging out. His stockings were of silk and his shoes square-toed in the court fashion; his age must have come to eighteen or nineteen; his face was cheerful and to all appearances he was nimble on his feet. He was going along singing seguidillas to lighten the labour of the road. When they came up to him he had just finished singing one that the cousin took down by heart, which they say went:

	To the wars I am carried
	by my own need;
	if I had any money,
	I would not go, in truth.

The first to speak to him was Don Quixote, saying:

"You travel very light, sir gallant. And where away? Let us know, if it is your pleasure to say."

To which the lad answered:

"Travelling so light is caused by the heat and by poverty, and where I am going is to the wars."

"How poverty?" asked Don Quixote. "For as to the heat, that may well be."

"Sir," replied the young man, "in this bundle I am carrying a pair of velvet trousers, the companions of this jerkin. If I wear them out on the road, I shall not be able to do myself honour with them in the city, and I have nothing to buy others with. And so, both for that reason and to air myself, I go about in this way, until I can catch up with some companies of infantry that are not twelve leagues from here, where I shall enlist; and there will be no lack of baggage animals to travel on from then on, as far as the port of embarkation, which they say is to be Cartagena. And I would sooner have the king for my master and lord, and serve him in the wars, than some threadbare wretch at court."

"And does your worship carry any special allowance, by any chance?" asked the cousin.

"If I had served some grandee of Spain, or some person of quality," answered the lad, "I should be sure to be carrying one, for that is what comes of serving good masters: out of the servants' hall men generally come out to be ensigns or captains, or with some good pension. But I, unfortunate creature, always served hunters after places and newcomers, on board and wages so wretched and so thin that half of it went in paying to have a collar starched. And it would be counted a miracle if a page out to make his fortune ever attained even a reasonable one."

"And tell me, on your life, my friend," asked Don Quixote, "is it possible that in the years you served you could not get hold of even one livery?"

"They have given me two," answered the page; "but just as, when a man leaves a religious house before taking his vows, they take back the habit and give him back his own clothes, so my masters gave me back mine. When the business they had come to court for was finished, they went back to their houses and took in the liveries they had given out for show and nothing else."

"A notable piece of spilorceria, as the Italian says," said Don Quixote; "but for all that, count it good fortune that you have come out of the court with as good an intention as you carry. Because there is nothing on earth more honourable or more profitable than to serve God first of all, and then your king and natural lord, especially in the exercise of arms, by which a man attains, if not more riches, at least more honour than by letters — as I have said many times. For although letters have founded more great estates than arms, still there is a something about the men of arms over the men of letters, with a certain I-know-what of splendour to be found in them that puts them ahead of everybody.

"And what I want to tell you now, carry in your memory, for it will be of great profit and relief to you in your hardships. And it is this: put aside the imagining of the adverse things that may come to you, of which the worst of all is death; and, so long as that death is a good one, the best of all is dying. They asked Julius Caesar, that valorous Roman emperor, which was the best death; he answered: the unthought-of, the sudden, the unforeseen. And although he answered as a pagan and a stranger to the knowledge of the true God, for all that he spoke well, so as to spare himself human feeling.

"For supposing they kill you in the first action and skirmish, either by a shot from a cannon or blown up by a mine — what does it matter? It is all dying, and the work is finished. And, according to Terence, the soldier who is dead in the battle makes a better show than the one who is alive and safe in flight. And the good soldier attains as much fame as he has obedience to his captains and to those who have the right to command him.

"And note, my son, that it becomes a soldier better to smell of gunpowder than of civet; and that if old age catches you in this honourable exercise, even though it be full of wounds and crippled or lame, at least it cannot catch you without honour — and with an honour that poverty cannot lessen. And the more so since orders are now being given for the keeping and relief of old and crippled soldiers; for it is not right that they should be treated the way some men treat the black people they hold enslaved, freeing them and giving them their liberty when they are already old and can no longer serve, and, turning them out of the house under the title of free men, making them the slaves of hunger, from which they can expect no freeing but by death.

"And for the present I do not want to tell you any more, except that you should get up behind me on this horse of mine as far as the inn, and there you shall have supper with me; and in the morning you shall follow your road, and may God give you as good a one as your intentions deserve."

The page did not accept the invitation to ride behind him, though he did accept the one to have supper with him at the inn; and at this moment, they say, Sancho said to himself:

"God bless you for a master! And is it possible that a man who knows how to say such things, and so many of them, and such good ones as he has said here, should say that he has seen the impossible absurdities he tells about the cave of Montesinos? Well now, time will tell."

And with this they came to the inn, just as night was falling, and not without pleasure to Sancho at seeing that his master judged it a real inn and not a castle as he usually did. They had hardly got in when Don Quixote asked the innkeeper about the man with the lances and halberds; who answered him that he was in the stable settling his mule. The cousin and Sancho did the same with their donkeys, giving Rocinante the best manger and the best place in the stable.
