Chapter 25: Where the Adventure of the Braying Is Noted, and the Amusing One of the Puppet-Master, with the Memorable Divinations of the Soothsaying Ape

Don Quixote's bread would not bake, as the saying goes, until he had heard and learnt the marvels promised by the man who was carrying the arms. He went to look for him where the innkeeper had said he was, and found him, and told him that he must at all costs tell him now what he was going to tell him later, about what he had asked him on the road. The man answered him:

"The tale of my marvels has to be taken more at leisure, and not standing up. Let your worship, my good sir, let me finish seeing to my beast, and I shall tell you things to astonish you."

"Let there be no delay for that," answered Don Quixote, "for I shall help you with everything."

And so he did, sifting the barley for him and cleaning out the manger — a humility that obliged the man to tell him with good will what he was asking. And, sitting down on a stone bench with Don Quixote beside him, and having as his senate and audience the cousin, the page, Sancho Panza and the innkeeper, he began to speak in this way:

"Your worships must know that in a village that is four and a half leagues from this inn it happened that one of its aldermen, through the contrivance and trickery of a girl who was his servant — and this is a long story — lost a donkey. And although the alderman made every possible effort to find it, it was not possible.

"A fortnight must have gone by, according to public voice and report, since the donkey went missing, when the alderman who had lost it was standing in the market square and another alderman of the same village said to him: 'Pay me for the good news, my friend, for your donkey has turned up.' 'I promise you good payment, my friend,' answered the other, 'but let us know where it has turned up.' 'On the mountain,' answered the finder. 'I saw him this morning, without a pack-saddle and without any harness at all, and so thin it was a misery to look at him. I tried to drive him ahead of me and bring him to you, but he has gone so wild and so shy that when I got up to him he ran away and got into the most hidden part of the mountain. If you want the two of us to go back and look for him, let me put this she-ass of mine in my house, and I shall come straight back.' 'You will do me a great pleasure,' said the man who had lost the donkey, 'and I shall try to pay you back in the same coin.'

"With all these circumstances, and in the very way I am telling it, everybody tells it who is informed about the truth of this business. In short, the two aldermen went off on foot side by side to the mountain, and, coming to the place and spot where they thought they would find the donkey, they did not find him; nor did he appear anywhere in those parts, however hard they looked for him.

"Seeing, then, that he did not appear, the alderman who had seen him said to the other: 'Look, my friend: a plan has come into my head by which without any doubt we shall be able to find this animal, even if he has got into the bowels of the earth and not merely of the mountain. And it is that I know how to bray marvellously; and if you know anything at all about it, hold the business as concluded.' 'Anything at all, do you say, my friend?' said the other. 'By God, I would not give way to anybody at it, not even to the donkeys themselves.'

"'We shall see about that now,' answered the second alderman, 'because I have determined that you shall go by one part of the mountain and I by another, so that we go round it and cover the whole of it, and every so often you shall bray and I shall bray, and it cannot be otherwise but that the donkey will hear us and answer us, if he is on the mountain.' To which the owner of the donkey answered: 'I say, my friend, that the plan is excellent and worthy of your great wit.'

"And, the two of them dividing according to the agreement, it happened that they brayed at almost the same time; and each of them, deceived by the other's braying, came running to look for him, thinking the donkey had turned up. And, on seeing each other, the man who had lost him said: 'Is it possible, my friend, that it was not my donkey that brayed?' 'No, it was not; it was I,' answered the other. 'Now I say,' said the owner, 'that between you and a donkey, my friend, there is no difference at all as far as braying goes, because in all my life I have never seen or heard anything more to the life.'

"'Those praises and that extolling,' answered the man with the plan, 'belong and apply better to you than to me, my friend; for by the God who made me, you could give two brays' start to the greatest and most expert brayer in the world. Because the tone you have is high; the sustaining of the voice is in its right time and measure; the dying falls are many and quick; and, in short, I give myself up as beaten and hand you the palm and the standard of this rare accomplishment.' 'Now I say,' answered the owner, 'that from here on I shall hold and value myself more, and shall think I know something, since I have some gift; for although I thought I brayed well, I never understood I came up to the extreme you say.'

"'I shall say too, now,' answered the second, 'that there are rare accomplishments lost in the world, and that they are badly bestowed on those who do not know how to make use of them.' 'Ours,' answered the owner, 'except in cases like the one we have in hand, cannot serve us in others — and even in this one, please God they may be of some use.'

"This said, they divided again and went back to their braying, and at every step they deceived each other and came together again, until they settled it between them as a countersign that, so as to be understood as themselves and not the donkey, they should bray twice, one bray after the other. With this, doubling the brays at every step, they went round the whole mountain without the lost donkey answering, even by signs. But how was the poor unlucky creature to answer, when they found him in the most hidden part of the wood, eaten by wolves?

"And, on seeing him, his owner said: 'I was already wondering why he did not answer; for if he had not been dead he would have brayed if he had heard us, or he would not have been a donkey. But in exchange for having heard you bray with such grace, my friend, I count as well spent the labour I have had in looking for him, even though I have found him dead.' 'The credit is in a good hand, my friend,' answered the other, 'for if the abbot sings well, the altar boy is not far behind him.'

"With this, disconsolate and hoarse, they went back to their village, where they told their friends, neighbours and acquaintances everything that had happened to them in the search for the donkey, each of them exaggerating the other's grace in braying — all of which was learnt and spread through the neighbouring places.

"And the devil, who never sleeps, being a friend to sowing and scattering quarrels and discord everywhere, raising squabbles on the wind and great fights out of nothing, arranged and brought it about that the people of the other villages, on seeing anybody from ours, would bray, as though throwing our aldermen's braying in their faces. The boys took it up, which was to fall into the hands and the mouths of all the devils in hell; and the braying went spreading from one village to another, so that the natives of the village of the bray are known as easily as black people are known and told apart from white. And this joke has gone so far in its bad luck that many times, with armed hands and in formed squadrons, the mocked have gone out against the mockers to give them battle, and neither king nor rook, neither fear nor shame, could put a stop to it.

"I believe that tomorrow or the next day the men of my village, who are the men of the bray, are going to take the field against another place two leagues from ours, which is one of those that persecute us most; and, so as to come out well prepared, I have bought these lances and halberds you have seen.

"And these are the marvels I said I would tell you, and if they have not seemed marvels to you, I know no others."

And with this the good man made an end of his talk; and at this moment there came in at the inn door a man dressed all in chamois — stockings, wide breeches and doublet — who said in a loud voice:

"Master host, is there lodging? For here comes the soothsaying ape and the puppet play of the setting free of Melisendra."

"Body of me," said the innkeeper, "here is Master Pedro! We are in for a good night."

I was forgetting to say that this Master Pedro had his left eye and nearly half his cheek covered with a patch of green taffeta, a sign that all that side must have been diseased. And the innkeeper went on, saying:

"Very welcome, your worship, Master Pedro. Where is the ape and the puppet stage, that I do not see them?"

"They are coming up close," answered the man all in chamois, "except that I have come ahead to find out whether there is lodging."

"I would take it from the Duke of Alba himself to give it to Master Pedro," answered the innkeeper. "Let the ape and the stage come up, for there are people in the inn tonight who will pay to see it and to see the ape's accomplishments."

"So be it and welcome," answered the man with the patch, "and I shall bring the price down and count myself well paid with my costs alone. And I shall go back and make the cart come on that the ape and the stage are travelling in."

And with that he went out of the inn again.

Don Quixote then asked the innkeeper what Master Pedro this was, and what puppet stage and what ape he was bringing. To which the innkeeper answered:

"This is a famous puppet-master who has been going about this Aragonese Mancha for a good while now, showing a play of Melisendra set free by the famous Don Gaiferos, which is one of the best and best-performed stories to be seen in this kingdom for many years past. He also brings with him an ape of the rarest ability ever seen among apes or imagined among men; because if they ask him something, he pays attention to what they are asking him and then jumps on his master's shoulder, and, putting his mouth to his ear, tells him the answer to what they are asking, and Master Pedro declares it at once. And he says a great deal more about things past than about those to come; and although he does not hit it right every time in everything, he goes wrong in very few, so that he makes us believe he has the devil in him.

"Two reals he charges for every question, if the ape answers — I mean if the master answers for him after he has spoken in his ear; and so it is believed that this Master Pedro is extremely rich. And he is a gallant fellow, as they say in Italy, and bon compaño, and gives himself the best life in the world; he talks more than six men and drinks more than twelve, all at the cost of his tongue and his ape and his puppet stage."

At this Master Pedro came back, and in a cart came the stage, and the ape — big and without a tail, with a felt behind, but not bad-faced. And hardly had Don Quixote seen him when he asked him:

"Tell me, your worship, Sir Soothsayer: what fish do we catch? What is to become of us? And here you have my two reals."

And he ordered Sancho to give them to Master Pedro, who answered for the ape and said:

"Sir, this animal does not answer or give any notice about things that are to come; about things past he knows something, and about present ones a certain amount."

"Body of me," said Sancho, "I would not give a farthing to have anybody tell me what has happened to me! Because who can know it better than I do myself? And to pay to have somebody tell me what I know would be a great foolishness. But since he knows present things, here are my two reals, and let his lordship the Most Monkeyish tell me what my wife Teresa Panza is doing at this moment, and what she is busy with."

Master Pedro would not take the money, saying:

"I do not care to take the rewards in advance, without the services having come first."

And, giving two slaps with his right hand on his left shoulder, the ape sprang up on it in one leap; and, putting his mouth to his ear, he chattered his teeth very fast. And, having kept up this performance for about the space of a creed, with another leap he was down on the floor. And on the instant, in the greatest haste, Master Pedro went and knelt down in front of Don Quixote, and, embracing his legs, said:

"These legs I embrace as though I were embracing the two pillars of Hercules, O distinguished reviver of the by now forgotten knight-errantry! O never-sufficiently-praised knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, courage of the fainthearted, prop of the falling, arm of the fallen, staff and comfort of all the unfortunate!"

Don Quixote was left thunderstruck, Sancho dumbfounded, the cousin bewildered, the page astonished, the man of the braying gaping, the innkeeper confused and, finally, all who heard the puppet-master's words amazed; and he went on, saying:

"And you, O good Sancho Panza, the best squire and squire to the best knight in the world, be glad, for your good wife Teresa is well; and this is the very hour when she is combing a pound of flax, and, for a further sign, she has at her left side a broken-lipped jug that holds a good drop of wine, with which she entertains herself at her work."

"That I believe very well," answered Sancho, "because she is a blessed creature; and if she were not jealous, I would not swap her for the giantess Andandona, who, according to my master, was a very complete and worthy woman. And my Teresa is one of those who will not let themselves go short, even if it is at their heirs' expense."

"Now I say," said Don Quixote at this point, "that the man who reads much and travels much sees much and knows much. I say this because what persuasion would have been enough to persuade me that there are apes in the world who can tell fortunes, as I have now seen with my own eyes? Because I am that very Don Quixote of La Mancha this good animal has named — although he has stretched himself out somewhat in my praises. But whatever I may be, I give thanks to heaven that endowed me with a soft and compassionate spirit, always inclined to do good to everybody and harm to nobody."

"If I had money," said the page, "I would ask the ape what is to happen to me on the journey I am making."

To which Master Pedro answered, having by now got up from Don Quixote's feet:

"I have already said that this little beast does not answer about what is to come; for if he did, it would not matter that there was no money, since for the service of Señor Don Quixote here present I would give up all the profits in the world. And now, because I owe it to him, and to give him pleasure, I mean to set up my stage and give pleasure to everybody in the inn, without any payment at all."

Which the innkeeper hearing, and being extremely glad, he showed the place where the stage could be set up, and it was done in a moment.

Don Quixote was not very happy about the ape's divinations, since it did not seem to him proper that an ape should tell fortunes, either about things to come or about things past. And so, while Master Pedro was setting up the stage, Don Quixote withdrew with Sancho to a corner of the stable, where, without being heard by anybody, he said to him:

"Look, Sancho, I have thought hard about this ape's strange ability, and I find by my reckoning that without doubt this Master Pedro, his master, must have made a pact, tacit or express, with the devil."

"If the packet is expressed and the devil's," said Sancho, "no doubt it must be a very dirty packet; but what use are these packets to Master Pedro?"

"You do not understand me, Sancho. I only mean that he must have made some agreement with the devil to pour that ability into the ape, so that he may earn his living by it; and afterwards, when he is rich, he will give him his soul, which is what this universal enemy is after. And what makes me believe this is seeing that the ape only answers about things past or present, and the devil's knowledge cannot stretch further than that, since he does not know things to come except by conjecture, and not always then; because it is reserved to God alone to know the times and the moments, and for Him there is no past and no future, for everything is present.

"And this being so, as it is, it is clear that this ape talks in the devil's style; and I marvel that they have not denounced him to the Holy Office and examined him and dragged out of him by whose power he divines. Because it is certain that this ape is no astrologer, and neither he nor his master casts, or knows how to cast, these figures they call judicial, which are so much in use now in Spain that there is not a wretched little woman, or a page, or a cobbler who does not presume to cast a figure, as though it were a jack of cards off the floor — ruining with their lies and their ignorance the marvellous truth of the science.

"I know of one lady who asked one of these figure-casters whether a small lapdog she had would get with pup and litter, and how many and of what colour the pups would be that she littered. To which the gentleman astrologer, after having cast the figure, answered that the little bitch would get with pup and would litter three little dogs, one green, another red and the other mottled, on condition that the said bitch should be covered between eleven and twelve o'clock in the day or in the night, and that it should be on a Monday or a Saturday. And what happened was that two days later the bitch died of overeating, and the gentleman caster was left with the credit in the place of being a most infallible astrologer, as all or most casters are."

"For all that," said Sancho, "I should like your worship to tell Master Pedro to ask his ape whether what happened to your worship in the cave of Montesinos is true; for I hold for myself, with your worship's pardon, that it was all humbug and lies, or at the least things dreamed."

"It could all be," answered Don Quixote, "but I shall do what you advise, although a certain I-know-not-what of scruple will stay with me."

While they were at this, Master Pedro came looking for Don Quixote to tell him that the stage was in order now, and that his worship should come and see it, because it deserved it. Don Quixote told him what was on his mind, and begged him to ask his ape at once to tell him whether certain things that had happened to him in the cave of Montesinos had been dreamed or true, because to him they seemed to have something of both. To which Master Pedro, without answering a word, brought the ape back and, setting him in front of Don Quixote and Sancho, said:

"Look, Sir Ape: this gentleman wants to know whether certain things that happened to him in a cave called the cave of Montesinos were false or true."

And, making him the accustomed signal, the ape climbed up on his left shoulder, and, apparently speaking in his ear, Master Pedro said at once:

"The ape says that part of the things your worship saw or went through in the said cave are false, and part probable; and that this is what he knows, and nothing else, as far as this question goes. And that if your worship wants to know more, next Friday he will answer everything he is asked, because for now his power has run out and will not come to him until Friday, as he has said."

"Did I not say so?" said Sancho. "That I could not settle it in my mind that all your worship said, my dear sir, about the goings-on in the cave was true — no, nor even half of it?"

"Events will tell, Sancho," answered Don Quixote; "for time, the discoverer of all things, leaves nothing that it does not bring out into the light of the sun, even if it is hidden in the bosom of the earth. And for now let this be enough, and let us go and see good Master Pedro's stage, for I hold for myself that it must have something new about it."

"Something?" answered Master Pedro. "Sixty thousand somethings this stage of mine holds inside it. I tell your worship, my lord Don Quixote, that it is one of the most worth-seeing things the world has today; and operibus credite, et non verbis; and now to work, for it is getting late and we have a great deal to do and to say and to show."

Don Quixote and Sancho obeyed him and came to where the stage was already set up and uncovered, full on every side of lighted wax tapers that made it showy and shining. On arriving, Master Pedro got inside it, since he was the one who had to work the figures of the contrivance; and outside there stood a boy, Master Pedro's servant, to serve as interpreter and expounder of the mysteries of that stage: he had a little wand in his hand with which he pointed out the figures as they came on.

All the people in the inn being placed, then, some of them standing, facing the stage, and Don Quixote, Sancho, the page and the cousin settled in the best seats, the interpreter began to say what will be heard and seen by anyone who hears or sees the next chapter.
