Chapter 26: Where the Amusing Adventure of the Puppet-Master Is Carried Further, with Other Things That Are Truly Very Good

They all fell silent, Tyrians and Trojans alike — I mean that everybody who was watching the stage was hanging on the mouth of the man who declared its marvels — when there was heard sounding inside the stage a quantity of kettledrums and trumpets, and a great deal of artillery going off; whose noise passed in a short time, and then the boy raised his voice and said:

"This true history that is here performed before your worships is taken word for word out of the French chronicles and out of the Spanish ballads that are in the mouths of the people and of the boys about these streets. It deals with the setting free by Señor Don Gaiferos of his wife Melisendra, who was held captive in Spain, in the power of the Moors, in the city of Sansueña — for that was the name then of the city that today is called Saragossa. And your worships may see there how Don Gaiferos is playing at tables, according to what is sung:

	Don Gaiferos sits playing at tables,
	and Melisendra is forgotten now.

"And that personage who looks out there, with a crown on his head and a sceptre in his hands, is the emperor Charlemagne, the reputed father of this Melisendra, who, vexed at seeing the idleness and carelessness of his son-in-law, comes out to scold him. And notice with what vehemence and eagerness he scolds him, so that it looks as if he wants to give him half a dozen raps on the head with the sceptre — and there are even authors who say he gave them to him, and gave them well. And, after having said him a great many things about the danger his honour was running in not seeing to his wife's freedom, they say he said to him:

"'I have said enough to you: look to it.'

"Let your worships also observe how the emperor turns his back and leaves Don Gaiferos in a rage; who, as you now see, impatient with fury, hurls the board and the pieces far away from him and asks in haste for his arms, and asks his cousin Don Roland for the loan of his sword Durindana, and how Don Roland will not lend it him, offering him his company in the difficult enterprise he is undertaking. But the valorous angry man will not accept it; on the contrary, he says that he alone is enough to bring his wife out, even if she were shut away in the deepest centre of the earth. And with this he goes in to arm himself, so as to set out at once.

"Turn your worships' eyes to that tower that appears there, which is supposed to be one of the towers of the castle of Saragossa that they now call the Aljafería; and that lady who appears on that balcony, dressed in the Moorish fashion, is the peerless Melisendra, who from there would often set herself to look at the road to France and, setting her imagination on Paris and on her husband, would console herself in her captivity.

"Look too at a new turn of events that is happening now, perhaps never seen before. Do you not see that Moor who, hushed and step by step, with his finger on his lips, is coming up behind Melisendra? Well, look how he gives her a kiss right on the lips, and the haste she makes to spit and to wipe them with the white sleeve of her shift, and how she laments and tears out her beautiful hair for grief, as though it had the blame for the mischief.

"Look too at that grave Moor there in those galleries, who is King Marsilio of Sansueña; who, having seen the Moor's insolence — although he was a relation of his and a great favourite — ordered him to be arrested on the spot and given two hundred lashes, taking him through the usual streets of the city,

	with the criers going in front
	and the constables' staves behind;

"and here you see them coming out to carry out the sentence, when the offence has hardly been carried out at all; because among Moors there is no 'notice to the other party' or 'let it stand to proof', as there is among us."

"Boy, boy," said Don Quixote at this point in a loud voice, "keep to your history in a straight line, and do not go off into curves and cross-cuts; for to get a truth out clean a great many proofs and re-provings are needed."

Master Pedro said from inside as well:

"Boy, do not go in for fancy work, but do as this gentleman orders you, and that will be the surest way. Keep to your plainsong and do not go in for counterpoints, for they generally break from being too fine."

"I shall do so," answered the boy; and he went on, saying: "This figure that appears here on horseback, wrapped in a Gascon cloak, is Don Gaiferos himself, whose wife, now avenged of the amorous Moor's boldness, with a better and quieter countenance has set herself at the tower windows and is talking with her husband, believing him to be some traveller — with whom she went through all those words and speeches of the ballad that says:

	Sir knight, if to France ye go,
	ask there for Gaiferos —

"which I do not say now, because from long-windedness tedium is usually bred. It is enough to see how Don Gaiferos discovers himself, and how by the glad gestures Melisendra makes we are given to understand that she has recognised him, and the more so now that we see she is letting herself down from the balcony to place herself on the crupper of her good husband's horse.

"But — oh, unlucky lady! — a corner of her petticoat has caught on one of the irons of the balcony, and she is hanging in the air unable to reach the ground. But you see how merciful heaven comes to the rescue in the greatest necessities: for Don Gaiferos arrives, and, without looking to see whether the rich petticoat will tear or not, he seizes hold of her and brings her down to the ground in spite of it, and then at one leap sets her on his horse's crupper, astride like a man, and tells her to hold on tight and to throw her arms round his back so as to cross them over his chest, so that she may not fall — because the lady Melisendra was not used to horsemanship of the kind.

"You see too how the horse's neighing gives signs that he is content with the valiant and beautiful burden he carries in his lord and his lady. You see how they turn their backs and leave the city and, glad and merry, take the road to Paris. Go in peace, O peerless pair of true lovers! May you come safe to your longed-for country, without fortune putting any obstacle in the way of your happy journey! May the eyes of your friends and your relations see you enjoy in quiet peace the days that are left you of your life — and may they be the days of Nestor!"

Here Master Pedro raised his voice again and said:

"Plainness, boy; do not soar; all affectation is bad."

The interpreter answered nothing; on the contrary, he went on, saying:

"There were not wanting some idle eyes, which generally see everything, that did not see Melisendra's coming down and getting up, and they gave notice of it to King Marsilio, who at once ordered the alarm to be sounded. And look how quickly, for the city is already sinking under the noise of the bells sounding from all the towers of the mosques."

"Not that!" said Don Quixote at this. "In this matter of the bells Master Pedro is going very wide of the mark, because bells are not used among Moors, but kettledrums and a kind of shawm like our own reed-pipes; and this business of bells ringing in Sansueña is beyond any doubt a great absurdity."

Which Master Pedro hearing, he left off ringing and said:

"Do not look at trifles, your worship, Señor Don Quixote, or want to carry things so far that you never find the end of them. Are there not a thousand plays performed about here, almost every day, full of a thousand improprieties and absurdities, and for all that they run their course most happily and are listened to not merely with applause but with admiration and everything else? Go on, boy, and let them talk; for so long as I fill my bag, let there be more improprieties in it than the sun has atoms."

"That is the truth," replied Don Quixote.

And the boy said:

"Look how much and how splendid a body of horse comes out of the city in pursuit of the two Catholic lovers, how many trumpets sounding, how many shawms playing and how many kettledrums and side drums thundering. I fear they will catch them up and bring them back tied to the tail of their own horse, which would be a horrible spectacle."

Seeing and hearing so much Moorishness and so much uproar, then, it seemed to Don Quixote a good thing to give help to the fugitives; and, standing up, he said in a loud voice:

"I shall not consent, in my days and in my presence, that so famous a knight and so daring a lover as Don Gaiferos should be treated with such foul play. Stop, you baseborn rabble! Do not follow him or pursue him, or you have me to fight with!"

And, saying and doing, he drew his sword and at one bound placed himself next to the stage, and with a headlong and never-before-seen fury began to rain sword-strokes down on the puppet Moorishness, knocking some over, beheading others, maiming this one, shattering that one; and, among many other blows, he let fly one downstroke such that if Master Pedro had not ducked, shrunk and crouched, it would have sheared his head off more easily than if it had been made of marzipan paste. Master Pedro was shouting, saying:

"Stop, your worship, Señor Don Quixote, and note that these you are knocking down and shattering and killing are not real Moors but figures made of paste. Look — sinner that I am! — you are destroying me and ruining my whole livelihood!"

But for all that Don Quixote did not stop dealing out sword-strokes, two-handed cuts, slashes and backhands as if it were raining them. Finally, in less than the time it takes to say two creeds, he had the whole stage on the ground, with all its gear and its figures smashed to pieces and crumbled: King Marsilio badly wounded, and the emperor Charlemagne with his crown and his head split in two.

The senate of listeners was thrown into an uproar, the ape fled over the roofs out of the window, the cousin was frightened, the page lost his nerve, and even Sancho Panza himself was in enormous terror, because, as he swore when the storm was over, he had never seen his master in such a headlong rage.

The general destruction of the stage being accomplished, then, Don Quixote quieted down a little and said:

"I should like to have here in front of me at this moment all those who do not believe, and do not want to believe, how much use knights errant are in the world. Look — if I had not been present here, what would have become of good Don Gaiferos and the beautiful Melisendra? It is a safe bet that by this hour those dogs would have caught them and done them some outrage. In short, long live knight-errantry over everything alive on earth today!"

"Long live it and welcome," said Master Pedro at this in a sickly voice, "and let me die, since I am so unfortunate that I can say with King Rodrigo:

	Yesterday I was lord of Spain,
	and today I have not one battlement
	that I can call my own.

"Not half an hour ago, nor even a middling moment, I saw myself lord of kings and emperors, my stables and my chests and my bags full of infinite horses and innumerable finery; and now I see myself desolate and cast down, poor and a beggar, and, above all, without my ape — for upon my word my teeth will sweat before I get him back into my hands. And all through the ill-considered fury of this gentleman knight, of whom it is said that he protects orphans and rights wrongs and does other charitable works; and in me alone has his generous intention come to fail — blessed and praised be the heavens, up there where they have their loftiest seats. In short, the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance was bound to be the one to disfigure my figures."

Sancho Panza was moved by Master Pedro's words, and said to him:

"Do not weep, Master Pedro, and do not lament, for you break my heart. Because I let you know that my master Don Quixote is so Catholic and so scrupulous a Christian that if he grasps that he has done you some wrong, he will know it and will want to pay you and satisfy you with a great deal over."

"If Señor Don Quixote would only pay me some part of the workmanship he has unworked, I should be content, and his worship would set his conscience at rest — because no man can be saved who holds what belongs to another against its owner's will and does not restore it."

"That is so," said Don Quixote; "but so far I do not know that I have anything of yours, Master Pedro."

"How not?" answered Master Pedro. "And these relics lying on this hard and barren ground — who scattered them and annihilated them but the invincible force of that powerful arm? And whose were their bodies but mine? And what did I keep myself on but them?"

"Now I finally believe," said Don Quixote at this point, "what I have believed a great many other times: that these enchanters who persecute me do nothing but set the figures in front of my eyes as they really are, and then change them and swap them for whatever ones they please. Really and truly I tell you, gentlemen who hear me, that everything that has happened here seemed to me to be happening to the letter: that Melisendra was Melisendra, Don Gaiferos Don Gaiferos, Marsilio Marsilio and Charlemagne Charlemagne. That is why my choler rose; and, to fulfil my profession as a knight errant, I wanted to give help and favour to those who were fleeing, and with this good purpose I did what you have seen. If it has come out backwards, it is not my fault but the fault of the wicked ones who persecute me; and, for all that, for this mistake of mine, though it did not come out of malice, I mean to condemn myself in costs. Let Master Pedro see what he wants for the broken figures, and I offer to pay it him at once in good current Castilian money."

Master Pedro bowed to him, saying:

"I expected no less from the unheard-of Christian charity of the valorous Don Quixote of La Mancha, true helper and protector of all needy and destitute vagabonds. And here the master innkeeper and the great Sancho shall be mediators and appraisers between your worship and me of what the now broken figures are worth or might be worth."

The innkeeper and Sancho said they would do so, and then Master Pedro picked up off the ground King Marsilio of Saragossa, with his head gone, and said:

"It can be seen how impossible it is to restore this king to his first condition; and so it seems to me, saving a better judgement, that I should be given for his death, end and finish four reals and a half."

"Go on," said Don Quixote.

"Well, for this split from top to bottom," Master Pedro went on, taking the halved emperor Charlemagne in his hands, "it would not be too much if I asked five reals and a quarter."

"That is not little," said Sancho.

"Nor much," replied the innkeeper. "Split the difference and set him down five reals."

"Let him have the whole five and a quarter," said Don Quixote, "for the sum of this notable misfortune does not stand on a quarter more or less; and let Master Pedro finish quickly, for supper time is coming on and I have certain forebodings of hunger."

"For this figure," said Master Pedro, "which is without a nose and short of one eye, and is the beautiful Melisendra, I want — and I am setting it fairly — two reals and twelve maravedís."

"The devil would be in it," said Don Quixote, "if Melisendra were not by now with her husband, at the very least, on the borders of France; because the horse they were riding seemed to me to be flying rather than running. And so there is no call to sell me the cat for a hare by presenting me here with a noseless Melisendra, when the other one, if it comes to that, is at this moment taking her ease in France with her husband with her legs stretched out. God help every man with what is his own, Master Pedro, and let us all walk on level ground and with sound intentions. And go on."

Master Pedro, who saw that Don Quixote was heeling over and going back to his first theme, did not want him to get away; and so he said to him:

"This must not be Melisendra but one of the girls who waited on her; and so, with sixty maravedís given me for her I shall be content and well paid."

In this way he went on putting a price on a great many other shattered figures, which the two arbitrating judges afterwards moderated to the satisfaction of both parties, and which came to forty reals and three quarters; and besides this, which Sancho paid out at once, Master Pedro asked for two reals for the trouble of catching the ape.

"Give them to him, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "not for catching the ape but for catching himself a drink; and I would give two hundred now as a reward to anybody who could tell me with certainty that the lady Doña Melisendra and Señor Don Gaiferos were already in France and among their own people."

"Nobody could tell us better than my ape," said Master Pedro, "but there is no devil that could catch him now — though I imagine that affection and hunger will force him to come looking for me tonight; and God will send the morning and we shall see each other."

In short, the storm of the puppet stage came to an end, and they all had supper in peace and good company at Don Quixote's expense, for he was generous in the last degree.

Before daybreak the man with the lances and the halberds went off; and after it was light the cousin and the page came to take their leave of Don Quixote, the one to go back to his own country and the other to go on with his journey, towards which Don Quixote gave him a dozen reals. Master Pedro did not want to get into any more chopping and changing of words with Don Quixote, whom he knew very well; and so he was up before the sun and, gathering up the relics of his stage and his ape, went off to look for his own adventures too.

The innkeeper, who did not know Don Quixote, was as astonished by his madnesses as by his generosity. Finally Sancho paid him very well by his master's orders, and, taking their leave of him, at about eight in the morning they left the inn and set out on their road — where we shall leave them going, for that is what is needed to make room for telling other things that belong to the setting out of this famous history.
