Chapter 27: Where an Account Is Given of Who Master Pedro and His Ape Were, with the Bad Outcome Don Quixote Had in the Adventure of the Braying, Which He Did Not End as He Wished or as He Had Planned

Cide Hamete, the chronicler of this great history, comes into this chapter with these words: "I swear as a Catholic Christian..." — to which his translator says that Cide Hamete's swearing as a Catholic Christian, he being a Moor, as he undoubtedly was, meant nothing else but this: that just as the Catholic Christian, when he swears, swears — or ought to swear — the truth, and to tell it in whatever he says, so he was telling the truth, as though he were swearing as a Catholic Christian, in what he meant to write about Don Quixote, and especially in saying who Master Pedro was and who the soothsaying ape was that had all those villages marvelling with his divinations.

He says, then, that anybody who has read the first part of this history will remember that Ginés de Pasamonte to whom, among other galley slaves, Don Quixote gave freedom in the Sierra Morena — a kindness that was afterwards ill thanked and worse repaid by that malignant and badly brought up crew.

This Ginés de Pasamonte, whom Don Quixote called Ginesillo de Parapilla, was the man who stole Sancho Panza's grey; and, since the how and the when of it were not put into the first part through the printers' fault, it has given a great many people something to puzzle over, who put the missing passage down to the author's short memory. But in short, Ginés stole him while Sancho Panza was sleeping on his back, using the trick and the method Brunello used when, while Sacripante was at Albraca, he drew the horse out from between his legs; and afterwards Sancho got him back, as has been told.

This Ginés, then, afraid of being found by the law, which was looking for him to punish him for his infinite villainies and crimes — which were so many and such that he himself composed a great volume telling them — decided to cross over into the kingdom of Aragon and cover his left eye, taking up the trade of puppet-master; for this and sleight of hand he could do to perfection.

It happened, then, that from some Christians who had been set free and were coming from Barbary he bought that ape, whom he taught that on being given a certain signal he should climb up on his shoulder and murmur — or seem to murmur — in his ear. This done, before he went into any place where he was going with his stage and his ape, he would find out at the nearest place, or from whoever he best could, what particular things had happened in that place, and to what people. And, carrying them well in his memory, the first thing he did was to show his stage, which was sometimes of one story and sometimes of another, but all of them cheerful and merry and well known.

The show over, he would announce his ape's abilities, telling the people that he divined all things past and present, but that in the matter of things to come he had no skill. For the answer to each question he asked two reals, and for some he cut the price, according to how he took the pulse of the questioners. And since he sometimes came to the houses of people whose doings he knew, even if they asked him nothing so as not to have to pay him, he would give the ape the signal and then say that he had told him such and such a thing, which fitted the facts to a mould. With this he got himself an unspeakable credit, and everybody went trooping after him. Other times, being so shrewd, he would answer in such a way that the answers fitted the questions well; and, as nobody pressed him or pushed him to say how his ape divined, he made monkeys of them all and filled his pouches.

As soon as he came into the inn he recognised Don Quixote and Sancho, and through recognising them it was easy for him to fill Don Quixote and Sancho Panza with wonder, and everybody else who was there. But it would have cost him dear if Don Quixote had brought his hand down a little lower when he cut off King Marsilio's head and destroyed all his cavalry, as has been told in the foregoing chapter.

This is what there is to say about Master Pedro and his ape.

And, coming back to Don Quixote of La Mancha, I say that after leaving the inn he decided to see first the banks of the river Ebro and all those parts, before going into the city of Saragossa, since the great deal of time that was left from then until the jousts gave him room for everything. With this intention he followed his road, along which he travelled two days without anything happening to him worth putting in writing, until on the third, coming up a rise, he heard a great noise of drums, trumpets and harquebuses.

At first he thought some regiment of soldiers was passing that way, and to see them he spurred Rocinante up the rise. And when he was at the top he saw at the foot of it, as far as he could judge, more than two hundred men armed with different kinds of arms — that is to say, long spears, crossbows, partisans, halberds and pikes, and a few harquebuses, and a great many bucklers.

He came down the slope and got near enough to the squadron to see the flags distinctly, judge their colours and note the devices they carried on them — especially one that came on a standard or pennant of white satin, on which was painted very much to the life a donkey like a little Sardinian ass, its head raised, its mouth open and its tongue out, in the act and posture of a beast in the middle of braying. Around it were written in large letters these two lines:

	Our two good magistrates, 'tis plain,
	did not stand and bray in vain.

By this ensign Don Quixote gathered that these people must be from the village of the bray, and he said so to Sancho, explaining to him what was written on the standard. He told him too that the man who had given them notice of the business had been wrong in saying that it was two aldermen who had brayed; but that, according to the lines on the standard, they had been magistrates. To which Sancho Panza answered:

"Sir, there is nothing to stick at in that, for it may very well be that the aldermen who brayed then came in time to be magistrates of their village, and so they can be called by both titles; and what is more, it makes no difference to the truth of the history whether the brayers were magistrates or aldermen, so long as they brayed one way or the other — because a magistrate is as likely to bray as an alderman."

Finally they learnt and made out that the mocked village was coming out to fight another that mocked it more than was just and more than was owing to good neighbourliness.

Don Quixote went up to them, to Sancho's no small distress, for he was never fond of finding himself in expeditions of the sort. The men of the squadron took him into their midst, believing he was one of their own party. Don Quixote, raising his visor with a fine spirit and bearing, came up to the standard of the donkey, and there all the chief men of the army gathered round him to look at him, filled with the usual astonishment that everybody fell into who looked at him for the first time.

Don Quixote, seeing them so intent on looking at him without anybody speaking to him or asking him anything, decided to make use of that silence, and, breaking his own, raised his voice and said:

"Good gentlemen, as earnestly as I can I beg you not to interrupt an argument I want to make you, until you find that it displeases and annoys you; for if that happens, at the least sign you make me I shall put a seal on my mouth and clap a gag on my tongue."

They all told him to say whatever he liked, for they would listen to him gladly. With this licence Don Quixote went on, saying:

"I, my dear sirs, am a knight errant, whose exercise is that of arms and whose profession is to favour those in need of favour and to come to the help of the destitute. Some days ago I learnt of your misfortune and of the cause that moves you to take up arms at every turn to avenge yourselves on your enemies; and, having gone over your business once and many times in my understanding, I find, according to the laws of duelling, that you are mistaken in holding yourselves affronted, because no single man can affront a whole community, unless it is by challenging all of it together for treason, since he does not know in particular who committed the treason he is challenging it for.

"An example of this we have in Don Diego Ordóñez de Lara, who challenged the whole people of Zamora because he did not know that Vellido Dolfos alone had committed the treason of killing his king; and so he challenged them all, and the vengeance and the answer concerned them all — although it is quite true that Señor Don Diego went somewhat too far, and even went a long way past the limits of the challenge, because he had no call to challenge the dead, the waters, the loaves of bread, those who were still unborn, and the other trifles that are set out there. But let it pass; for when choler bursts its banks, the tongue has no father, tutor or bridle to check it.

"This being so, then — that one man alone cannot affront a kingdom, a province, a city, a commonwealth or a whole community — it comes out clean that there is no call to go out to avenge the challenge of such an affront, since it is none. Because it would be a fine thing if the people of Clock-town killed each other at every turn with whoever called them by that name, and so with the stew-pot men, the aubergine men, the whale men, the soap men, and all the other names and nicknames that go about here in the mouths of boys and of people of no great account! It would be a fine thing, certainly, if all these distinguished towns took offence and revenged themselves and went about with their swords for ever sliding out like sackbuts at every quarrel, however small!

"No, no, and God neither permit it nor wish it. Prudent men and well-ordered commonwealths have to take up arms and draw their swords and put their persons, lives and estates at risk for four things: the first, to defend the Catholic faith; the second, to defend their own lives, which is a law of nature and of God; the third, in defence of their honour, their family and their property; the fourth, in the service of their king in a just war. And if we want to add a fifth, which can be counted as second, it is in defence of their country. To these five causes, as the chief ones, some others may be added that are just and reasonable and that make it right to take up arms; but to take them up for childishness and for things that are matter for laughter and entertainment rather than for affront, looks as if the man who takes them up is short of all reasonable judgement.

"What is more, taking unjust revenge — and there can be none that is just — goes directly against the holy law we profess, in which we are commanded to do good to our enemies and to love those who hate us; a commandment which, though it looks somewhat difficult to keep, is not so except for those who have less of God in them than of the world, and more of the flesh than of the spirit. Because Jesus Christ, true God and true man, who never lied and could not and cannot lie, being our lawgiver, said that his yoke was easy and his burden light; and so he would not command us anything that it was impossible to carry out. And so, my dear sirs, your worships are bound by divine and human laws to quiet down."

"The devil take me," said Sancho to himself at this, "if this master of mine is not a 'ologian; and if he is not one, he is as like one as one egg is to another."

Don Quixote took a little breath, and, seeing that they were still lending him silence, wanted to go further with his talk — as he would have done if Sancho's sharpness had not got in the way; for Sancho, seeing that his master had stopped, took over from him, saying:

"My master Don Quixote of La Mancha, who at one time was called the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance and is now called the Knight of the Lions, is a very well-advised gentleman who knows Latin and Spanish like a bachelor of arts, and in everything he deals with and advises on he goes about it like a very good soldier, and he has all the laws and ordinances of what they call duelling at his fingertips. And so there is nothing to do but let yourselves be led by whatever he says, and it is on my head if you go wrong.

"And besides, it stands said already that it is foolishness to take offence merely at hearing a bray; because I remember, when I was a boy, that I brayed whenever I felt like it, without anybody stopping me, and with such grace and truth to life that when I brayed all the donkeys in the village brayed too. And I was none the less for that the son of my parents, who were most honourable people; and although for this ability I was envied by more than four of the stiff-necked men of my village, I did not care two farthings. And, so that you may see I am telling the truth, wait and listen — for this science is like swimming: once learnt, it is never forgotten."

And then, putting his hand to his nose, he began to bray so lustily that all the nearby valleys rang with it. But one of the men standing next to him, believing he was making fun of them, raised a long stick he had in his hand and gave him such a blow with it that, without being able to help himself, Sancho Panza went down on the ground.

Don Quixote, who saw Sancho in such bad case, charged at the man who had struck him with his lance couched; but so many got in the way that it was not possible to avenge him. On the contrary, seeing that a stormcloud of stones was raining down on him and that a thousand levelled crossbows and no fewer harquebuses were threatening him, he turned Rocinante's reins and, at the fastest gallop he could manage, got out from among them, commending himself with all his heart to God to deliver him from that danger, fearing at every step that some bullet would come in at his back and out at his chest; and every moment he took in his breath to see whether it failed him.

But the men of the squadron were satisfied with seeing him run, and did not shoot at him. They put Sancho on his donkey, hardly come round yet, and let him go after his master — not because he had his senses about him to steer it, but because the grey followed Rocinante's tracks, without whom he could not be a moment at ease. Don Quixote, then, having got a good way off, turned his head and saw Sancho coming, and waited for him, seeing that nobody was following.

The men of the squadron stayed there until night; and, their opponents not having come out to battle, they went back to their village, merry and glad; and if they had known the ancient custom of the Greeks, they would have raised a trophy in that place.
