Chapter 28: Of Things That Benengeli Says Whoever Reads Him Will Know, If He Reads Them with Attention

When the brave man flees, foul play has been discovered, and it is the part of prudent men to keep themselves for a better occasion. This truth was borne out in Don Quixote, who, giving way to the fury of the village and to the bad intentions of that indignant squadron, took to his heels; and, without remembering Sancho or the danger he was leaving him in, he got as far off as seemed to him enough to be safe. Sancho followed him, laid across his donkey, as has been related.

He arrived at last, come round to his senses by now, and on arriving he let himself fall off the grey at Rocinante's feet, all anguish, all bruises and all beating. Don Quixote dismounted to look at his wounds; but, finding him sound from head to foot, he said to him with a good deal of choler:

"In an evil hour did you know how to bray, Sancho! And where did you find it good to name the rope in the hanged man's house? To music of brays, what counterpoint was to be expected but of cudgels? And give thanks to God, Sancho, that since they crossed you with a stick they did not make the sign of the cross over you with a scimitar."

"I am not up to answering," answered Sancho, "because I feel as if I were talking out of my shoulder blades. Let us mount and get away from here, and I shall put silence on my brays — but not on saying that knights errant run away and leave their good squires ground like henna, or like chaff, in the power of their enemies."

"He does not flee who retires," answered Don Quixote; "because you must know, Sancho, that valour which is not founded on the base of prudence is called rashness, and the exploits of the rash man are put down more to good luck than to his spirit. And so I confess that I have retired but have not fled; and in this I have imitated a great many brave men who have kept themselves for better times, and the histories are full of it — which, since they would be of no profit to you or of any pleasure to me, I do not report to you now."

By this time Sancho was on his beast, helped by Don Quixote, who likewise got up on Rocinante; and little by little they went to take cover in a poplar grove that showed itself about a quarter of a league from there. From time to time Sancho let out some very deep "ohs" and some sorrowful groans; and when Don Quixote asked him the cause of such bitter feeling, he answered that from the end of his backbone to the nape of his skull it hurt him in such a way that it took his senses away.

"The cause of that pain," said Don Quixote, "must without doubt be that, as the stick they struck you with was long and full-length, it caught you all across the back, where all those parts come in that are hurting you; and if it had caught more of you, more would be hurting."

"By God," said Sancho, "your worship has got me out of a great doubt, and has cleared it up for me in fine terms! Body of me! Was the cause of my pain so hidden that it needed telling me that everything hurts that the stick reached? If my ankles were hurting, there might still be some guessing about why they hurt; but for what has been pounded to hurt me is not much of a guess.

"Upon my word, sir our master, another man's trouble hangs by a hair; and every day I am sighting more land of how little I can expect from the company I keep with your worship. Because if this time you have let me be cudgelled, another time and another hundred times we shall go back to the blanket-tossings of long ago and to other childishnesses — which, if this time they have come out on my back, next time will come out at my eyes.

"I should do a great deal better — except that I am a barbarian and shall never do anything good in all my life — I should do a great deal better, I say again, to go back home and to my wife and to my children, and to keep her and bring them up on what God was pleased to give me, and not go trailing after your worship along roads that are no roads and by paths and highways that are neither, drinking badly and eating worse.

"And then take sleeping! Count out seven feet of earth, brother squire, and if you want more, take as many again, for it is in your own hand to dish it out; and stretch yourself out to your heart's content. May I see burnt and turned to powder the first man who put a stitch into knight-errantry, or at least the first man who wanted to be squire to such fools as all the past knights errant must have been. Of the present ones I say nothing, since your worship is one of them, and I have respect for them, and because I know that your worship knows one point more than the devil in everything you say and everything you think."

"I would make a good bet with you, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that now that you go along talking with nobody to stop you, nothing at all hurts you anywhere in your body. Talk, my son, everything that comes into your mind and to your mouth; for in exchange for nothing hurting you, I shall count as a pleasure the annoyance your impertinences give me. And if you so much want to go back to your house with your wife and children, God forbid that I should stop you: you have money of mine. Look how long it is since this third time we came out of our village, and look what you can and ought to earn each month, and pay yourself with your own hand."

"When I served Tomé Carrasco," answered Sancho, "the father of the bachelor Sansón Carrasco, whom your worship knows well, I earned two ducats a month, besides my food. With your worship I do not know what I can earn, although I know that the squire of a knight errant has more work than the man who serves a farmer. Because, in short, those of us who serve farmers, however much we work by day and however badly things go, at night we have a stew for supper and sleep in a bed — which I have not slept in since I have been serving your worship. Except for the short time we were at Don Diego de Miranda's house, and the feast I had with the skimmings I took out of Camacho's pots, and what I ate and drank and slept at Basilio's house, all the rest of the time I have slept on the hard ground in the open air, subject to what they call the inclemencies of heaven, keeping myself going on scraps of cheese and crusts of bread, and drinking water, sometimes from brooks and sometimes from springs, out of whatever we come across in these out-of-the-way places where we go about."

"I confess," said Don Quixote, "that everything you say is true, Sancho. How much do you think I ought to give you over and above what Tomé Carrasco gave you?"

"To my mind," said Sancho, "with two reals more that your worship added each month, I should count myself well paid. That is as to the wages of my labour; but as to satisfying me over the word and promise your worship has made me of giving me the government of an isle, it would be just for another six reals to be added, which in all would come to thirty."

"That is very good," replied Don Quixote; "and, according to the wages you have set yourself, it is twenty-three days since we came out of our village. Reckon it up, Sancho, pro rata, and see what I owe you, and pay yourself, as I have told you, with your own hand."

"Oh, body of me!" said Sancho. "Your worship goes very wide in this reckoning, because in the matter of the promise of the isle it has to be counted from the day your worship promised it me until the present hour we are in."

"Well then, how long is it, Sancho, since I promised it you?" said Don Quixote.

"If I remember rightly," answered Sancho, "it must be more than twenty years, three days more or less."

Don Quixote gave himself a great slap on the forehead and began to laugh very heartily, and said:

"Why, I was hardly two months in the Sierra Morena, or in the whole course of our sallies — and you say, Sancho, that it is twenty years since I promised you the isle? Now I say that you want the money of mine that you have to be eaten up in your wages; and if that is so and it pleases you, from here I give it you, and much good may it do you; for in exchange for seeing myself rid of so bad a squire, I shall be glad to be left poor and without a farthing.

"But tell me, you perverter of the squirely ordinances of knight-errantry: where have you seen or read that any squire of a knight errant ever set himself to bargain with his master about 'so much more must you give me every month for serving you'? Go in, go in, you villain, poltroon and monster — for you look like all of them; go in, I say, into the mare magnum of their histories, and if you find that any squire ever said, or thought, what you have said here, I want you to nail him on my forehead and, into the bargain, give me four good flicks on the nose, sealed and delivered.

"Turn the grey's reins, or his halter, and go back home, because not one step further from here shall you go on with me. O bread ill-acknowledged! O promises badly placed! O man who has more of the beast in him than of the person! Now, when I was thinking of setting you up in such a station that in spite of your wife they would call you 'your lordship' — now you take your leave? Now you go, when I was coming with a firm and binding intention of making you lord of the best isle in the world? In short, as you have said at other times, honey is not for the mouth of... and so forth. An ass you are, and an ass you have to be, and you will end an ass when the course of your life runs out; for I hold for myself that your life will come to its last term before you tumble to it and grasp that you are a beast."

Sancho was looking hard at Don Quixote while he was saying him these abuses, and he was so stricken that the tears came into his eyes, and in a pained and sickly voice he said to him:

"My dear sir, I confess that to be an ass altogether I lack nothing but the tail. If your worship wants to put one on me, I shall count it well put on, and shall serve you as a donkey all the days that are left me of my life. Let your worship forgive me and pity my green years, and note that I know little, and that if I talk a lot it comes more from a disease than from malice; but he who errs and mends commends himself to God."

"I should have been astonished, Sancho, if you had not mixed some little proverb into your talk. Well now, I forgive you, provided that you mend yourself and that from now on you do not show yourself such a friend of your own interest, but try to broaden your heart, and take heart and courage to wait for the fulfilling of my promises — which, though it is late, is not made impossible."

Sancho answered that he would do so, even if he had to draw strength out of weakness.

With this they went into the poplar grove, and Don Quixote settled himself at the foot of an elm and Sancho at the foot of a beech; for trees of that kind, and others like them, always have feet and never hands. Sancho spent the night painfully, because the cudgelling made itself felt more in the night air. Don Quixote spent it in his usual memories; but for all that they gave their eyes up to sleep, and at daybreak they followed their road, looking for the banks of the famous Ebro — where there happened to them what will be told in the coming chapter.
