Chapter 29: Of the Famous Adventure of the Enchanted Boat

By their measured steps, and by steps still to be measured, two days after leaving the poplar grove Don Quixote and Sancho came to the river Ebro; and the sight of it was a great pleasure to Don Quixote, because he contemplated and looked at the pleasantness of its banks, the clearness of its waters, the quietness of its course and the abundance of its liquid crystal, whose glad sight renewed a thousand loving thoughts in his memory. Above all he went back and forth over what he had seen in the cave of Montesinos; for although Master Pedro's ape had told him that part of those things were true and part lies, he held more by the true ones than by the lying ones — quite the other way from Sancho, who held them all for the very truth of lying.

Going along in this way, then, there offered itself to his sight a small boat without oars or any other tackle, tied up on the bank to the trunk of a tree that stood on the shore. Don Quixote looked in every direction and saw nobody at all; and then, without any more ado, he got down off Rocinante and ordered Sancho to do the same off the grey, and to tie both beasts very securely together to the trunk of a poplar or willow that stood there. Sancho asked him the cause of this sudden dismounting and this tying up. Don Quixote answered:

"You must know, Sancho, that this boat here is directly — and it cannot possibly be otherwise — calling me and inviting me to get into it and go in it to bring help to some knight, or to some other person of quality in need, who must be laid under some great affliction. Because this is the manner of the books of chivalrous histories and of the enchanters who meddle and talk in them: when some knight is laid under some hardship out of which he cannot be delivered except by the hand of another knight, even though they are two or three thousand leagues apart, and even more, either they snatch him up in a cloud or they furnish him with a boat to get into, and in less than the opening and shutting of an eye they carry him, either through the air or over the sea, wherever they like and wherever his help is needed. And so, Sancho, this boat is put here for that same purpose; and this is as true as it is now day. And before this one is over, tie the grey and Rocinante together, and into the hand of God, who will guide us; for I would not give up embarking if barefoot friars begged me to."

"Well, since that is so," answered Sancho, "and your worship means to run at every step into these things — I do not know whether to call them absurdities — there is nothing for it but to obey and bow my head, keeping to the proverb 'do what your master tells you and sit down at table with him'. But for all that, for the discharge of my conscience, I want to warn your worship that to my mind this boat is not one of the enchanted ones but belongs to some fishermen on this river, because the best shad in the world are caught in it."

This is what Sancho was saying while he tied up the beasts, leaving them to the protection and shelter of the enchanters with a good deal of pain to his soul. Don Quixote told him not to grieve over the abandoning of those animals, since the one who was going to carry them along such longinquous roads and regions would see to feeding them.

"I do not understand that about 'longwinkyous'," said Sancho, "and I have never heard such a word in all the days of my life."

"Longinquous," answered Don Quixote, "means far off; and it is no wonder that you do not understand it, for you are not obliged to know Latin, like some who presume they know it and are ignorant of it."

"They are tied up now," replied Sancho. "What are we to do next?"

"What?" answered Don Quixote. "Cross ourselves and weigh anchor — I mean, embark and cut the cable this boat is tied by."

And, giving a leap into it, with Sancho after him, he cut the cord, and the boat began to draw away little by little from the bank. And when Sancho saw himself a matter of two yards out into the river, he began to shake, fearing he was lost; but nothing gave him more pain than hearing the grey braying and seeing Rocinante struggling to get himself loose, and he said to his master:

"The grey is braying, grieved at our being gone, and Rocinante is trying to get free to throw himself after us. O dearest friends, stay in peace, and may the madness that takes us away from you, turned into a coming to our senses, bring us back into your presence!"

And with that he began to weep so bitterly that Don Quixote, vexed and choleric, said to him:

"What are you afraid of, you cowardly creature? What are you weeping about, you heart of butter? Who is chasing you, or who is hunting you, you spirit of a house mouse? Or what do you lack, you destitute man in the very bowels of abundance? Are you by any chance travelling on foot and barefoot over the Riphaean mountains, instead of sitting on a plank like an archduke on the smooth course of this pleasant river, out of which in a short space we shall come to the wide sea? But we must have come out already, and travelled at least seven or eight hundred leagues; and if I had an astrolabe here to take the height of the pole with, I would tell you how many we have travelled — although either I know very little, or we have already passed, or shall soon pass, the equinoctial line, which divides and cuts the two opposite poles at equal distance."

"And when we get to that line your worship talks about," asked Sancho, "how far shall we have travelled?"

"A long way," replied Don Quixote; "because of the three hundred and sixty degrees the globe contains, of water and of land, according to the computation of Ptolemy, who was the greatest cosmographer known, we shall have travelled half when we reach the line I have named."

"By God," said Sancho, "your worship brings me a fine sort of person as a witness for what he says — a Toll-and-Lousy, with 'pee' tacked on the front of him, or 'pee-oh', or I do not know what."

Don Quixote laughed at the interpretation Sancho had given to the name and to the computation and reckoning of the cosmographer Ptolemy, and said to him:

"You must know, Sancho, that among the Spaniards and those who embark at Cadiz to go to the East Indies, one of the signs they have for knowing they have passed the equinoctial line I have told you about is that all the lice die on everybody in the ship, without one being left, and you would not find one in the whole vessel if you paid its weight in gold. And so, Sancho, you may run a hand over a thigh; and if you come across anything alive, we shall be out of this doubt, and if not, we have passed it."

"I do not believe any of that," answered Sancho, "but for all that I shall do what your worship orders me — although I do not see what need there is for these experiments, since I see with my own eyes that we have not got five yards from the bank, and we have not slipped two yards from where the beasts are, because there are Rocinante and the grey in the very place where we left them. And taking a sight of it, as I am taking one now, I swear we are not moving or going along at an ant's pace."

"Make the test I have told you, Sancho, and do not trouble about any other; for you know nothing about what colures, lines, parallels, zodiacs, ecliptics, poles, solstices, equinoxes, planets, signs, points and measures are, of which the celestial and terrestrial spheres are composed. If you knew all these things, or part of them, you would see clearly how many parallels we have cut, how many signs we have seen and how many constellations we have left behind and are leaving behind now. And I tell you again to feel and fish about, for I hold for myself that you are cleaner than a sheet of smooth white paper."

Sancho felt himself, and, bringing his hand round nicely and carefully towards the back of his left knee, he raised his head, looked at his master and said:

"Either the experiment is false, or we have not got to where your worship says, not by many leagues."

"Why, what is it?" asked Don Quixote. "Have you come across something?"

"Something, and somethings!" answered Sancho.

And, shaking his fingers, he washed his whole hand in the river, down the middle of whose current the boat was quietly gliding, moved by no secret intelligence and by no hidden enchanter, but by the very course of the water, gentle and smooth just then.

At this they made out some great water mills that stood in the middle of the river; and hardly had Don Quixote seen them when he said to Sancho in a loud voice:

"Do you see, my friend? There is the city, castle or fortress where there must be some knight held down, or some queen, princess or infanta come to grief, for whose rescue I have been brought here."

"What the devil city, fortress or castle is your worship talking about, sir?" said Sancho. "Do you not see that those are water mills standing in the river, where they grind the wheat?"

"Be quiet, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "for although they look like water mills, they are not; and I have told you before that enchantments turn everything about and change it out of its natural being. I do not mean that they really change one being into another, but that they seem to — as experience showed in the transformation of Dulcinea, the only refuge of my hopes."

At this the boat, having got into the middle of the river's current, began to travel less slowly than it had until then. The millers at the mills, who saw that boat coming down the river and going to run into the millrace, came out in a hurry, a great many of them with long poles to stop it; and, as they came out floured, with their faces and their clothes covered in the dust of the flour, they made an ugly sight. They shouted at the tops of their voices, saying:

"Devils of men! Where are you going? Have you come here to kill yourselves? What do you want — to drown and be torn to pieces on these wheels?"

"Did I not tell you, Sancho," said Don Quixote at this point, "that we had come to where I must show how far the valour of my arm reaches? Look what villains and poltroons come out to meet me, look how many monsters set themselves against me, look how many hideous faces are pulling grimaces at us... Well, now you shall see, you rascals!"

And, standing up in the boat, he began to threaten the millers in a loud voice, saying to them:

"Wicked and worse-advised rabble, set at liberty and at their own free will the person you hold oppressed in that fortress or prison of yours, high or low, of whatever sort or quality he may be; for I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, called by another name the Knight of the Lions, to whom, by the order of high heaven, it is reserved to bring this adventure to a happy end."

And, saying this, he laid his hand on his sword and began to fence with it in the air against the millers; who, hearing and not understanding that nonsense, set themselves with their poles to stop the boat, which was already going into the race and channel of the wheels.

Sancho went down on his knees, devoutly asking heaven to deliver him from so plain a danger — as it did, through the skill and quickness of the millers, who, putting their poles against the boat, stopped it, but not in such a way as to keep from capsizing it and pitching Don Quixote and Sancho into the water. But it turned out well for Don Quixote, who could swim like a goose, although the weight of his armour took him to the bottom twice; and if it had not been for the millers, who threw themselves into the water and pulled the pair of them out almost bodily, it would have been Troy for them both.

Set on land, then, more wet than dying of thirst, Sancho went down on his knees, his hands together and his eyes fixed on heaven, and asked God in a long and devout prayer to deliver him from then on from the bold desires and undertakings of his master.

At this the fishermen who owned the boat arrived, whose boat the wheels of the mills had smashed to pieces; and, seeing it broken, they set about stripping Sancho and asking Don Quixote to pay for it. And he, with great calm, as though nothing at all had happened to him, told the millers and the fishermen that he would pay for the boat most willingly, on condition that they gave up, freely and without any trickery, the person or persons who were held down in that castle of theirs.

"What persons or what castle are you talking about," answered one of the millers, "you man without any sense? Do you by any chance want to carry off the women who come to grind wheat at these mills?"

"Enough!" said Don Quixote to himself. "Here it would be preaching in the desert to try to bring this rabble round to doing any virtuous thing for the asking. And in this adventure two mighty enchanters must have met, and one of them blocks what the other tries: one furnished me with the boat and the other pitched me over the side. God set it right, for this whole world is machinery and contrivances, one against another. I can do no more."

And, raising his voice, he went on, looking at the mills:

"My friends, whoever you may be, who are left shut up in that prison, forgive me; for by my misfortune and by yours, I cannot bring you out of your affliction. This adventure must be kept and reserved for some other knight."

Having said this, he came to terms with the fishermen and paid fifty reals for the boat, which Sancho handed over most unwillingly, saying:

"With two boat-fares like this we shall have the whole capital at the bottom."

The fishermen and millers were astonished, looking at those two figures so far outside the use of other men, and they could not make out at all where the arguments and questions Don Quixote was putting to them were leading; and, taking them for madmen, they left them and went back to their mills, and the fishermen to their huts. Don Quixote and Sancho went back to their beasts, and to being beasts; and this was the end of the adventure of the enchanted boat.
