Chapter 30: Of What Befell Don Quixote with a Beautiful Huntress

Knight and squire got back to their animals melancholy enough and in a bad humour, and especially Sancho, whom it went to the soul to touch the stock of their money, since it seemed to him that everything taken out of it was being taken out of the pupils of his own eyes. Finally, without a word passing between them, they mounted and went away from the famous river — Don Quixote buried in the thoughts of his love and Sancho in those of his advancement, which just then seemed to him to be a long way off. Because, dolt though he was, he grasped well enough that his master's actions, all or most of them, were absurdities, and he was looking for a chance when, without going into accounts or leave-takings with his master, he might one day break away and go off home. But fortune arranged things quite the other way from what he feared.

It happened, then, that the next day, at sunset and on coming out of a wood, Don Quixote cast his eyes over a green meadow, and at the far end of it he saw people; and, coming nearer, he made out that they were a hawking party. He came nearer still, and among them he saw a splendid lady on a snow-white palfrey or hackney, decked out with green harness and a silver saddle. The lady likewise came dressed in green, and so gallantly and richly that gallantry itself seemed transformed into her. On her left hand she carried a goshawk, a sign that gave Don Quixote to understand that this was some great lady, and that she must be the mistress of all those hunters — as was the truth. And so he said to Sancho:

"Run, Sancho my son, and tell that lady of the palfrey and the goshawk that I, the Knight of the Lions, kiss the hands of her great beauteousness; and that if her greatness gives me leave, I shall go and kiss them, and serve her in whatever my strength can and her highness may command me. And mind how you speak, Sancho, and take care not to jam any proverb of yours into your embassy."

"You have found your jammer, have you not?" answered Sancho. "Try that on me! Why, this is not the first time in my life that I have carried embassies to high and lofty ladies!"

"Unless it was the one you carried to the lady Dulcinea," replied Don Quixote, "I do not know that you have carried any other, at least in my service."

"That is true," answered Sancho, "but a good payer does not mind pledges, and in a full house supper is soon cooked. I mean that there is no need to tell me or warn me about anything, because I have something for everything and I know a little about it all."

"I believe it, Sancho," said Don Quixote. "Go, and good luck, and God guide you."

Sancho set off at a gallop, driving the grey out of his usual pace, and came to where the beautiful huntress was; and, dismounting and going down on his knees in front of her, he said to her:

"Beautiful lady, that knight who appears over there, called the Knight of the Lions, is my master, and I am a squire of his who at home is called Sancho Panza. This same Knight of the Lions, who not long ago was called the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, sends by me to ask your greatness to be pleased to give him leave so that, with your purpose and good pleasure and consent, he may put his desire into practice — which is nothing else, as he says and as I think, but to serve your soaring high-flyingness and beauteousness. In giving it, your ladyship will do a thing that redounds to your own good, and he will receive a most signal favour and contentment."

"Certainly, good squire," answered the lady, "you have delivered your embassy with all the circumstances such embassies call for. Get up off the ground, for it is not right that the squire of so great a knight as the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance — of whom we already have a great deal of news here — should be on his knees. Get up, my friend, and tell your master that he is very welcome to come and make use of me and of the duke my husband, at a country house we have here."

Sancho got up, astonished as much at the good lady's beauty as at her great breeding and courtesy, and still more at what she had said about having news of his master the Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance; and if she had not called him the Knight of the Lions, it must have been because he had taken the name so recently. The duchess, whose title is still not known, asked him:

"Tell me, brother squire: this master of yours, is he not one about whom there goes a printed history called The Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha, who has for the lady of his soul a certain Dulcinea of El Toboso?"

"That is the very man, my lady," answered Sancho; "and that squire of his who goes about, or ought to go about, in that history, whom they call Sancho Panza, is me — unless they swapped me in the cradle, I mean unless they swapped me in the printing."

"I am very glad of all this," said the duchess. "Go, brother Panza, and tell your master that he is well arrived and welcome to my estates, and that nothing could come to me that would give me greater contentment."

Sancho, with this most agreeable answer, went back to his master with the greatest pleasure, and told him everything the great lady had said, praising her great beauteousness, her great grace and courtesy to the skies in his rustic terms. Don Quixote drew himself up gallantly in the saddle, settled himself well in the stirrups, adjusted his visor, spurred Rocinante and with a fine boldness went to kiss the duchess's hands.

The duchess, having sent for the duke her husband, told him the whole of Don Quixote's embassy while Don Quixote was coming up; and the two of them, having read the first part of this history and having understood from it the preposterous humour of Don Quixote, waited for him with the greatest pleasure and with a desire to know him, having settled it beforehand to fall in with his humour and to agree with him in whatever he said, treating him as a knight errant for as long as he stayed with them, with all the ceremonies customary in the books of chivalry, which they had read and were even very fond of.

At this Don Quixote came up with his visor raised; and, making as if to dismount, Sancho ran up to hold his stirrup for him. But he was so unlucky that, in getting off the grey, he caught one foot in a rope of the pack-saddle in such a way that it was not possible to untangle him, and instead he was left hanging from it with his mouth and his chest on the ground.

Don Quixote, who was not in the habit of dismounting without somebody holding his stirrup, thinking that Sancho had already got there to hold it, threw the weight of his body down all at once, and brought Rocinante's saddle with him — for it must have been badly girthed — and the saddle and he came to the ground, not without shame to him and with a great many curses that he muttered between his teeth at the wretched Sancho, who still had his foot in the shackle.

The duke ordered his hunters to go to the knight and the squire, who lifted up Don Quixote, badly used by his fall; and, limping and as best he could, he went to bend his knees before the two nobles. But the duke would not allow it on any account; on the contrary, dismounting from his own horse, he went and embraced Don Quixote, saying to him:

"It grieves me, Sir Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance, that the first thing your worship has done in my country should have been as bad as we have just seen; but the carelessness of squires is often the cause of worse things than this."

"The thing I have had happen in meeting you, valorous prince," answered Don Quixote, "cannot possibly be bad, even if my fall had not stopped until the bottom of the abyss, since the glory of having seen you would have lifted me and brought me out of it. My squire, God curse him, is better at untying his tongue to say malicious things than at tying and girthing a saddle so that it will hold. But however I may find myself, fallen or standing, on foot or on horseback, I shall always be at your service and at that of my lady the duchess, your worthy consort, worthy lady of beauty and universal princess of courtesy."

"Gently, my lord Don Quixote of La Mancha!" said the duke. "For where my lady Doña Dulcinea of El Toboso is, it is not reasonable that other beauties should be praised."

By this time Sancho Panza was free of the noose; and, finding himself close by, before his master could answer he said:

"It cannot be denied, but must be affirmed, that my lady Dulcinea of El Toboso is very beautiful; but where you least expect it, up jumps the hare. Because I have heard it said that this thing they call nature is like a potter who makes clay pots, and the man who makes one beautiful pot can make two, and three, and a hundred. I say it because upon my word my lady the duchess is not one step behind my mistress the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso."

Don Quixote turned to the duchess and said:

"Your greatness may imagine that no knight errant in the world ever had a more talkative or a more amusing squire than the one I have; and he will bear me out if your great loftiness cares to make use of me for a few days."

To which the duchess answered:

"That good Sancho is amusing I value highly, because it is a sign that he is judicious; for wit and drollery, Señor Don Quixote, as your worship knows very well, do not settle on dull minds. And, since good Sancho is amusing and droll, from this moment I confirm him as judicious."

"And talkative," added Don Quixote.

"So much the better," said the duke, "because a great deal of drollery cannot be said in a few words. And, so that we may not lose our time in them, let the great Knight of the Sorrowful Countenance come..."

"Of the Lions your highness should say," said Sancho, "for there is no Sorrowful Countenance now, nor any countenance at all."

"Let it be the Knight of the Lions," the duke went on. "I say let the Knight of the Lions come to a castle of mine that is nearby, where he shall be given the welcome that is justly owed to so lofty a person, and the one that the duchess and I generally give to all the knights errant who come to it."

By this time Sancho had put Rocinante's saddle to rights and girthed it properly; and, Don Quixote getting up on him and the duke on a handsome horse, they set the duchess between them and made for the castle. The duchess ordered Sancho to ride beside her, because she took infinite pleasure in hearing his judicious sayings. Sancho did not need asking twice, and wove himself in among the three of them and made a fourth in the conversation, to the great pleasure of the duchess and the duke, who counted it a great piece of luck to take into their castle so errant a knight and so errand-run a squire.
