Chapter 31: Which Deals with Many and Great Matters

Extreme was the gladness Sancho carried about with him at seeing himself, as he thought, in the duchess's favour; because he imagined he was going to find in her castle what he had found in Don Diego's house and in Basilio's, being always fond of the good life. And so he took the chance by the forelock in this matter of treating himself well, whenever and wherever it offered.

The history relates, then, that before they reached the country house or castle, the duke rode on ahead and gave orders to all his servants about the way they were to treat Don Quixote; who, as soon as he came with the duchess to the castle gates, was met by two footmen or grooms who came out of it dressed to their feet in what they call morning gowns, of the finest crimson satin; and, catching Don Quixote up in their arms, without his being heard or seen, they said to him:

"Let your greatness go and help my lady the duchess down."

Don Quixote did so, and there were great civilities between the two of them over the business; but in the end the duchess's insistence won, and she would not come down off the palfrey except in the duke's arms, saying that she did not find herself worthy of giving so great a knight so useless a burden. Finally the duke came out to help her down; and, on going into a great courtyard, two beautiful maidens came up and threw over Don Quixote's shoulders a great cloak of the finest scarlet, and in an instant all the galleries of the courtyard were crowned with the menservants and maidservants of those nobles, calling out at the tops of their voices:

"Welcome to the flower and cream of knights errant!"

And all of them, or most, sprinkled flasks of scented waters over Don Quixote and over the duke and duchess; at all of which Don Quixote marvelled. And that was the first day when he wholly knew and believed himself to be a true knight errant and not a fanciful one, seeing himself treated in the very way he had read that such knights were treated in the ages past.

Sancho, abandoning the grey, stitched himself to the duchess and went into the castle; and, his conscience biting him for leaving the donkey alone, he went up to a reverend duenna who had come out with others to receive the duchess, and said to her in a low voice:

"Señora González, or whatever your worship's name may be..."

"I am called Doña Rodríguez de Grijalba," answered the duenna. "What is it you want, brother?"

To which Sancho answered:

"I should like your worship to do me the kindness of going out to the castle gate, where you will find a grey donkey of mine. Let your worship be so good as to order him to be put — or to put him — in the stable, because the poor little creature is a little timid, and will not be able to bear being alone on any account."

"If the master is as judicious as the man," answered the duenna, "we are in a fine way! Be off with you, brother, and much bad luck to you and to whoever brought you here, and see to your own donkey; for we duennas of this house are not accustomed to business of that kind."

"Well, truly," answered Sancho, "I have heard my master say — and he is a diviner of the histories — telling that one about Lancelot,

	when he came from Britain,
	for ladies waited on him,
	and duennas on his horse;

"and as far as my donkey in particular goes, I would not swap him for Sir Lancelot's nag."

"Brother, if you are a jester," replied the duenna, "keep your drolleries for where they will look like drolleries and be paid for; for from me you will get nothing but a fig."

"Well and good," answered Sancho, "and it will be a good ripe one, since your worship will not lose the trick of her years by a single point!"

"Son of a whore," said the duenna, all fired up with choler by now, "whether I am old or not I shall account for to God and not to you, you rascal stuffed with garlic."

And she said this in such a loud voice that the duchess heard it; and, turning and seeing the duenna so upset and her eyes so bloodshot, she asked her who she was quarrelling with.

"With this good man here," answered the duenna, "who has earnestly asked me to go and put a donkey of his that is at the castle gate into the stable, bringing it up as an example that they did so I do not know where — that some ladies waited on a certain Lancelot and some duennas on his nag — and, above all, by way of good manners, he has called me old."

"That I should take as an affront," answered the duchess, "beyond anything anybody could say to me."

And, speaking to Sancho, she said:

"Note, Sancho my friend, that Doña Rodríguez is very young, and that she wears that headdress more for authority and for custom than for her years."

"May the years I have left to live be bad ones," answered Sancho, "if I said it for that. I only said it because I have such affection for my donkey that it seemed to me I could not commend him to a more charitable person than the lady Doña Rodríguez."

Don Quixote, who was hearing it all, said to him:

"Are these conversations for this place, Sancho?"

"Sir," answered Sancho, "every man must talk about his own business wherever he may be. Here I remembered the grey, and here I spoke of him; and if I had remembered him in the stable, there I should have spoken of him."

To which the duke said:

"Sancho is quite right, and there is nothing to blame him for. The grey shall be given all he could ask for, and let Sancho not worry, for he shall be treated like Sancho's own person."

With these speeches, agreeable to everybody but Don Quixote, they came up to the top of the house and brought Don Quixote into a hall hung with the richest cloths of gold and brocade. Six maidens unarmed him and served him as pages, all of them coached and instructed by the duke and duchess about what they had to do and how they had to treat Don Quixote, so that he might imagine and see that they were treating him as a knight errant.

Don Quixote, once unarmed, was left in his narrow wide breeches and his chamois doublet — dry, tall, stretched out, with his jaws kissing each other on the inside; a figure such that, if the maidens who were serving him had not taken care to hide their laughter, which was one of the strict orders their master and mistress had given them, they would have burst laughing.

They asked him to let himself be undressed for a shirt, but he would never consent, saying that decency looked as well in knights errant as valour. Still, he said they should give the shirt to Sancho; and, shutting himself up with him in a chamber where there was a rich bed, he undressed and put on the shirt. And, finding himself alone with Sancho, he said to him:

"Tell me, you modern clown and ancient blockhead: does it seem to you a good thing to dishonour and affront a duenna as venerable and as worthy of respect as that one? Were those times to be remembering the grey, or are these nobles the sort to let the beasts go badly when they treat their owners so handsomely? For God's sake, Sancho, restrain yourself, and do not show the coarse thread in such a way that they tumble to it that you are woven of villainous and common cloth.

"Look, you sinner, that a lord is held in higher esteem the more honourable and well-born servants he has; and that one of the greatest advantages princes have over other men is that they are served by servants as good as themselves. Do you not see, distressed man that you are and unlucky man that I am, that if they see you are a coarse peasant or a droll idiot, they will think that I am some charlatan or some sham knight? No, no, Sancho my friend, run, run from these dangers; for the man who trips into being a talker and a wit falls at the first kick and comes down a wretched buffoon.

"Bridle your tongue, consider and chew over your words before they come out of your mouth, and note that we have arrived at a place where, with God's favour and the valour of my arm, we must come out bettered by a third and a fifth in fame and in fortune."

Sancho promised him very earnestly that he would sew up his mouth, or bite his tongue, before speaking a word that was not very much to the point and well considered, as his master ordered him; and that he should not worry about it, for it would never be through him that anybody found out who they were.

Don Quixote dressed, put on his baldric with his sword, threw the scarlet cloak over his shoulders, put on a cap of green satin the maidens gave him, and with this adornment went out into the great hall, where he found the maidens drawn up in a line, as many on one side as on the other, and all of them with the wherewithal to give him water for his hands, which they did with a great many bows and ceremonies.

Then came twelve pages with the steward to take him in to dinner, for the duke and duchess were already waiting for him. They took him into their midst and, full of pomp and majesty, led him to another hall, where a rich table was laid with only four covers. The duchess and the duke came out to the door of the hall to receive him, and with them a grave churchman, one of those who govern the houses of princes; one of those who, not being born princes, never manage to teach those who are how they ought to be so; one of those who want the greatness of the great to be measured by the narrowness of their own minds; one of those who, meaning to teach those they govern to be moderate, make them mean. Of such as these, I say, must have been the grave churchman who came out with the duke and duchess to receive Don Quixote.

A thousand courteous civilities were exchanged, and, finally, taking Don Quixote into their midst, they went and sat down at the table.

The duke invited Don Quixote to take the head of the table; and although he refused it, the duke's importunities were so many that he had to take it. The churchman sat opposite him, and the duke and the duchess on the two sides.

Sancho was present at all of it, gaping and astonished at seeing the honour those princes were paying his master; and, seeing the many ceremonies and entreaties that passed between the duke and Don Quixote to make him sit at the head of the table, he said:

"If your worships give me leave, I shall tell you a story that happened in my village about this business of seats."

Hardly had Sancho said this when Don Quixote trembled, believing beyond any doubt that he was going to say some foolish thing. Sancho looked at him and understood him, and said:

"Do not be afraid, my dear sir, that I shall let myself go, or that I shall say anything that does not come very much to the point; for I have not forgotten the advice your worship gave me a little while ago about talking much or little, or well or badly."

"I do not remember any of it, Sancho," answered Don Quixote. "Say what you like, so long as you say it quickly."

"Well, what I want to say," said Sancho, "is so true that my master Don Quixote here present will not let me lie."

"For my part," replied Don Quixote, "lie as much as you like, Sancho, for I shall not stop you; but look to what you are going to say."

"I have looked and looked at it again so much that the man who rings the alarm is safe enough, as will be seen by the deed."

"It would be as well," said Don Quixote, "if your greatnesses ordered this fool thrown out of here, for he will say a thousand pieces of nonsense."

"By the duke's life," said the duchess, "Sancho shall not leave my side a moment. I am very fond of him, because I know he is very judicious."

"Judicious days may your holiness live," said Sancho, "for the good opinion you have of me, even if there is nothing of it in me. And the story I want to tell is this. A gentleman of my village, very rich and of good family — because he came of the Álamos of Medina del Campo, and married Doña Mencía de Quiñones, who was the daughter of Don Alonso de Marañón, a knight of the Order of Santiago, who was drowned at the Herradura, over whom there was that quarrel in our village years ago in which, as I understand it, my master Don Quixote took a part, and out of which Tomasillo the Rascal, the son of Balbastro the blacksmith, came out wounded... Is not all this true, sir our master? Say so, on your life, so that these gentlefolk may not take me for some lying chatterer."

"So far," said the churchman, "I take you more for a chatterer than a liar; but from now on I do not know what I shall take you for."

"You give so many witnesses, Sancho, and so many particulars, that I cannot help saying that you must be telling the truth. Get on, and shorten the story, for you are on the road not to finish in two days."

"He shall not shorten it at all," said the duchess, "if he means to please me; on the contrary, he shall tell it in the way he knows how, even if he does not finish it in six days — and if they were so many, they would be for me the best days I ever spent in my life."

"I say, then, my dear sirs," Sancho went on, "that this same gentleman, whom I know like my own hands, because it is not a crossbow-shot from my house to his, invited a farmer, poor but honourable —"

"Get on, brother," said the churchman at this point, "for you are on the road not to stop with your story before the next world."

"I shall stop short of halfway, if God is pleased," answered Sancho. "And so I say that, this same farmer coming to the house of the said gentleman who had invited him — God rest his soul, for he is dead now, and for a further sign they say he died the death of an angel, though I was not there myself, having gone off at that time to reap at Tembleque —"

"On your life, my son, come back quickly from Tembleque, and, without burying the gentleman, unless you want to hold any more funerals, finish your story."

"The fact is, then," replied Sancho, "that as the two of them were about to sit down at table — and I seem to see them now more than ever —"

The duke and duchess were taking great pleasure in the displeasure the good churchman was showing at the delays and pauses with which Sancho was telling his story, and Don Quixote was eating himself up with choler and rage.

"I say, then," said Sancho, "that, the two of them being, as I have said, about to sit down at table, the farmer kept insisting that the gentleman should take the head of the table, and the gentleman kept insisting too that the farmer should take it, because in his house what he ordered was to be done. But the farmer, who prided himself on being courteous and well brought up, would never do it, until the gentleman, vexed, put both hands on his shoulders and made him sit down by force, saying to him: 'Sit down, you blockhead, for wherever I sit will be the head of the table for you.' And that is the story, and truly I believe it has not been brought in here beside the point."

Don Quixote turned a thousand colours, which marbled his brown skin and showed through it. The duke and duchess hid their laughter, so that Don Quixote should not be utterly put out of countenance, having understood Sancho's malice; and, to change the conversation and stop Sancho going on with other absurdities, the duchess asked Don Quixote what news he had of the lady Dulcinea, and whether he had sent her any presents of giants or villains in the last few days, since he could not have failed to conquer a great many. To which Don Quixote answered:

"My lady, my misfortunes, though they had a beginning, will never have an end. Giants I have conquered, and poltroons and villains I have sent her; but where were they to find her, if she is enchanted and turned into the ugliest peasant girl that can be imagined?"

"I do not know," said Sancho Panza. "To me she seems the most beautiful creature in the world; at least in nimbleness and in jumping I know well enough that she would not give a tumbler any odds. Upon my word, my lady duchess, she leaps from the ground onto a she-ass as if she were a cat."

"Have you seen her enchanted, Sancho?" asked the duke.

"Have I seen her!" answered Sancho. "Why, who the devil but me was the first to hit on the business of the enchantment? She is about as enchanted as my father is!"

The churchman, who heard talk of giants, poltroons and enchantments, tumbled to it that this must be Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose history the duke read regularly, and which he had rebuked him for many times, telling him that it was an absurdity to read such absurdities. And, making certain that what he suspected was true, with great choler he said to the duke:

"Your Excellency, my lord, will have to give an account to Our Lord of what this good man does. This Don Quixote, or Don Fool, or whatever he is called, I imagine cannot be as much of an idiot as Your Excellency wants him to be, when you put chances into his hand so that he may carry his nonsense and emptiness further."

And, turning the conversation to Don Quixote, he said to him:

"And you, soul of a pitcher, who has jammed it into your brain that you are a knight errant and that you conquer giants and take villains prisoner? Be off with you, and much good may it do you: go back home, and bring up your children if you have any, and see to your property, and leave off wandering about the world gaping at the wind and giving everybody who knows you and does not know you something to laugh at. Where in the world have you found that there ever were, or are now, knights errant? Where are there giants in Spain, or villains in La Mancha, or enchanted Dulcineas, or all the herd of simplicities that are told about you?"

Don Quixote listened attentively to the arguments of that venerable man; and, seeing that he had fallen silent, with no respect for the duke and duchess, with an angry expression and a face in an uproar, he got to his feet and said...

But this answer deserves a chapter to itself.
