Chapter 32: Of the Answer Don Quixote Gave His Reprover, with Other Grave and Amusing Events

Don Quixote, then, being on his feet and trembling from head to foot like a man dosed with quicksilver, said in a hurried and troubled voice:

"The place where I am, and the presence I find myself in, and the respect I have always had and still have for the calling your worship professes, hold and tie the hands of my just anger. And so, both for what I have said and because everybody knows that the weapons of gowned men are the same as women's, which are the tongue, I shall enter with mine into an equal battle with your worship — from whom good advice was rather to be expected than shameful abuse.

"Holy and well-meaning reproofs call for other circumstances and require other conditions. At the very least, having reproved me in public and so harshly has gone past all the limits of good reproof, since the first sort settle better on gentleness than on harshness; and it is not right, without having any knowledge of the sin one is reproving, to call the sinner an idiot and a fool without any more ado.

"If not, tell me, your worship: for which of the idiocies you have seen in me do you condemn and abuse me, and order me to go home and see to the government of my house and my wife and my children, without knowing whether I have any? Is there nothing more to it than to walk helter-skelter into other people's houses and govern their owners — and, some of you having been brought up in the narrowness of some boarding school, without having seen more of the world than can be contained in twenty or thirty leagues of territory, to burst in and lay down laws for chivalry and pass judgement on knights errant?

"Is it by any chance a vain undertaking, or time badly spent, that is spent wandering about the world, not looking for its comforts but for the rough places by which the good climb to the seat of immortality? If knights held me for a fool, or the magnificent, or the generous, or the highly born, I should count it an irreparable affront; but that students who never entered or set foot on the paths of chivalry should hold me for a simpleton, I do not care a farthing. A knight I am and a knight I shall die, if it please the Almighty.

"Some go by the broad field of proud ambition; others by that of servile and base flattery; others by that of deceitful hypocrisy; and some by that of true religion. But I, inclined by my star, go by the narrow path of knight-errantry, for the exercise of which I despise property but not honour. I have made satisfaction for wrongs, righted injustices, punished insolences, conquered giants and trampled monsters. I am in love, only because it is necessary that knights errant should be; and, being so, I am not one of the vicious lovers but of the continent Platonic ones. My intentions I always direct to good ends, which are to do good to everybody and harm to nobody. Whether the man who understands this, who does this, who deals in this deserves to be called a dolt, let your greatnesses say — excellent duke and duchess."

"Well said, by God!" said Sancho. "Do not say another word in your own defence, my lord and master, because there is nothing more to say, or to think, or to keep on with in the world. And besides, when this gentleman denies, as he has denied, that there have been any knights errant in the world or that there are any now, what wonder is it that he knows nothing of the things he has been talking about?"

"By any chance," said the churchman, "are you, brother, that Sancho Panza they speak of, to whom your master has promised an isle?"

"I am," answered Sancho, "and I am one who deserves it as well as anybody else. I am one of those who say 'keep company with the good and you will be one of them', and I am one of those 'not who you are born with, but who you graze with', and one of those 'he who leans against a good tree is covered by a good shade'. I have leaned against a good master, and I have been many months in his company, and I mean to be another like him, God willing; and long life to him and long life to me — for he will not run short of empires to command, nor I of isles to govern."

"No, certainly not, Sancho my friend," said the duke at this point. "For I, in Señor Don Quixote's name, grant you the government of one I have going spare, and of no small quality."

"Down on your knees, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and kiss His Excellency's feet for the favour he has done you."

Sancho did so; which the churchman seeing, he got up from the table extremely vexed, saying:

"By the habit I wear, I am half inclined to say that Your Excellency is as much of a simpleton as these sinners are. Look whether they are not bound to be mad, when the sane canonise their madnesses! Your Excellency may stay with them; for as long as they are in the house, I shall be in mine, and shall excuse myself from reproving what I cannot remedy."

And, without saying any more or eating any more, he went off, without the duke and duchess's entreaties being able to stop him — although the duke did not say much to him, prevented by the laughter his impertinent choler had caused him. He finished laughing and said to Don Quixote:

"Your worship, Sir Knight of the Lions, has answered so loftily for yourself that there is nothing left for you to make good over this business, which, though it looks like a wrong, is no wrong at all; because, just as women cannot inflict a wrong, neither can churchmen, as your worship knows better than I."

"That is so," answered Don Quixote, "and the reason is that the man who cannot be wronged cannot wrong anybody. Women, children and churchmen, since they cannot defend themselves, cannot be affronted even though they are offended; because between a wrong and an affront there is this difference, as Your Excellency knows better: the affront comes from a party who can inflict it, and does inflict it, and stands by it; the wrong can come from any quarter without affronting.

"Take an example. A man is in the street, off his guard; ten come up with armed hands and, beating him with sticks, he lays hand to his sword and does his duty, but the multitude of his opponents stands against him and does not let him carry out his intention, which is to avenge himself. This man is left wronged but not affronted. And another example will confirm the same thing. A man is standing with his back turned; another comes up and beats him with a stick, and, having beaten him, runs off and does not wait, and the first follows and does not catch him. The man who took the blows received a wrong but not an affront, because the affront must be stood by. If the man who gave him the blows, though he gave them by a treacherous stroke, had laid hand to his sword and stood his ground, facing his enemy, then the beaten man would be left wronged and affronted at the same time: wronged, because he was struck by treachery; affronted, because the man who struck him stood by what he had done, without turning his back and standing his ground.

"And so, according to the laws of that accursed duelling, I may be wronged but not affronted; because children have no feeling in the matter, nor women, and they cannot run away, and they have no call to stand their ground — and the same holds of those set apart in holy religion, because these three kinds of people lack offensive and defensive weapons; and so, although they are naturally obliged to defend themselves, they are not obliged to offend anybody. And although a little while ago I said I might be wronged, I now say that I may not, on any account; because the man who cannot receive an affront can still less give one.

"For which reasons I ought not to feel, and do not feel, the things that good man has said to me. I only wish he had waited a little, so that I could have given him to understand the error he is in, in thinking and saying that there have never been and are not now any knights errant in the world; for if Amadís had heard such a thing, or one of the infinite number of his line, I know it would not have gone well with his worship."

"That I would swear to," said Sancho: "they would have given him such a slash as would have split him from top to bottom like a pomegranate, or like a very ripe melon. They were fine ones for putting up with ticklings of that sort! Upon my blessed self, I hold it for certain that if Reinaldos de Montalbán had heard those arguments from the little man, he would have given him such a smack across the mouth that he would not have spoken for three years. No, let him just take them on and see how he got out of their hands!"

The duchess was dying of laughter at hearing Sancho talk, and in her opinion she held him for more amusing and more mad than his master; and there were many in that time who were of this same opinion.

Finally Don Quixote quieted down, and the dinner came to an end; and, as the cloth was taken away, four maidens came in, one with a silver basin, another with a silver ewer, another with two of the whitest and richest towels over her shoulder, and the fourth with her arms bared to the elbow and in her white hands — which were undoubtedly white — a round ball of Naples soap.

The one with the basin came up, and with a fine grace and ease fitted the basin under Don Quixote's beard; and he, without saying a word, astonished at such a ceremony, believing that it must be the custom of that country to wash the beard instead of the hands, stretched his out as far as he could. And at the same moment the ewer began to rain, and the maiden with the soap worked his beard over in great haste, raising flakes of snow — for the soapsuds were no less white — not only on the beard but all over the face and the eyes of the obedient knight, so much so that they made him shut them by force.

The duke and the duchess, who knew nothing about any of this, were waiting to see where such an extraordinary washing was going to end. The barber maiden, when she had him a hand's breadth deep in lather, pretended that the water had run out and ordered the one with the ewer to go and fetch some, saying that Señor Don Quixote would wait. She did so, and Don Quixote was left the strangest figure, and the most calculated to raise laughter, that could be imagined.

Everybody present was looking at him, and there were a good many of them; and, seeing him with half a yard of neck, more than moderately brown, his eyes shut and his beard full of soap, it was a great marvel and a great piece of discretion that they could hide their laughter. The maidens who were playing the trick kept their eyes lowered, not daring to look at their master and mistress, in whose bodies choler and laughter were tumbling over each other, so that they did not know which to attend to: punishing the girls' boldness or rewarding them for the pleasure they were getting from seeing Don Quixote in that state.

Finally the maiden with the ewer came, and they finished washing Don Quixote; and then the one who had the towels wiped him and dried him very deliberately, and, all four making him a great and deep bow and curtsey together, they were about to go. But the duke, so that Don Quixote should not tumble to the joke, called the maiden with the basin, saying to her:

"Come and wash me, and mind that the water does not run out on you."

The girl, sharp and quick, came and set the basin on the duke as on Don Quixote, and, hurrying, they washed him and soaped him very well; and, leaving him dried and clean, they went off with curtseys. Afterwards it was learnt that the duke had sworn that if they had not washed him as they washed Don Quixote, he would have punished their impudence — which they had judiciously put right by soaping him too.

Sancho was watching the ceremonies of that washing attentively, and he said to himself:

"God bless me! Can it be the custom in this country to wash squires' beards as well as knights'? Because in God and in my soul I have great need of it, and even if they shaved mine off with a razor I should count it a further kindness."

"What are you saying to yourself, Sancho?" asked the duchess.

"I say, my lady," he answered, "that in the courts of other princes I have always heard it said that when the cloth is taken away they give water for the hands, but not lye for the beard; and that this is why it is good to live a long time, so as to see a great deal. Although they also say that the man who lives a long life has to go through a great deal of trouble — although going through a washing of this kind is more of a pleasure than a labour."

"Do not be uneasy, Sancho my friend," said the duchess, "for I shall have my maidens wash you, and even put you in the wash-tub if need be."

"With the beard I shall be content," answered Sancho, "for now at least; for as time goes on, God has said what will be."

"See, steward," said the duchess, "to what good Sancho asks, and carry out his wishes to the letter."

The steward answered that Señor Sancho should be served in everything, and with that he went off to his dinner and took Sancho with him, leaving the duke and duchess and Don Quixote at the table talking about many different things, but all of them touching on the exercise of arms and of knight-errantry.

The duchess begged Don Quixote to sketch out and describe for her — since he seemed to have a happy memory — the beauty and the features of the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso; for, from what fame proclaimed about her beauty, she took it for understood that she must be the loveliest creature on the globe, and even in all La Mancha. Don Quixote sighed at hearing what the duchess asked of him, and said:

"If I could take out my heart and set it before your greatness's eyes, here on this table and on a plate, it would save my tongue the labour of saying what can hardly be thought — because Your Excellency would see her in it, painted entire. But what is the use of my setting myself now to sketch and describe point by point and part by part the beauty of the peerless Dulcinea, when it is a load worthy of other shoulders than mine, an enterprise on which the brushes of Parrhasius, Timanthes and Apelles ought to be employed, and the chisels of Lysippus, to paint her and grave her on panels, on marble and on bronze, and Ciceronian and Demosthenic rhetoric to praise her?"

"What does Demosthenic mean, Señor Don Quixote?" asked the duchess. "For it is a word I have never heard in all the days of my life."

"Demosthenic rhetoric," answered Don Quixote, "is the same as saying the rhetoric of Demosthenes, as Ciceronian is that of Cicero — who were the two greatest rhetoricians in the world."

"That is so," said the duke, "and you have been caught out in asking such a question. But for all that, Señor Don Quixote would give us great pleasure if he would paint her for us; for it is a safe bet that even in a rough sketch and outline she would come out such that the most beautiful women would envy her."

"I would do it, certainly," answered Don Quixote, "if the misfortune that happened to her a little while ago had not rubbed her out of my mind — a misfortune such that I am more in a state to weep over it than to describe it. Because your greatnesses must know that, going a few days ago to kiss her hands and to receive her blessing, her good pleasure and her leave for this third sally, I found a different woman from the one I was looking for. I found her enchanted and turned from a princess into a peasant, from beautiful into ugly, from an angel into a devil, from fragrant into stinking, from well-spoken into rustic, from composed into a leaper, from light into darkness and, finally, from Dulcinea of El Toboso into a country wench from Sayago."

"God bless me!" said the duke at this instant, letting out a great shout. "Who has been the man who has done the world so much harm? Who has taken from it the beauty that gladdened it, the grace that entertained it and the decency that did it credit?"

"Who?" answered Don Quixote. "Who can it be but some malignant enchanter, of the many envious ones who persecute me? That accursed race, born into the world to darken and annihilate the exploits of the good and to give light and raise up the doings of the wicked. Enchanters have persecuted me, enchanters persecute me and enchanters will persecute me until they have thrown me and my high chivalries into the deep abyss of oblivion; and they hurt me and wound me in the place where they see I feel it most, because to take away a knight errant's lady is to take away the eyes he sees with, and the sun that gives him light, and the food that keeps him alive. Many other times I have said it, and now I say it again: that a knight errant without a lady is like a tree without leaves, a building without foundations and a shadow without a body to cast it."

"There is no more to be said," said the duchess. "But if, for all that, we are to give credit to the history of Señor Don Quixote that has come out into the light of the world a few days since, with the general applause of the people, it is gathered from it — if I remember rightly — that your worship has never seen the lady Dulcinea, and that this lady does not exist in the world but is a fanciful lady whom your worship engendered and gave birth to in your understanding, and painted with all the graces and perfections you pleased."

"There is a great deal to say about that," answered Don Quixote. "God knows whether there is a Dulcinea in the world or not, or whether she is fanciful or not fanciful; and these are not the kind of things whose investigation is to be carried to the end. I neither engendered nor gave birth to my lady, although I contemplate her as a lady ought to be who contains in herself the qualities that can make her famous in all the parts of the world: beautiful without a blemish, grave without pride, loving with decency, grateful because courteous, courteous because well brought up, and, finally, high by lineage — since on good blood beauty shines out and shows itself with more degrees of perfection than in beautiful women humbly born."

"That is so," said the duke; "but Señor Don Quixote must give me leave to say what the history of his exploits that I have read forces me to say — from which it is inferred that, granting there is a Dulcinea, in El Toboso or out of it, and that she is beautiful in the highest degree in which your worship paints her for us, in the matter of the height of her lineage she does not run level with the Orianas, the Alastrajareas, the Madásimas or others of that stamp, of whom the histories are full that your worship knows so well."

"To that I can say," answered Don Quixote, "that Dulcinea is the daughter of her own works, and that virtues improve the blood, and that a humble man who is virtuous is to be esteemed and held higher than a vicious man who has been raised up. And what is more, Dulcinea has a strip of quality about her that can carry her to being a queen with a crown and a sceptre; for the merit of a beautiful and virtuous woman stretches to working greater miracles, and, though not formally, still virtually she has greater fortunes shut up inside her."

"I say, Señor Don Quixote," said the duchess, "that in everything your worship says you go with a leaden foot and, as the saying is, with the sounding line in your hand; and that from now on I shall believe, and make everybody in my house believe — and even the duke my lord, if it should be necessary — that there is a Dulcinea in El Toboso, and that she is alive today, and beautiful, and nobly born, and worthy that such a knight as Señor Don Quixote should serve her, which is the most I can say or know how to say.

"But I cannot help forming one scruple, and having a certain I-do-not-know-what of a grudge against Sancho Panza. The scruple is that the history I mentioned says that this Sancho Panza found this lady Dulcinea, when he carried her a letter on your worship's behalf, winnowing a sack of wheat — and, for a further sign, it says it was red wheat: a thing that makes me doubt the height of her lineage."

To which Don Quixote answered:

"My lady, your greatness must know that all or most of the things that happen to me go outside the ordinary bounds of the things that happen to other knights errant, whether they are directed by the inscrutable will of the fates or whether they come directed by the malice of some envious enchanter. And since it is by now an established thing that all or most famous knights errant have some grace or other — one the grace of not being able to be enchanted, another that of having flesh so impenetrable that he cannot be wounded, as the famous Roland was, one of the Twelve Peers of France, of whom it is told that he could not be wounded except through the sole of his left foot, and that this had to be with the point of a stout pin and with no other kind of weapon at all; so that when Bernardo del Carpio killed him at Roncesvalles, seeing that he could not gash him with iron, he lifted him off the ground in his arms and strangled him, remembering then the death Hercules gave to Antaeus, that fierce giant who they said was the son of Earth.

"I want to infer from all this that I might have some grace of the kind — not that of not being able to be wounded, because experience has shown me many times that I am of soft flesh and not at all impenetrable, nor that of not being able to be enchanted, since I have already seen myself shut in a cage, into which all the world would not have had the power to shut me if it had not been by the force of enchantments. But since I got free of that one, I want to believe that there will be no other that can hurt me. And so, these enchanters, seeing that they cannot use their evil arts on my person, take their revenge on the things I love most, and want to take away my life by ill-treating Dulcinea's, by whom I live.

"And so I believe that when my squire carried her my embassy, they turned her into a country wench busy at so low an occupation as winnowing wheat. But I have already said that that wheat was neither red nor wheat, but grains of oriental pearl. And as proof of this truth I want to tell your magnitudes how, coming through El Toboso a little while ago, I could never find Dulcinea's palaces; and how the next day, Sancho my squire having seen her in her own shape, which is the loveliest on the globe, she seemed to me a coarse, ugly country girl, and not at all well-spoken, when she is the very discretion of the world. And since I am not enchanted, and cannot be, by any sound reasoning, it is she who is the enchanted one, the injured one, the changed and swapped and turned-about one; and in her my enemies have taken their revenge on me, and for her I shall live in perpetual tears until I see her in her first state.

"All this I have said so that nobody should stick at what Sancho said about Dulcinea's sifting or winnowing; for since they changed her for me, it is no wonder that they swapped her for him. Dulcinea is of good family and well born, and of the gentle lineages there are in El Toboso — which are many, ancient and very good — it is a safe bet that no small part belongs to the peerless Dulcinea, through whom her place will be famous and named in the ages to come, as Troy has been through Helen and Spain through la Cava, though with a better title and a better fame.

"On the other hand, I want your ladyships to understand that Sancho Panza is one of the most amusing squires who ever served a knight errant. Sometimes he has simplicities so sharp that the wondering whether he is simple or sharp gives no small pleasure. He has malices that condemn him for a rogue, and carelessnesses that confirm him for a dolt. He doubts everything and believes everything; when I think he is about to throw himself over the cliff of foolishness, he comes out with judgements that lift him to the sky. In short, I would not swap him for any other squire, even if they gave me a city into the bargain; and so I am in doubt whether it will be a good thing to send him to the government your greatness has favoured him with — although I see in him a certain aptitude for this business of governing, so that with his understanding trimmed up a little he would carry off any government as the king carries off his taxes.

"And what is more, we already know by many experiences that a man needs neither much ability nor much learning to be a governor, since there are a hundred about who can hardly read and who govern like gerfalcons. The touchstone is that they should have good intentions and want to get everything right; for they will never lack somebody to advise them and set them on the road in what they have to do — like those governors who are knights and not lawyers, and give judgement with an assessor. I would advise him to take no bribe and lose no right, and other little things I still have in my stomach, which will come out in their own time for Sancho's use and the profit of the isle he governs."

The duke, the duchess and Don Quixote had reached this point in their conversation when they heard a great many voices and a great noise of people in the palace; and all at once Sancho came into the hall in a great fright, with a lye-cloth for a bib, and behind him a great many lads — or, better said, kitchen scullions and other small fry — and one came with a little trough of water which by its colour and its lack of cleanness showed itself to be washing-up water. The one with the trough was following him and chasing him, and was doing his best to get it into place and fit it under his beard, while another scullion made as if he wanted to wash it.

"What is this, brothers?" asked the duchess. "What is this? What do you want with this good man? How is it you do not consider that he is a governor elect?"

To which the scullion barber answered:

"This gentleman will not let himself be washed, as the custom is, and as the duke my lord was washed and his master the gentleman."

"I will indeed," answered Sancho with a great deal of choler, "but I should like it to be with cleaner towels, with clearer lye and with hands not so dirty. There is not so much difference between me and my master that they should wash him with angels' water and me with devils' lye. The customs of countries and of princes' palaces are good just so far as they do not cause distress; but the custom of washing that is used here is worse than a flogging by penitents. I am clean about the beard and have no need of refreshments of that kind; and whoever comes to wash me, or to touch a hair of my head — I mean of my beard, speaking with all due respect — I shall give him such a punch that I shall leave my fist set in his skull; for these ceremonies and soapings look more like tricks than the entertaining of guests."

The duchess was dying of laughter, seeing Sancho's choler and hearing his arguments; but it did not give Don Quixote much pleasure to see him so badly got up with the marbled towel and so surrounded by so many kitchen entertainers. And so, making the duke and duchess a deep bow, as though asking their leave to speak, in a composed voice he said to the rabble:

"Here, gentlemen knights! Let your worships leave the young man alone and go back the way you came, or by some other way if you feel like it; for my squire is as clean as anybody else, and those little troughs are cramping little pots for him. Take my advice and leave him, because neither he nor I know anything about the business of jokes."

Sancho took the words out of his mouth and went on, saying:

"No, let them just come and make fun of the stray — I shall put up with it about as well as it is now night! Bring a comb here, or whatever they like, and curry-comb this beard of mine; and if they get anything out of it that offends cleanliness, let them shear me in crosses."

At this point, without leaving off laughing, the duchess said:

"Sancho Panza is right in everything he has said, and he will be right in everything he says. He is clean, and, as he says, he has no need to wash; and if our custom does not please him, his soul is in his own palm. And besides, you ministers of cleanliness have been excessively slack and careless — and I do not know whether to say impudent — in bringing to such a personage and to such a beard, instead of basins and ewers of pure gold and towels of German linen, little troughs and wooden bowls and sideboard dishcloths. But in short, you are bad men and badly born, and you cannot help, villains that you are, showing the grudge you bear the squires of knights errant."

The rascally ministers, and even the steward who had come with them, believed that the duchess was speaking in earnest; and so they took the lye-cloth off Sancho's chest, and all of them, confused and almost put out of countenance, went off and left him. And he, seeing himself out of what to his mind was an extreme danger, went and knelt down before the duchess and said:

"From great ladies, great favours are to be expected; this one that your worship has done me today cannot be paid for with less than wishing to see myself dubbed a knight errant, so as to spend all the days of my life in serving so lofty a lady. A labourer I am, Sancho Panza is my name, married I am, children I have and as a squire I serve. If with any of these things I can serve your greatness, I shall be quicker to obey than your ladyship to command."

"It is plain enough, Sancho," answered the duchess, "that you have learnt to be courteous in the school of courtesy itself; it is plain enough, I mean, that you have been brought up at the breast of Señor Don Quixote, who must be the cream of civilities and the flower of ceremonies — or cirrymonies, as you say. Blessings on such a master and such a servant: the one for the pole star of knight-errantry and the other for the star of squirely faithfulness. Get up, Sancho my friend, for I shall repay your courtesies by making the duke my lord fulfil, as soon as he can, the promised favour of the government."

With this the conversation stopped, and Don Quixote went off to take his siesta; and the duchess asked Sancho that if he was not very anxious to sleep, he should come and spend the afternoon with her and her maidens in a very cool room. Sancho answered that although it was true that he was in the habit of sleeping four or five hours during the summer siestas, still, to serve her goodness, he would try with all his strength not to sleep at all that day, and would come obediently at her order; and off he went. The duke gave fresh orders that Don Quixote should be treated as a knight errant, without departing a point from the manner in which they tell that the knights of old were treated.
