Chapter 33: Of the Delightful Conversation the Duchess and Her Maidens Had with Sancho Panza, Worth Reading and Worth Noting

The history relates, then, that Sancho did not sleep that siesta, but, to keep his word, came as soon as he had eaten to see the duchess; who, with the pleasure she took in hearing him, made him sit down next to her on a low chair — although Sancho, out of pure good breeding, did not want to sit. But the duchess told him to sit as a governor and talk as a squire, since for both things together he deserved the very bench of the Cid Ruy Díaz the Champion.

Sancho shrugged his shoulders, obeyed and sat down; and all the duchess's maidens and duennas gathered round her, attentive and in the deepest silence to hear what he would say. But the duchess was the one who spoke first, saying:

"Now that we are alone and nobody is listening to us here, I should like the lord governor to resolve certain doubts I have, born of the history of the great Don Quixote that is already in print. One of these doubts is that, since good Sancho never saw Dulcinea — I mean the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso — and never took her Señor Don Quixote's letter, because it was left behind in the notebook in the Sierra Morena, how did he dare to invent the answer, and all that about finding her winnowing wheat, when the whole thing was a trick and a lie, and so much to the damage of the good name of the peerless Dulcinea, and all of it so ill-suited to the quality and faithfulness of good squires?"

At these words, without answering any of them, Sancho got up out of his chair and, with quiet steps, his body bent over and his finger on his lips, went all round the room lifting the hangings; and then, this done, he sat down again and said:

"Now, my lady, that I have seen that nobody is listening to us on the sly, apart from the people present, I shall answer without fear or start what I have been asked and everything else I may be asked. And the first thing I say is that I hold my master Don Quixote for a downright madman — although sometimes he says things that, to my mind and to the minds of all who hear him, are so judicious and so well set on the right track that Satan himself could not say them better. But for all that, truly and without any scruple, it has settled in me that he is an idiot. And since I have this in my noddle, I make bold to make him believe things with neither head nor feet to them, like that business of the answer to the letter, and the business of six or eight days ago, which is not in the history yet: that is to say, the enchantment of my lady Doña Dulcinea, whom I have given him to understand is enchanted, when it is no more true than the hills of Úbeda."

The duchess begged him to tell her about that enchantment or trick, and Sancho told it to her all just as it had happened, at which the listeners took no small pleasure. And, going on with her talk, the duchess said:

"From what good Sancho has told me, a scruple goes leaping about in my soul, and a certain whisper comes to my ears saying: 'Since Don Quixote of La Mancha is mad, wanting and an idiot, and Sancho Panza his squire knows it, and for all that serves him and follows him and goes along relying on his empty promises, then without any doubt he must be madder and more foolish than his master. And this being so, as it is, it will be counted against you, my lady duchess, if you give this Sancho Panza an isle to govern; for the man who does not know how to govern himself, how will he know how to govern others?'"

"By God, my lady," said Sancho, "that scruple comes straight to the birth. But tell it, your worship, to speak plainly, or however it likes, for I know it is telling the truth: if I were judicious, I should have left my master days ago. But this was my luck and this my ill fortune; I can do no more, I have to follow him. We are from the same place, I have eaten his bread, I am fond of him, he is grateful, he gave me his ass-colts and, above all, I am faithful; and so it is impossible for anything to part us except the spade and the mattock.

"And if your high-flyingness does not want the promised government given to me, God made me out of less, and it might be that not giving it me would redound to the good of my conscience; for though I am a fool, I understand that proverb 'the ant grew wings to her own harm'. And it might even be that Sancho the squire would get to heaven quicker than Sancho the governor. They bake as good bread here as in France; and at night all cats are grey; and wretched enough is the man who has not breakfasted by two in the afternoon; and there is no stomach a hand's breadth bigger than another, and it can be filled, as they say, with straw and hay; and the little birds of the field have God for their provider and steward; and four yards of Cuenca cloth keep you warmer than another four of fine Segovia stuff; and when we leave this world and go down into the earth, the prince travels by as narrow a path as the day-labourer, and the Pope's body takes up no more feet of ground than the sexton's, even if the one is taller than the other; because when we go into the hole we all fit ourselves in and shrink, or they make us fit and shrink, however little we like it — and good night to us.

"And I say again that if your ladyship will not give me the isle because I am a fool, I shall know how to not care a bit about it because I am judicious. And I have heard it said that behind the cross stands the devil, and that all is not gold that glitters, and that from among the oxen and the ploughs and the yokes they took the ploughman Wamba to be king of Spain, and from among the brocades and the pastimes and the riches they took Rodrigo to be eaten by snakes — if the verses of the old ballads are not lying."

"And of course they are not lying!" said Doña Rodríguez the duenna at this point, who was one of the listeners. "For there is a ballad that says they put King Rodrigo alive, alive, into a tomb full of toads, snakes and lizards, and that two days later the king said from inside the tomb, in a pained and low voice:

	Now they are eating me, now they are eating me
	there where I had most sinned;

"and, going by that, this gentleman is quite right to say that he would rather be a ploughman than a king, if he is to be eaten by vermin."

The duchess could not hold her laughter at hearing her duenna's simplicity, nor did she stop marvelling at hearing Sancho's arguments and proverbs, and she said to him:

"Good Sancho knows already that whatever a knight once promises he tries to carry out, even if it costs him his life. The duke, my lord and husband, although he is not one of the errant sort, is a knight none the less for that; and so he will keep his word about the promised isle, in spite of the envy and the malice of the world. Let Sancho be of good heart, for when he least expects it he will find himself sitting in the chair of his isle and of his estate, and taking his government in hand, and he shall throw it over for another of three-pile brocade. What I charge him with is to look how he governs his vassals, noting that they are all loyal and well born."

"As for governing them well," answered Sancho, "there is no need to charge me with that, because I am charitable by nature and have compassion for the poor; and don't steal a loaf from the man who bakes and kneads; and by my blessed self they shall not load the dice on me. I am an old dog and understand every 'here, boy'; and I know how to wake myself up at the right times, and I do not let cobwebs get in front of my eyes, because I know where the shoe pinches me. I say it because the good will find a hand and a hold with me, and the bad neither foot nor entrance. And it seems to me that in this business of governments it is all a matter of beginning, and it might be that after a fortnight of being a governor I should be licking my fingers after the office and know more about it than about working in the fields, where I was brought up."

"You are right, Sancho," said the duchess, "for nobody is born taught, and bishops are made out of men and not out of stones. But, coming back to the talk we were having a little while ago about the enchantment of the lady Dulcinea, I hold it for a certain and more than established thing that the notion Sancho had of playing a trick on his master and giving him to understand that the country girl was Dulcinea — and that if his master did not recognise her it must be because she was enchanted — was all the invention of one of the enchanters who persecute Señor Don Quixote. Because really and truly I know from a good source that the country wench who leapt up onto the she-ass was and is Dulcinea of El Toboso, and that good Sancho, thinking he was the deceiver, is the deceived; and there is no more doubting this truth than there is about things we never saw.

"And let Señor Sancho Panza know that we have enchanters here too who are fond of us and tell us what goes on in the world, plainly and simply, without tangles and machinery. And let Sancho believe me that the leaping country wench was and is Dulcinea of El Toboso, who is as enchanted as the mother who bore her; and when we least expect it we shall see her in her own shape, and then Sancho will come out of the deception he is living in."

"All that may very well be," said Sancho Panza. "And now I am willing to believe what my master tells about what he saw in the cave of Montesinos, where he says he saw the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso in the same dress and habit as I said I had seen her in when I enchanted her purely to please myself. And it must all have been the other way round, as your worship says, my lady; because from my poor wits it neither can nor ought to be presumed that I could build so sharp a piece of humbug in an instant, nor do I believe my master is so mad that with so feeble and thin a persuasion as mine he would believe a thing so far outside all bounds.

"But, my lady, your goodness should not for this reason take me for ill-meaning, since a blockhead like me is not obliged to bore through the thoughts and malices of those wretched enchanters. I made that up to escape my master Don Quixote's scoldings, and not with any intention of offending him; and if it has come out backwards, God is in heaven and judges hearts."

"That is the truth," said the duchess; "but tell me now, Sancho, what is this you say about the cave of Montesinos? For I should like to know it."

Then Sancho Panza told her point by point what has been said about that adventure. Which the duchess hearing, she said:

"From this business it can be inferred that, since the great Don Quixote says he saw there the very country girl Sancho saw on the way out of El Toboso, it is undoubtedly Dulcinea, and the enchanters are going about here very sharp and excessively inquisitive."

"That is what I say," said Sancho Panza. "For if my lady Dulcinea of El Toboso is enchanted, so much the worse for her; I am not going to take on my master's enemies, who must be many and bad. The truth is that the woman I saw was a country girl, and I took her for a country girl and judged her for such a country girl; and if that was Dulcinea, it is not to be put down to my account, nor is it to run at my charge, or there will be a fight over it.

"No — but let them keep coming at me at every turn with a 'say-you and say-I', 'Sancho said it, Sancho did it, Sancho went off and Sancho came back', as though Sancho were some whoever-you-please and not the very Sancho Panza who goes about in books now all over the world, according to what Sansón Carrasco told me — and he is at least a person bachelored at Salamanca, and such people cannot lie except when they feel like it or when it suits them very well. So there is no call for anybody to take me on; and, since I have a good name, and, as I heard my master say, a good name is worth more than great riches, jam that government on me and you shall see wonders; for a man who has been a good squire will be a good governor."

"Everything good Sancho has said here," said the duchess, "is a set of Catonian judgements, or at least drawn from the very entrails of Micael Verino himself, florentibus occidit annis. In short, in short, to speak in his own manner: under a bad cloak there is often a good drinker."

"Truly, my lady," answered Sancho, "in my life I have never drunk out of malice; out of thirst it may well be, because I have nothing of the hypocrite about me. I drink when I feel like it, and when I do not feel like it and when they give it me, so as not to look either squeamish or badly brought up; for at a friend's toast, what heart could be so much of marble as not to pledge him back? But though I put them on, I do not dirty them; and what is more, the squires of knights errant almost always drink water, because they are always going about through woods, forests and meadows, mountains and crags, without finding a drop of mercy of wine even if they would give an eye for it."

"So I believe," answered the duchess. "And for now, let Sancho go and rest, and afterwards we shall talk at more length and give orders about his going quickly to have that government jammed on him, as he puts it."

Sancho kissed the duchess's hands again, and begged her to do him the favour of having good care taken of his grey, because he was the light of his eyes.

"What grey is this?" asked the duchess.

"My donkey," answered Sancho; "and so as not to name him by that name, I generally call him the grey. And I asked this lady duenna, when I came into this castle, to take care of him, and she flew up as if I had told her she was ugly or old — when it ought to be more proper and natural for duennas to look after donkeys than to lend authority to drawing rooms. God bless me, how badly a gentleman of my village got on with these ladies!"

"He must have been some peasant," said Doña Rodríguez the duenna, "for if he had been a gentleman and well born he would have set them above the horn of the moon."

"Well now," said the duchess, "let there be no more of it. Let Doña Rodríguez be quiet and let Señor Panza calm himself, and let the treatment of the grey be my charge; for since he is a jewel of Sancho's, I shall set him above the pupils of my eyes."

"It will be enough for him to be in the stable," answered Sancho; "for as to being above the pupils of your greatness's eyes, neither he nor I is worthy to be there for a single moment, and I should consent to it about as readily as to being stabbed. For although my master says that in courtesies it is better to lose by a card too many than by too few, in donkeyish ones — and eye-pupilish ones — you have to go with the dividers in your hand and by measured limits."

"Let Sancho take him to the government," said the duchess, "and there he can treat him as he likes, and even pension him off from work."

"Do not think your worship, my lady duchess, that you have said anything very much," said Sancho; "for I have seen more than two asses go off to governments, and my taking mine would be nothing new."

Sancho's arguments renewed the duchess's laughter and her contentment; and, sending him off to rest, she went to give the duke an account of what had passed between them, and between the two of them they laid out and arranged a trick to play on Don Quixote that should be a famous one and should fit the chivalric style — in which style they played him a great many, so apt and so judicious that they are the best adventures this great history contains.
