Chapter 34: Which Tells of the News That Came of How the Peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso Was to Be Disenchanted, Which Is One of the Most Famous Adventures in This Book

Great was the pleasure the duke and duchess took in Don Quixote's conversation and in Sancho Panza's; and, confirming themselves in their intention of playing them some tricks that should carry the glimmerings and appearance of adventures, they took as their starting point the adventure of the cave of Montesinos that Don Quixote had already told them, so as to play him one that should be famous. (But what most astonished the duchess was that Sancho's simplicity should be so great that he had come to believe it an infallible truth that Dulcinea of El Toboso was enchanted, when he himself had been the enchanter and the humbug of that business.)

And so, having given their servants orders about everything they had to do, six days later they took him out boar hunting, with as great an apparatus of huntsmen and beaters as a crowned king could have taken. They gave Don Quixote a hunting suit and Sancho another, green, of the finest cloth; but Don Quixote would not put his on, saying that the next day he had to go back to the hard exercise of arms and could not carry wardrobes and stores about with him. Sancho did take the one they gave him, with the intention of selling it at the first chance he could get.

The expected day having come, then, Don Quixote armed himself, Sancho dressed himself, and, on his grey, which he would not leave although they offered him a horse, he got in among the troop of huntsmen. The duchess came out splendidly turned out, and Don Quixote, out of pure courtesy and civility, took the rein of her palfrey, although the duke would not have consented to it. And finally they came to a wood that lay between two very high mountains, where, the stands, hides and paths being taken and the people distributed to different positions, the hunt began with a great uproar, shouting and hallooing, so that they could not hear one another, what with the barking of the dogs and the sound of the horns.

The duchess dismounted, and with a sharp boar spear in her hands took up a stand where she knew boars generally came. The duke dismounted too, and Don Quixote, and they placed themselves at her sides. Sancho placed himself behind all of them without getting off the grey, whom he would not have dared to abandon in case some mishap befell him.

And they had hardly set foot and drawn up in a line with a great many other servants of theirs when, harried by the dogs and followed by the hunters, they saw an enormous boar coming at them, gnashing its teeth and tusks and throwing foam out of its mouth. And, on seeing it, gripping his shield and laying his hand on his sword, Don Quixote went forward to receive it. The duke did the same with his boar spear; and the duchess would have gone ahead of them all if the duke had not stopped her.

Only Sancho, on seeing the valiant animal, abandoned the grey and ran for it as fast as he could, and, trying to climb up a tall oak, found it impossible. On the contrary, being halfway up and gripping a branch, struggling to get to the top, he was so short of luck and so unfortunate that the branch broke off; and, on his way to the ground, he was left hanging in the air, caught on a stump of the oak and unable to reach the ground.

And, seeing himself like that, and that the green coat was tearing, and thinking that if that fierce animal came up there it could reach him, he began to shout so much and to call for help so earnestly that everybody who heard him and could not see him believed he was between the teeth of some wild beast.

Finally the tusked boar was left run through with the blades of the many boar spears that were put in front of it; and Don Quixote, turning his head at Sancho's shouts — for by them he had recognised him by now — saw him hanging from the oak head downwards, with the grey next to him, for he had not abandoned him in his calamity. And Cide Hamete says that he seldom saw Sancho Panza without seeing the grey, or the grey without seeing Sancho: such was the friendship and good faith the two of them kept with each other.

Don Quixote came and unhooked Sancho; who, seeing himself free and on the ground, looked at the tear in his hunting coat and it grieved him to the soul, for he had thought he had an entailed estate in that suit. At this they laid the mighty boar across a pack mule and, covering it with sprigs of rosemary and branches of myrtle, carried it, as though in sign of victorious spoils, to some great field tents that were pitched in the middle of the wood, where they found the tables laid in order and the dinner ready — so sumptuous and grand that the greatness and magnificence of the man who gave it could be plainly seen in it. Sancho, showing the duchess the wounds in his torn suit, said:

"If this hunt had been for hares or little birds, my coat would have been safe from coming to this pass. I do not know what pleasure there is in waiting for an animal that, if it reaches you with one tusk, can take your life. I remember having heard an old ballad sung that says:

	May you be eaten by the bears,
	like Favila the renowned."

"That was a Gothic king," said Don Quixote, "who, going out to hunt boar, was eaten by a bear."

"That is what I say," answered Sancho: "that I would not have princes and kings put themselves into dangers of the kind for the sake of a pleasure that ought not to be one, since it consists in killing an animal that has committed no crime at all."

"On the contrary, you are mistaken, Sancho," answered the duke, "because the exercise of hunting big game is more suitable and necessary for kings and princes than any other. Hunting is an image of war: there are stratagems in it, tricks and ambushes for overcoming the enemy in safety; extreme colds and intolerable heats are borne in it; idleness and sleep are cut down, the strength is built up, the limbs of the man who practises it are made nimble; and, in short, it is an exercise that can be carried out without harm to anybody and with pleasure to many. And the best thing about it is that it is not for everybody, as the other kinds of hunting are — except hawking, which is likewise only for kings and great lords. So, Sancho, change your opinion; and when you are a governor, busy yourself with hunting and you will see how it repays you a hundredfold."

"Not that," answered Sancho. "The good governor, a broken leg and at home. It would be a fine thing if people with business came looking for him worn out and he were up in the hills enjoying himself! The government would go finely then! Upon my word, sir, hunting and pastimes are more for idlers than for governors. What I mean to entertain myself with is playing trumps for stakes at the holidays and skittles on Sundays and feast days; for those hunts, or hunt-pots either, do not go with my nature or agree with my conscience."

"Please God, Sancho, that it may be so, for from saying to doing is a long way."

"Let it be what it may," replied Sancho, "for a good payer does not mind pledges, and the man God helps is better off than the man who rises early, and guts carry feet and not feet guts. I mean that if God helps me, and I do what I ought with good intentions, I shall undoubtedly govern better than a gerfalcon. No — just put a finger in my mouth and see whether I bite or not!"

"God curse you and all his saints curse you, cursed Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and when will the day come — as I have said so many other times — when I shall see you speak one connected and orderly sentence without proverbs! Let your greatnesses leave this fool alone, my dear sirs, for he will grind your souls not merely between two but between two thousand proverbs, brought in as seasonably and as timely as God may give him health, or give it me if I should ever want to listen to them."

"Sancho Panza's proverbs," said the duchess, "although they are more than the Greek Commander's, are not for that reason less to be valued, because of the shortness of the judgements in them. For my own part I can say that they give me more pleasure than others, however much better brought in and more seasonably fitted."

With these and other entertaining conversations they came out of the tent into the wood, and in going round some of the hides the day went by and night came on them — and not as clear or as calm as the season of the year called for, which was midsummer; but a certain half-light it brought with it helped the duke and duchess's plan a great deal.

And so, as soon as it began to grow dark, a little after twilight, all at once it seemed that the whole wood was on fire on all four sides; and then there were heard here and there, and this way and that, infinite bugles and other instruments of war, as of many troops of cavalry going through the wood. The light of the fire and the sound of the warlike instruments almost blinded and deafened the eyes and ears of the bystanders, and of everybody else in the wood.

Then there were heard infinite battle cries in the Moorish fashion, as they raise them when they go into battle; trumpets and clarions sounded, drums thundered, fifes shrilled, almost all at once, so continuously and so fast that the man would have had no senses who did not lose them at the confused sound of so many instruments. The duke was struck dumb, the duchess dumbfounded, Don Quixote amazed, Sancho Panza trembling; and, in the end, even those who knew the cause were frightened. Fear brought silence on them, and a courier who went past in front of them in the dress of a devil, blowing on a huge hollow horn in place of a bugle, which gave out a hoarse and terrible sound.

"Hey there, brother courier!" said the duke. "Who are you, where are you going, and what men of war are these who seem to be crossing this wood?"

To which the courier answered in a hideous and unabashed voice:

"I am the Devil. I am going to look for Don Quixote of La Mancha. The people coming this way are six troops of enchanters, who are bringing the peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso on a triumphal car. She comes enchanted, with the gallant Frenchman Montesinos, to give Don Quixote his orders about how this lady is to be disenchanted."

"If you were the devil, as you say and as your figure shows, you would already have recognised this knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, since you have him in front of you."

"In God and in my conscience," answered the Devil, "I was not looking at that, because I carry my thoughts scattered over so many things that I was forgetting the main one I came for."

"Without any doubt," said Sancho, "this demon must be a decent man and a good Christian; because if he were not, he would not swear in God and in my conscience. Now I hold for myself that even in hell itself there must be good people."

Then the Demon, without dismounting, turned his eyes to Don Quixote and said:

"To you, Knight of the Lions — and may I see you between their claws — the unfortunate but valiant knight Montesinos sends me, ordering me to tell you on his behalf that you are to wait for him in the very place where I find you, because he brings with him the lady they call Dulcinea of El Toboso, with orders to give you what is needed for disenchanting her. And, since my coming was for nothing more, my stay shall be no longer: demons like me be with you, and the good angels with these ladies and gentlemen."

And, saying this, he blew the monstrous horn, turned his back and went off without waiting for an answer from anybody.

Astonishment was renewed in everyone, and especially in Sancho and Don Quixote: in Sancho, at seeing that in the teeth of the truth they wanted Dulcinea to be enchanted; in Don Quixote, at not being able to make certain whether what had happened to him in the cave of Montesinos was true or not. And, while he was raised up in these thoughts, the duke said to him:

"Does your worship mean to wait, Señor Don Quixote?"

"Why not?" he answered. "Here I shall wait, fearless and strong, even if all hell should come to attack me."

"Well, if I see another devil and hear another horn like the last one, I shall wait here about as much as I shall in Flanders," said Sancho.

At this the night closed in more, and a great many lights began to run about through the wood, exactly as the dry exhalations of the earth run about the sky, which look to our eyes like running stars. There was heard likewise a terrible noise, of the kind made by the solid wheels that ox carts generally have, from whose harsh and continuous screech they say the wolves and the bears run away, if there are any where they pass.

To all this tempest there was added another that increased them all, which was that it really seemed as though four encounters or battles were being fought at one and the same time on the four sides of the wood: for over there sounded the hard uproar of terrifying artillery, over yonder infinite muskets were being fired, close by sounded almost the voices of the combatants, far off the Moorish battle cries were repeated.

Finally the bugles, the horns, the hunting horns, the clarions, the trumpets, the drums, the artillery, the harquebuses and, above all, the fearful noise of the carts, all together made a sound so confused and so horrible that Don Quixote needed all his heart to bear it; but Sancho's came to the ground, and he fell in a faint into the duchess's lap. She received him there, and in great haste ordered water to be thrown in his face. It was done, and he came round to his senses just as one of the carts with the screeching wheels was arriving at that place.

It was drawn by four sluggish oxen, all covered with black trappings; on each horn they carried a great wax torch tied and lit; and on top of the cart was made a high seat, on which sat a venerable old man with a beard whiter than snow itself, and so long that it came down past his waist. His dress was a long gown of black buckram; and, since the cart came full of infinite lights, everything on it could be well made out and discerned. It was guided by two hideous demons dressed in the same buckram, with such hideous faces that Sancho, having seen them once, shut his eyes so as not to see them twice.

The cart coming level with the place, then, the venerable old man got up from his high seat and, standing on his feet, said in a great voice:

"I am the wise Lirgandeo."

And the cart passed on without another word. Behind this one there passed another cart in the same fashion, with another old man enthroned; who, making the cart stop, said in a voice no less grave than the other's:

"I am the wise Alquife, the great friend of Urganda the Unknown."

And he passed on.

Then, in the same manner, another cart arrived; but the man sitting on the throne was not old like the others, but a big robust fellow with an ugly look about him, who, on arriving, standing up like the others, said in a hoarser and more devilish voice:

"I am Arcaláus the enchanter, mortal enemy of Amadís of Gaul and of all his kindred."

And he passed on. A little way off from there these three carts halted, and the tiresome noise of their wheels stopped; and then there was heard another — not a noise, but a sound made up of a soft and ordered music, at which Sancho was glad, and he took it for a good sign. And so he said to the duchess, from whom he never moved a point or a step:

"My lady, where there is music there can be nothing bad."

"Nor where there are lights and brightness," answered the duchess.

To which Sancho replied:

"Fire gives light and bonfires give brightness, as we see in the ones that surround us — and they might very well burn us up; but music is always a sign of merrymaking and festivity."

"Time will tell," said Don Quixote, who was listening to it all.

And he was right, as is shown in the following chapter.
