Chapter 35: Where the News Don Quixote Had of Dulcinea's Disenchantment Is Carried Further, with Other Wonderful Events

In time to the agreeable music they saw coming towards them one of the carts they call triumphal, drawn by six dun mules covered over with white linen; and on each one rode a torch-bearing penitent, likewise dressed in white, with a great lighted wax torch in his hand. The cart was twice, and even three times, bigger than the ones before, and the sides of it and the top were taken up by twelve more penitents as white as snow, all with their torches lit — a sight that filled them with wonder and terror together.

And on a raised throne there sat a nymph dressed in a thousand veils of silver tissue, with infinite leaves of gold spangling shining through them all, which made her, if not richly, at least showily dressed. She had her face covered with a transparent and delicate gauze, so that, without its threads getting in the way, there could be made out through them a most beautiful maiden's face; and the many lights gave room to distinguish her beauty and her years, which to look at did not reach twenty nor fall short of seventeen.

Beside her came a figure dressed in one of those trailing gowns, down to the feet, its head covered with a black veil. But the moment the cart came face to face with the duke and duchess and Don Quixote, the music of the shawms stopped, and then that of the harps and lutes that were playing on the cart. And, the figure in the gown getting to its feet, it parted the gown to both sides, and, taking the veil off its face, showed itself plainly to be the very figure of death, fleshless and hideous — at which Don Quixote felt distress and Sancho fear, and the duke and duchess made some show of being frightened.

This living death, raised up and standing, in a rather sleepy voice and with a not very wide-awake tongue, began to speak in this way:

	I am Merlin, the one the histories
	say had the devil for a father
	(a lie made authoritative by the ages),
	prince of Magic and monarch
	and archive of the Zoroastrian science,
	rival of the ages and the centuries
	that try to cover over the exploits
	of the brave and errant knights
	for whom I have had and still have great affection.
	And although the condition of enchanters,
	of magi or of magicians, is always
	hard, harsh and unyielding,
	mine is tender, soft and loving,
	and a friend to doing good to all people.
	In the gloomy caverns of Dis,
	where my soul was busying itself
	in forming certain rhombs and characters,
	there came the grieving voice of the beautiful
	and peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso.
	I learnt of her enchantment and her misfortune,
	and her transformation from a gentle lady
	into a rustic village girl; I was moved to pity,
	and, shutting my spirit in the hollow
	of this terrible and fierce skeleton,
	after turning over a hundred thousand books
	of this devilish and clumsy science of mine,
	I come to give the remedy that suits
	so great a grief, so great an ill.
	O you, the glory and honour of all who wear
	the tunics of steel and of diamond,
	light and lantern, path, pole star and guide
	of those who, leaving behind dull sleep
	and the idle feather bed, set themselves
	to practise the intolerable exercise
	of bloody and heavy arms!
	To you I speak — O man, as you deserve,
	never sufficiently praised — to you, valiant
	and judicious together, Don Quixote,
	splendour of La Mancha, star of Spain:
	that for the peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso
	to recover her first estate,
	it is needful that Sancho, your squire,
	should give himself three thousand lashes
	and three hundred, upon both his valiant buttocks,
	bared to the air, and in such a way
	that they smart him, sting him and vex him.
	And in this all those are agreed
	who have been the authors of her misfortune,
	and this is what my coming is for, my lords and ladies.

"By all that's holy!" said Sancho at this. "Never mind three thousand lashes — I would as soon give myself three as three stabs. The devil take you for a way of disenchanting! I do not see what my backside has to do with enchantments! By God, if Señor Merlin has found no other way of disenchanting the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, she can go to her grave enchanted!"

"I shall take you," said Don Quixote, "you villain stuffed with garlic, and tie you to a tree as naked as your mother bore you; and I shall give you not three thousand three hundred lashes but six thousand six hundred, so well laid on that they will not come off at three thousand three hundred tugs. And do not answer me a word, or I shall tear the soul out of you."

Hearing which, Merlin said:

"It must not be like that, because the lashes good Sancho has to receive must be of his own free will and not by force, and at whatever time he likes; no fixed term is set for him. But he is allowed, if he wants to buy off his suffering by half of this whipping, to let them be given him by somebody else's hand, even if it is a rather heavy one."

"Neither somebody else's nor my own, neither heavy nor weighing," replied Sancho. "No hand at all is going to touch me. Did I by any chance give birth to the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, that my backside should pay for what her eyes sinned? My lord and master, now — yes, he is a party to her, since he calls her at every turn 'my life', 'my soul', his food and his prop — he can and should whip himself for her and take all the steps necessary for her disenchantment. But whipping myself...? Abernuncio!"

Sancho had hardly finished saying this when the silvered nymph who came beside Merlin's spirit got to her feet, and, taking the fine veil off her face, showed it to be such that it seemed to everybody more than excessively beautiful; and, with a manly unconcern and in a voice that was not very ladylike, speaking straight at Sancho Panza, she said:

"O wretched squire, soul of a pitcher, heart of cork, with entrails of pebble and flint! If you were ordered, you thieving face-flayer, to throw yourself down to the ground from a high tower; if you were asked, enemy of the human race, to eat a dozen toads, two dozen lizards and three dozen snakes; if you were urged to kill your wife and your children with some cruel, sharp scimitar — it would be no wonder if you showed yourself squeamish and unwilling. But to make a fuss about three thousand three hundred lashes, when there is no charity-school boy, however poor a creature, who does not take that many every month, astonishes, stuns and terrifies all the merciful hearts of those who hear it, and even the hearts of all those who come to learn of it in the course of time.

"Set, O miserable and hardened animal, set, I say, those skittish little mule's eyes of yours on the pupils of these of mine, which have been compared to shining stars, and you shall see them weep thread by thread and skein by skein, making furrows, tracks and paths across the beautiful fields of my cheeks. Let it move you, you sly and evil-minded monster, that my age, so full of flower — still in the teen-and-something of my years, for I am nineteen and have not reached twenty — is being consumed and withered under the rind of a rustic peasant girl. And if I do not look like her now, it is a particular favour that Señor Merlin here present has done me, only so that my beauty may soften you; for the tears of an afflicted beauty turn crags into cotton wool and tigers into sheep.

"Lay it on, lay it on that great carcass of yours, you untamed brute, and rouse that spirit out of its sloth — the spirit that inclines you to nothing but eating and more eating — and set free the smoothness of my flesh, the gentleness of my nature and the beauty of my face. And if you will not soften for my sake or bring yourself round to any reasonable terms, do it for that poor knight you have at your side — for your master, I mean, whose soul I can see stuck crosswise in his throat, not ten fingers from his lips, waiting for nothing but your hard or soft answer, either to come out at his mouth or to go back down to his stomach."

Hearing this, Don Quixote felt his throat and said, turning to the duke:

"By God, sir, Dulcinea has told the truth, for here I have my soul stuck crosswise in my throat like the nut of a crossbow."

"What do you say to this, Sancho?" asked the duchess.

"I say, my lady," answered Sancho, "what I have said: as for the lashes, abernuncio."

"Abrenuncio you should say, Sancho, and not as you say it," said the duke.

"Let your greatness let me be," answered Sancho, "for I am not in a state now to look at subtleties or at a letter more or less; because these lashes they are going to give me, or that I am going to give myself, have me so troubled that I do not know what I am saying or what I am doing.

"But I should like to know from the lady my lady Doña Dulcina of El Toboso where she learnt the manner of begging she has. She comes to ask me to open up my flesh with lashes, and she calls me a soul of a pitcher and an untamed brute, with a whole string of bad names that the devil may put up with. Is my flesh made of bronze, by any chance, or is it anything to me whether she is disenchanted or not? What basket of white linen, of shirts, of headcloths and of socks — even though I do not wear them — does she bring along in front of her to soften me, instead of one piece of abuse after another? For she knows the proverb they say about here, that a donkey loaded with gold climbs a mountain lightly, and that gifts break rocks, and 'pray to God and keep hammering', and that one 'here you are' is worth more than two 'I'll give you'.

"And my lord and master, who ought to have stroked my hair the right way and coaxed me into turning myself into wool and carded cotton, says that if he catches me he will tie me naked to a tree and double the stake on the lashes. And these afflicted gentlefolk ought to consider that they are asking not only a squire to whip himself but a governor — as who should say, 'and cherries with it'. Let them learn, let them learn, much good may it do them, how to beg and how to ask and how to have some breeding; for all times are not alike, and men are not always in a good humour. I am bursting with grief just now over seeing my green coat torn, and they come and ask me to whip myself of my own free will, when my will is about as far from it as from turning me into a cacique in the Indies."

"Well truly, Sancho my friend," said the duke, "if you do not soften more than a ripe fig, you shall not take that government in hand. It would be a fine thing if I sent my islanders a cruel governor with flinty entrails, who will not bend to the tears of afflicted maidens or to the pleas of judicious, imperious and ancient enchanters and sages! In short, Sancho, either you must be whipped, or they must whip you, or you must not be a governor."

"Sir," answered Sancho, "would they not give me two days' grace to think about what suits me best?"

"No, on no account," said Merlin. "Here, in this instant and in this place, it must be settled what is to become of this business. Either Dulcinea will go back to the cave of Montesinos and to her first state as a peasant girl, or else, in the state she is in, she will be carried to the Elysian Fields, where she will be waiting until the tale of the whipping is complete."

"Come, good Sancho," said the duchess, "good courage, and a good return for the bread you have eaten of Señor Don Quixote's — whom we must all serve and please for his good nature and for his high chivalries. Say yes to this whipping, my son, and let the devil go to the devil and fear to the mean-spirited; for a good heart breaks bad luck, as you know very well."

To these arguments Sancho answered with these preposterous ones, saying to Merlin:

"Tell me, your worship, Señor Merlin: when the devil courier arrived here and gave my master a message from Señor Montesinos, ordering him on his behalf to wait for him here because he was coming to give orders for the lady Doña Dulcinea of El Toboso to be disenchanted — and up to now we have not seen Montesinos, or anything like him."

To which Merlin answered:

"The Devil, Sancho my friend, is an ignorant fellow and a very great rogue. I sent him to look for your master, but not with a message from Montesinos, but with one from me; because Montesinos is in his cave attending to — or, better said, waiting for — his own disenchantment, which still has the tail left to skin. If he owes you anything, or you have any business to do with him, I shall bring him to you and set him down wherever you like best. And for now, finish saying yes to this discipline; and believe me, it will do you a great deal of good, both for the soul and for the body: for the soul, because of the charity with which you will do it; for the body, because I know you are of a sanguine complexion, and taking a little blood out of you can do you no harm."

"There are a great many doctors in the world — even the enchanters are doctors," replied Sancho. "But since everybody tells me so, though I do not see it myself, I say I am content to give myself the three thousand three hundred lashes, on condition that I am to give them to myself whenever and however I like, without any limit being set on the days or on the time; and I shall try to get out of the debt as soon as possible, so that the world may enjoy the beauty of the lady Doña Dulcinea of El Toboso, since, by the look of it, she really is beautiful, the other way round from what I thought.

"It must also be a condition that I am not to be obliged to draw blood with the discipline, and that if any of the lashes are fly-flicks, they are to be counted in. Item, that if I make a mistake in the number, Señor Merlin, since he knows everything, is to take care to count them and to let me know how many I am short of or over."

"About the ones over there will be no need to give notice," answered Merlin, "because on reaching the exact number the lady Dulcinea will at once and suddenly be disenchanted, and she will come looking for good Sancho, like a grateful woman, to give him thanks and even rewards for the good work. So there is nothing to have any scruples about, over or under; and heaven forbid that I should cheat anybody, even by a hair of the head."

"Well then, into the hand of God!" said Sancho. "I consent to my own bad luck; I say I accept the penance on the conditions set down."

Sancho had hardly said these last words when the music of the shawms sounded again and infinite harquebuses were let off again, and Don Quixote hung on Sancho's neck, giving him a thousand kisses on the forehead and on the cheeks. The duchess and the duke and all the bystanders showed signs of having received the greatest contentment, and the cart began to move off; and, as she passed, the beautiful Dulcinea bowed her head to the duke and duchess and made Sancho a great curtsey.

And by now the dawn was coming on apace, glad and smiling: the little flowers of the fields were lifting themselves up and standing straight, and the liquid crystal of the streams, murmuring between white and grey pebbles, was going to pay its tribute to the rivers that waited for it. The glad earth, the clear sky, the clean air, the serene light, each by itself and all together, gave plain signs that the day, which came treading on the skirts of the dawn, was going to be calm and bright. And the duke and duchess, satisfied with the hunt and with having carried out their intention so judiciously and so successfully, went back to their castle, with the intention of following up their tricks — for there was no earnest that could give them more pleasure.
