Chapter 36: Where the Strange and Never-Imagined Adventure of the Distressed Duenna, Alias the Countess Trifaldi, Is Told, with a Letter Sancho Panza Wrote to His Wife Teresa Panza

The duke had a steward of a very playful and easy wit, who had taken the part of Merlin and arranged all the apparatus of the adventure just described, composed the verses and got a page to play Dulcinea. Finally, with his master and mistress taking a hand in it, he arranged another of the most amusing and strangest contrivance that can be imagined.

The duchess asked Sancho the next day whether he had begun the task of the penance he had to perform for Dulcinea's disenchantment. He said he had, and that the night before he had given himself five lashes. The duchess asked him what he had given them to himself with. He answered that it was with his hand.

"That," replied the duchess, "is giving yourself pats rather than lashes. I hold for myself that the wise Merlin will not be content with such gentleness. It will be necessary for good Sancho to make himself some scourge of thorns, or of knotted cords, that will let themselves be felt; because learning enters with blood, and the freedom of so great a lady as Dulcinea is not to be given away so cheaply for so small a price. And let Sancho note that works of charity done lukewarmly and slackly have no merit and are worth nothing."

To which Sancho answered:

"Let your ladyship give me some suitable scourge or lash, and I shall give it myself so long as it does not hurt too much; because I would have your worship know that although I am a rustic, my flesh has more of cotton in it than of esparto grass, and it would not be a good thing for me to waste myself away for somebody else's profit."

"So be it," answered the duchess. "Tomorrow I shall give you a scourge that will fit you exactly and will suit the tenderness of your flesh as though they were its own sisters."

To which Sancho said:

"Your highness must know, my lady of my soul, that I have a letter written to my wife Teresa Panza, giving her an account of everything that has happened to me since I left her. I have it here in my bosom, and it needs nothing but the address on it. I should like your judiciousness to read it, because it seems to me that it goes in the governor style — I mean, in the way governors ought to write."

"And who dictated it?" asked the duchess.

"Who was to dictate it but me, sinner that I am?" answered Sancho.

"And did you write it yourself?" said the duchess.

"Not by a long way," answered Sancho, "because I cannot read or write, although I can sign my name."

"Let us see it," said the duchess, "for it is a safe bet that you show in it the quality and sufficiency of your wits."

Sancho took an open letter out of his bosom, and, the duchess taking it, she saw that it went in this way:

Letter from Sancho Panza to Teresa Panza, His Wife

If they gave me good lashes, I was riding well mounted; if I have a good government, it is costing me good lashes. You will not understand this, my Teresa, for the present; another time you will know it. You must know, Teresa, that I have decided that you are to travel in a coach, which is what matters, because every other way of travelling is going on all fours. You are a governor's wife — see whether anybody is going to gnaw at your heels now!

I am sending you a green hunting suit here that my lady the duchess gave me; alter it so that it will serve for a skirt and a bodice for our daughter. Don Quixote, my master, from what I have heard said in this country, is a sane madman and an amusing idiot, and I am not far behind him. We have been in the cave of Montesinos, and the wise Merlin has laid hold of me for the disenchanting of Dulcinea of El Toboso, who is called Aldonza Lorenzo over there. With three thousand three hundred lashes, less five, that I have to give myself, she will be left as disenchanted as the mother who bore her. You are not to say anything about this to anybody, because put your business to the council and some will say it is white and others that it is black.

In a few days from now I shall set off for the government, where I go with the greatest desire to make money, because they have told me that all new governors go with this same desire. I shall feel its pulse and let you know whether you are to come and be with me or not. The grey is well, and sends you his best regards; and I do not mean to leave him even if they carried me off to be the Great Turk.

My lady the duchess kisses your hands a thousand times; send her back two thousand, for there is nothing that costs less or comes cheaper, as my master says, than good manners. It has not pleased God to furnish me with another portmanteau with another hundred crowns in it, like the one of the other day; but do not let that grieve you, my Teresa, for safe is the man who rings the alarm, and it will all come out in the wash of the government. Only it has grieved me a great deal that they tell me if I once get a taste of it, I shall be licking my fingers after it; and if that were so, it would not come cheap to me — although the crippled and maimed have their own canonry in the alms they beg. So one way or another you are going to be rich and in luck. God give it you, as He can, and keep me to serve you. From this castle, the twentieth of July 1614.

Your husband the governor,

Sancho Panza.

When the duchess had finished reading the letter she said to Sancho:

"In two things the good governor goes a little off the road. One is in saying, or giving to understand, that this government has been given him for the lashes he has to give himself — when he knows, and cannot deny, that when the duke my lord promised it him, there was no dreaming that there were lashes in the world. The other is that he shows himself very greedy in it, and I should not like that to turn out ill; for greed bursts the sack, and a greedy governor makes justice ungoverned."

"I do not mean it in that way, my lady," answered Sancho; "and if it seems to your worship that this letter does not go as it should, there is nothing for it but to tear it up and make a new one — and it might well be worse, if it is left to my noddle."

"No, no," replied the duchess, "this one is good, and I want the duke to see it."

With this they went out to a garden where they were to dine that day. The duchess showed the duke Sancho's letter, at which he received the greatest pleasure. They dined; and after the cloth had been taken away, and after they had entertained themselves a good while with Sancho's delicious conversation, all at once there was heard the very mournful sound of a fife and that of a hoarse and untuned drum. Everybody showed themselves disturbed by the confused, martial and mournful harmony, and especially Don Quixote, who could not keep still in his seat for pure agitation. Of Sancho there is nothing to say except that fear carried him to his usual refuge, which was the side or the skirts of the duchess, because really and truly the sound they were hearing was extremely mournful and melancholy.

And, while they were all in this suspense, they saw coming into the garden two men dressed in mourning, so long and trailing that it dragged on the ground. These came beating two great drums, likewise covered with black. At their side came the fife player, black and pitch-dark like the rest. Following the three came a personage of gigantic body, mantled rather than dressed in a gown of the deepest black, whose skirt was likewise outrageously large. Over the gown he was girt and crossed with a broad baldric, also black, from which there hung an enormous scimitar with black fittings and scabbard. He came with his face covered by a transparent black veil, through which there half showed an extremely long beard, white as snow. He moved his steps in time to the drums with great gravity and composure. In short, his greatness, his swagger, his blackness and his attendants could have astonished — and did astonish — everybody who looked at him without knowing him.

He came, then, with the deliberation and pomp described, and knelt down before the duke, who was standing waiting for him with the rest of those there. But the duke would on no account allow him to speak until he got up. The prodigious scarecrow did so; and, standing on his feet, he lifted the mask off his face and made plain the most horrifying, the longest, the whitest and the thickest beard that human eyes had until then ever seen; and then he unfixed and dragged out of his broad, deep chest a grave and sonorous voice, and, fixing his eyes on the duke, said:

"Most high and mighty lord, I am called Trifaldin of the White Beard. I am squire to the Countess Trifaldi, otherwise called the Distressed Duenna, on whose behalf I bring your greatness an embassy — which is that your magnificence should be pleased to give her the power and the leave to come in and tell you her trouble, which is one of the strangest and most astonishing that the most troubled mind in the world could ever have thought of.

"And first she wishes to know whether the valorous and never-conquered knight Don Quixote of La Mancha is in this castle of yours; in search of whom she has come on foot and without breakfasting from the kingdom of Candaya to this estate of yours — a thing that can and ought to be held for a miracle or for the force of enchantment. She is waiting at the gate of this fortress or country house, and waits for nothing but your good pleasure to come in. I have spoken."

And then he coughed and stroked his beard from top to bottom with both hands, and with great composure stood waiting for the duke's answer, which was:

"Good squire Trifaldin of the White Beard, we have had news these many days now of the misfortune of my lady the Countess Trifaldi, whom the enchanters have made them call the Distressed Duenna. You may very well tell her, stupendous squire, to come in, and that the valiant knight Don Quixote of La Mancha is here, from whose generous nature she may safely promise herself all protection and all help. And you may likewise tell her on my behalf that if my favour should be necessary to her, it shall not be wanting, since being a knight already obliges me to give it — a knight being bound and concerned to favour all sorts of women, and especially widowed, ruined and distressed duennas, as her ladyship must be."

Hearing which, Trifaldin bent his knee to the ground; and, making a sign to the fife and the drums to play, at the same sound and at the same pace as he had come in, he went out of the garden again, leaving everybody astonished at his presence and his bearing. And the duke, turning to Don Quixote, said to him:

"In short, famous knight, the darkness of malice and of ignorance cannot cover and dim the light of valour and of virtue. I say this because your goodness has hardly been six days in this castle when already they come looking for you from far-off and distant lands, and not in coaches or on dromedaries but on foot and fasting — the sad and the afflicted, trusting that they will find in that mighty arm the remedy for their troubles and hardships, thanks to your great exploits, which run and travel round the whole discovered surface of the earth."

"I could wish, lord duke," answered Don Quixote, "that that blessed churchman were here present who at table the other day showed himself in such an ill temper and with such a grudge against knights errant, so that he might see with his own eyes whether such knights are necessary in the world. He would at least put his hand on it, that people who are extraordinarily afflicted and disconsolate, in great cases and in enormous misfortunes, do not go looking for their remedy to the houses of lawyers, or to that of the village sacristans, or to the gentleman who has never managed to get outside the boundaries of his own place, or to the idle courtier who is sooner looking for news to report and tell than trying to do deeds and exploits for others to tell and write about.

"The remedy for troubles, the succour of needs, the protection of maidens, the consolation of widows are found in no kind of persons better than in knights errant; and for being one I give infinite thanks to heaven, and I count as very well spent any mishap and hardship that may come to me in this so honourable exercise. Let this duenna come and ask whatever she likes, for I shall make out her remedy for her in the strength of my arm and in the fearless resolution of my courageous spirit."
