Chapter 37: Where the Famous Adventure of the Distressed Duenna Is Carried Further

The duke and duchess were extremely glad to see how well Don Quixote was answering to their design; and at this point Sancho said:

"I should not like this lady duenna to put any stumbling block in the way of the promise of my government, because I have heard a Toledo apothecary say — and he talked like a goldfinch — that wherever duennas came into it, nothing good could happen. God bless me, how badly that apothecary got on with them! From which I gather that, since all duennas are tiresome and impertinent, of whatever quality and condition they may be, what will the distressed ones be like — such as they say this Countess Three-Skirts, or Three-Tails, is? For in my country skirts and tails, tails and skirts, are all one."

"Be quiet, Sancho my friend," said Don Quixote; "for since this lady duenna comes from such far-off lands to look for me, she cannot be one of those the apothecary had in his reckoning — and what is more, this one is a countess; and when countesses serve as duennas, it must be in the service of queens and empresses, since in their own houses they are the greatest of ladies and are served by other duennas."

To this Doña Rodríguez, who happened to be there, answered:

"My lady the duchess has duennas in her service who could have been countesses if fortune had wished it; but laws go where kings wish. And let nobody speak ill of duennas, and especially of the old ones and the unmarried; for although I am not one myself, I understand very well and can see clearly the advantage an unmarried duenna has over a widowed one — and whoever sheared us was left with the scissors in his hand."

"For all that," replied Sancho, "there is so much to shear off duennas, according to my barber, that it will be better not to stir the rice even if it sticks."

"Squires are always our enemies," answered Doña Rodríguez; "for, since they are the goblins of the anterooms and see us at every turn, the times they are not praying — which are many — they spend in gossiping about us, digging up our bones and burying our good name. Well, I consign them to the walking logs; for whether they like it or not we shall go on living in the world, and in the great houses, even if we die of hunger and cover our delicate or not-so-delicate flesh with a black widow's gown, as a man covers or hides a dunghill with a tapestry on a procession day. Upon my word, if it were given to me and the occasion called for it, I would make it plain, not only to those present but to the whole world, that there is no virtue that is not shut up in a duenna."

"I believe," said the duchess, "that my good Doña Rodríguez is right, and very much so; but she had better wait for a proper time to stand up for herself and for the rest of the duennas, so as to confound the bad opinion of that bad apothecary and root out the one the great Sancho Panza has in his breast."

To which Sancho answered:

"Ever since I have had the fumes of a governor about me, the dizzy spells of a squire have left me, and I do not care a wild fig for all the duennas there are."

They would have gone further with their duenna-ish talk if they had not heard the fife and the drums beginning to sound again, from which they understood that the Distressed Duenna was coming in. The duchess asked the duke whether it would be right to go out and receive her, since she was a countess and a person of quality.

"For what she has of countess about her," answered Sancho, before the duke could answer, "I am quite content that your greatnesses should go out and receive her; but for the duenna part of her, my opinion is that you should not stir a step."

"Who brings you into this, Sancho?" said Don Quixote.

"Who, sir?" answered Sancho. "I bring myself in, and I may bring myself in, as a squire who has learnt the terms of courtesy in your worship's school — you being the most courteous and best brought-up knight there is in all courteousness. And in these things, as I have heard your worship say, a man loses as much by a card too many as by a card too few; and a word to the wise."

"It is as Sancho says," said the duke. "We shall see the cut of the countess, and by that we shall measure out the courtesy that is owing to her."

At this the drums and the fife came in, as they had the first time.

And here, with this short chapter, the author made an end, and began the next, carrying on the same adventure, which is one of the most notable in the history.
