Chapter 38: Where the Distressed Duenna Gives an Account of Her Ill Fortune

Behind the mournful musicians there began to come into the garden as many as twelve duennas, divided into two files, all dressed in wide widow's gowns of what looked like fulled serge, with white headdresses of fine cotton so long that they showed nothing of the gown but its hem.

After them came the Countess Trifaldi, led by the hand by the squire Trifaldin of the White Beard, dressed in the finest black baize, unnapped — for had it been napped, every grain of it would have shown as big as one of the good chickpeas of Martos. The tail, or skirt, or whatever they may like to call it, ended in three points, which were held up in the hands of three pages, likewise dressed in mourning, making a showy and mathematical figure with the three acute angles that the three points formed. From which everybody who looked at the pointed skirt gathered that she must be called the Countess Trifaldi for that reason, as who should say the Countess of the Three Skirts.

And Benengeli says that it was true, and that by her own family name the countess was called Lobuna, on the grounds that a great many wolves were bred in her county; and that if they had been foxes instead of wolves she would have been called Zorruna, it being the custom in those parts for lords to take the style of their names from the thing or things their estates are richest in. But this countess, to favour the novelty of her skirt, dropped the Lobuna and took up the Trifaldi.

The twelve duennas and their lady came at a procession pace, their faces covered with black veils — not transparent like Trifaldin's, but so close-woven that nothing at all showed through.

As soon as the duennaish squadron had finished appearing, the duke, the duchess and Don Quixote got to their feet, and so did all those who were watching that deliberate procession. The twelve duennas halted and made an aisle, down the middle of which the Distressed Lady came forward, with Trifaldin still holding her by the hand. Seeing which, the duke, the duchess and Don Quixote came forward some twelve paces to receive her. She, going down on her knees on the ground, said in a voice coarse and hoarse rather than fine and delicate:

"Let your greatnesses be pleased not to pay so much courtesy to this servant of yours — I mean this servingwoman of yours; because, distressed as I am, I shall not manage to answer as I ought, on account of my strange and never-before-seen misfortune having carried off my understanding I do not know where, and it must be very far off, since the more I look for it the less I find it."

"He would be without his own, my lady countess," answered the duke, "who did not discover your worth from your person, which without anything more to see deserves all the cream of courtesy and all the flower of well-bred ceremony."

And, raising her by the hand, he led her to sit down in a chair next to the duchess, who received her likewise with a great deal of civility.

Don Quixote said nothing, and Sancho was dying to see the face of the Trifaldi and of some of her many duennas; but it was not possible until they uncovered themselves of their own free will and pleasure.

Everybody having settled down and fallen silent, they were waiting to see who would break the silence, and it was the Distressed Duenna, with these words:

"I am confident, most powerfullest lord, most beautifullest lady and most judiciousest bystanders, that my most afflictedest trouble will find in your most valorousest breasts a reception no less pleasant than it is generous and sorrowful; because it is such a trouble as is enough to move marble to tenderness, and to soften diamonds, and to make pliable the steel of the hardest hearts in the world. But before it comes out into the square of your hearings — not to say your ears — I should like to be made knowing whether there is in this gathering, ring and company the most refinedest knight Don Quixote of La Manchissima and his squirissimo Panza."

"The Panza," said Sancho, before anybody else could answer, "is here, and the Don Quixotissimo likewise; and so you may, most dolorousest duennissima, say whatever you likissimost, for we are all ready and most preparedest to be your most servantissimous."

At this Don Quixote got up, and, directing his words to the Distressed Duenna, said:

"If your troubles, afflicted lady, can promise themselves any hope of remedy from the valour or the strength of any knight errant, here are mine, which, weak and brief though they are, will all be employed in your service. I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose business it is to come to the help of all sorts of needy people; and, this being so, as it is, you have no need, my lady, to seek anybody's good will or to look for preambles, but plainly and without going round about to tell your ills — for there are ears listening to you that will know how to grieve over them, if not how to remedy them."

Hearing which, the Distressed Duenna made as if to throw herself at Don Quixote's feet, and indeed threw herself down; and, struggling to embrace them, she said:

"Before these feet and legs I throw myself, O unconquered knight, since they are the bases and pillars of knight-errantry. These feet I want to kiss, on whose steps hangs and depends the whole remedy of my misfortune, O valorous errant, whose true exploits leave behind and outshine the fabulous ones of the Amadíses, Esplandiáns and Belianíses!"

And, leaving Don Quixote, she turned to Sancho Panza, and, taking him by the hands, said to him:

"O you, the most loyal squire who ever served a knight errant in the present or in the past ages, longer in goodness than the beard of Trifaldin my attendant, who is here present! You may well pride yourself that in serving the great Don Quixote you serve in shorthand the whole herd of knights who have handled arms in the world. I conjure you, by what you owe to your most faithful goodness, to be a good intercessor for me with your master, so that he may at once favour this most humble and most unfortunate countess."

To which Sancho answered:

"That my goodness should be as long and as great as your squire's beard, my ladyship, matters very little to me. Let my soul have its beard and moustaches on it when I go out of this life, which is what matters; for about the beards down here I care little or nothing. But without all these wheedlings and entreaties I shall beg my master — who I know is fond of me, and the more so now that he needs me for a certain piece of business — to favour and help your worship in everything he can. Let your worship unpack your trouble and tell it to us, and leave it to us, for we shall all understand one another."

The duke and duchess were bursting with laughter at all this, as the people who had felt the pulse of that adventure, and they praised between themselves the sharpness and the play-acting of the Trifaldi, who, sitting down again, said:

"Of the famous kingdom of Candaya, which lies between the great Taprobana and the South Sea, two leagues beyond Cape Comorin, the lady was Queen Doña Maguncia, widow of King Archipiela her lord and husband, of which marriage they had and procreated the Infanta Antonomasia, heiress of the kingdom; which said Infanta Antonomasia was brought up and grew up under my tutelage and teaching, since I was the most senior and the chief duenna of her mother.

"It happened, then, that with days going and days coming, the child Antonomasia reached the age of fourteen with such great perfection of beauty that nature could not have raised her a point higher. And are we to say that her good sense was a snivelling little thing? She was as judicious as she was beautiful, and she was the most beautiful in the world — and is so still, unless by now the envious fates and the hardened Parcae have cut the thread of her life. But they will not have, for the heavens will not permit so great a harm to be done to the earth as it would be to carry off unripe the cluster of the loveliest vine in the world.

"With this beauty — and not praised as it deserves by my clumsy tongue — an infinite number of princes fell in love, both native and foreign; among whom a private gentleman who was at court dared to raise his thoughts to the heaven of so much beauty, trusting in his youth and his gallantry and in his many abilities and graces and in the ease and happiness of his wit. Because I would have your greatnesses know, if you do not take it amiss, that he played a guitar until he made it talk; and, what is more, he was a poet and a great dancer, and he knew how to make a birdcage, so that merely by making them he could have earned his living if he had found himself in extreme need — and all these parts and graces are enough to bring down a mountain, let alone a delicate maiden.

"But all his gentility and his fine grace and all his graces and abilities would have counted for little or nothing in reducing the fortress of my girl, if the thieving face-flayer had not used the remedy of reducing me first. First the villain and soulless vagabond wanted to get my good will and bribe my liking, so that I, a bad governor, should hand him the keys of the fortress I was guarding. In short: he flattered my understanding and reduced my will with I do not know what trinkets and toys he gave me; but what most laid me low and brought me down on the ground were some verses I heard him sing one night from a grating that looked out on a little alley where he was standing — which, if I remember rightly, went:

	From my sweet enemy there comes
	a hurt that wounds the soul,
	and, for greater torment still, it wills
	that it be felt and not be told.

"The verses seemed to me of pearl, and his voice of syrup; and ever since — I mean from that time on, seeing the ill I fell into through these and other such verses — I have thought that from good and well-ordered commonwealths the poets ought to be banished, as Plato advised; at least the lascivious ones, because they write verses that are not like those of the Marquis of Mantua, which entertain and make children and women weep, but sharp things that, like soft thorns, run through your soul and, like lightning, wound you inside it, leaving your clothes untouched. And another time he sang:

	Come, death, so hidden away
	that I may not feel you coming,
	so that the pleasure of dying
	may not give me back my life.

"And other little verses and tail-pieces of the same stamp, which sung enchant and written hold you spellbound. And then, what about when they stoop to composing a kind of verse that was in use in Candaya at that time, which they called seguidillas? Then there was the leaping of souls, the frisking of laughter, the restlessness of bodies and, in short, the quicksilver of all the senses. And so I say, my dear sirs, that such versifiers ought by a just title to be banished to the Isles of the Lizards.

"But it is not their fault, but the fault of the simpletons who praise them and the fools who believe them; and if I had been the good duenna I ought to have been, their stale-brewed conceits would not have moved me, and I should not have believed it true when they say: 'I live dying, I burn in the ice, I shiver in the fire, I hope without hope, I go away and I stay,' along with other impossibilities of that breed that their writings are full of. And then what about when they promise the phoenix of Arabia, the crown of Ariadne, the horses of the Sun, the pearls of the South, the gold of Tibar and the balsam of Panchaia? Here is where they stretch out their pens furthest, since it costs them little to promise what they never intend and are not able to fulfil.

"But where am I straying to? Ah, wretched me! What madness or what folly carries me off to tell other people's faults when I have so much to say about my own? Ah, luckless me again! It was not the verses that reduced me but my own simplicity; it was not the music that softened me but my own frivolity. My great ignorance and my small caution opened the road and cleared the path for the steps of Don Clavijo — that being the name of the said gentleman.

"And so, with me as the go-between, he found himself once and a great many times in the chamber of Antonomasia, who was deceived by me and not by him, under the title of her true husband; for, sinner though I am, I would never have consented to his coming, without being her husband, as near as the welt of the sole of her slippers. No, no, not that: matrimony must come first in any business of this kind that is handled by me!

"There was only one harm in this business, which was the inequality of it, Don Clavijo being a private gentleman and the Infanta Antonomasia the heiress, as I have said, of the kingdom. For some days this tangle stayed hidden and covered up by the shrewdness of my caution, until it seemed to me that a certain swelling of Antonomasia's belly was uncovering it at a great rate; the fear of which made the three of us go into council, out of which it came that, before the bad business came out into the light, Don Clavijo should apply to the vicar for Antonomasia as his wife, on the strength of a written promise the infanta had made him of being his wife, drawn up by my wits with such force that not even Samson's strength could have broken it.

"The steps were taken, the vicar saw the promise, this same vicar took the lady's confession, she confessed straight out, and he ordered her to be lodged in the house of a very honourable officer of the court..."

At this point Sancho said:

"So there are officers of the court in Candaya too, and poets and seguidillas — from which I can swear that I imagine all the world is one and the same. But let your worship hurry up, Señora Trifaldi, for it is late and I am already dying to know the end of this very long story."

"I shall," answered the countess.
