Chapter 39: Where the Trifaldi Carries On Her Stupendous and Memorable History

Every word Sancho said gave the duchess as much pleasure as it drove Don Quixote to despair; and, ordering him to be quiet, the Distressed Lady went on, saying:

"In short, after a great many questions and answers, the infanta staying always at her thirteen, without going back on or varying from her first declaration, the vicar gave sentence in favour of Don Clavijo and handed her over to him as his lawful wife — at which Queen Doña Maguncia, the mother of the Infanta Antonomasia, took such offence that within three days we buried her."

"She must have died, no doubt about it," said Sancho.

"Obviously!" answered Trifaldin. "In Candaya they do not bury living people, but dead ones."

"It has been known, sir squire," replied Sancho, "for a person in a faint to be buried in the belief that they were dead; and it seemed to me that Queen Maguncia was more obliged to faint than to die. With life a great many things are put right, and the infanta's folly was not so great as to deserve being felt so much. If that lady had married some page of hers, or some other servant of her household, as a great many others have done, from what I have heard, the harm would have been past remedy; but her having married a gentleman as much of a gentleman and as well-informed as they have painted him here for us — truly and truly, though it was a piece of foolishness, it was not so great a one as people think. Because, according to my master's rules — and he is here present and will not let me lie — just as bishops are made out of learned men, so out of knights, and especially errant ones, can be made kings and emperors."

"You are right, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "because a knight errant, so long as he has a couple of fingers of good luck, is in the immediate potentiality of being the greatest lord in the world. But let the Distressed Lady go on, for I can see through it that she still has the bitter part to tell of this history that has been sweet so far."

"And how bitter the bitter part is!" answered the countess. "So bitter that beside it colocynth is sweet and oleander tasty.

"The queen being dead, then — and not in a faint — we buried her; and hardly had we covered her with the earth and hardly had we said her the last farewell, when —

	quis talia fando temperet a lachrymis? —

"mounted on a wooden horse, there appeared above the queen's grave the giant Malambruno, first cousin to Maguncia, who along with being cruel was an enchanter. And he, by his arts, in revenge for his cousin's death, and as a punishment for Don Clavijo's boldness, and out of spite at Antonomasia's excess, left the two of them enchanted on the grave itself: her turned into a bronze she-ape, and him into a terrifying crocodile of some unknown metal; and between the two of them stands a pillar, likewise of metal, and on it, written in the Syriac tongue, some letters which, having been set out in the Candayan and now in the Castilian, hold this sentence: 'These two bold lovers shall not recover their first shape until the valorous Manchegan comes to grips with me in single battle; for the fates keep this never-before-seen adventure for his great valour alone.'

"This done, he drew from its scabbard a broad and enormous scimitar and, seizing me by the hair, made a feint of wanting to cut my throat and slice my head clean off. I was thrown into confusion, my voice stuck in my throat, I was cast down in the last degree; but for all that I made the greatest effort I could, and in a trembling, pained voice I said him so many things and such things that they made him suspend the carrying out of so severe a punishment.

"Finally he had all the palace duennas brought before him, who were these here present; and, after having enlarged on our guilt and abused the nature of duennas, their bad habits and worse contrivances, and loading them all with the guilt that was mine alone, he said he did not want to punish us with capital punishment but with other, drawn-out punishments that would give us a civil and continuous death. And in that very moment and instant when he finished saying this, we all felt the pores of our faces opening, and pricking all over them as if with the points of needles. We put our hands at once to our faces and found ourselves in the state you shall now see."

And then the Distressed Lady and the other duennas lifted the masks they had come covered with, and uncovered their faces, all thickly grown with beards — some fair, some black, some white and some grizzled. At the sight of which the duke and duchess showed themselves astonished, Don Quixote and Sancho thunderstruck, and all those present dumbfounded.

And the Trifaldi went on:

"In this way that poltroon and evil-minded Malambruno punished us, covering the softness and smoothness of our faces with the roughness of these bristles. Would to heaven he had rather struck our heads off with his enormous scimitar than shadowed the light of our faces with this fleece that covers us! Because if we go into the reckoning, my dear sirs — and what I am going to say now I should have liked to say with my eyes turned to fountains; but the thought of our misfortune, and the seas they have rained until now, have left them without moisture and dry as beards of corn, and so I shall say it without tears — I say, then: where can a duenna with a beard go? What father or what mother will grieve for her? Who will give her any help? For even when she has a smooth skin and a face martyred with a thousand kinds of paints and washes, she can hardly find anybody to love her; what will she do when she uncovers a face turned into a forest? O duennas and companions of mine, we were born at an unlucky moment, in an ill-starred hour our parents engendered us!"

And, saying this, she gave signs of fainting away.
