Chapter 40: Of Things That Belong and Pertain to This Adventure and to This Memorable History

Really and truly, everybody who enjoys histories like this one ought to show themselves grateful to Cide Hamete, its first author, for the care he took in telling us the smallest quavers of it, without leaving anything, however minute, that he did not bring distinctly into the light: he paints the thoughts, uncovers the imaginings, answers the unspoken questions, clears up the doubts, resolves the arguments; in short, he makes plain the very atoms of the most inquisitive desire. O most celebrated author! O fortunate Don Quixote! O famous Dulcinea! O amusing Sancho Panza! All together and each one of you singly, may you live infinite ages, for the pleasure and the general entertainment of the living.

The history says, then, that as soon as Sancho saw the Distressed Lady in a faint, he said:

"By the faith of an honest man, I swear, and by the memory of all my ancestors the Panzas, that I have never heard or seen such an adventure as this, nor has my master ever told me of one, nor has it ever fitted into his imagination. May a thousand Satans take you — not to curse you as an enchanter and a giant, Malambruno — and could you find no other kind of punishment to give these poor sinners but bearding them? How much better would it not have been, and how much more to their purpose, to take away the upper halves of their noses, even if they talked through them, than to put beards on them? I would wager they have not the means to pay anybody to shave them."

"That is the truth, sir," answered one of the twelve; "we have not the means to trim ourselves. And so some of us have taken as a thrifty remedy the use of certain plasters or sticking patches, and, applying them to our faces and pulling them off all at once, we are left as bare and smooth as the bottom of a stone mortar. Because although there are women in Candaya who go from house to house to take off the down and shape the eyebrows and do other cosmetic offices belonging to women, we duennas of my lady's household would never let them in — because most of them smell of being third parties, having left off being first ones. And if we are not relieved by Señor Don Quixote, they will carry us to the grave with beards."

"I would have my own plucked out in the land of the Moors," said Don Quixote, "if I did not put an end to yours."

At this point the Trifaldi came out of her faint and said:

"The ring of that promise, valorous knight, reached my ears in the middle of my faint, and has been the means of my coming out of it and recovering all my senses. And so I beg you again, illustrious errant and indomitable lord, that your gracious promise may turn into a deed."

"It shall not be held up by me," answered Don Quixote. "See, my lady, what it is I have to do, for my spirit is very ready to serve you."

"The case is," answered the Distressed Lady, "that from here to the kingdom of Candaya, if you go by land, is five thousand leagues, two more or less; but if you go by air and in a straight line, it is three thousand two hundred and twenty-seven. It is also to be known that Malambruno told me that when fortune furnished me with the knight who was to set us free, he would send him a mount a great deal better and with fewer vices than the ones you hire; because it is to be that same wooden horse on which the valorous Pierres carried off the fair Magalona.

"This horse is steered by a peg he has in his forehead, which serves him for a bridle, and he flies through the air with such lightness that it looks as if the devils themselves were carrying him. This horse, according to ancient tradition, was made by that wise Merlin; he lent him to Pierres, who was his friend, and with him Pierres made great journeys and carried off, as has been said, the fair Magalona, taking her on the crupper through the air and leaving everybody who looked at them from the ground gaping. And he lent him to nobody but the man he chose, or the man who paid best for him; and from the great Pierres until now we know of nobody who has got up on him.

"Malambruno has taken him from there by his arts and has him in his power, and makes use of him in his journeys, which he makes at every moment to various parts of the world; and today he is here and tomorrow in France and the next day in Potosí. And the good of it is that this horse neither eats nor sleeps nor wears out horseshoes, and goes at an amble through the air without having wings, so that the man on his back can carry a cup full of water in his hand without spilling a drop of it, so smoothly and quietly does he travel — for which reason the fair Magalona was very glad to ride on him."

To this Sancho said:

"For travelling quietly and smoothly, my grey — even though he does not travel through the air; but on the ground I would match him against all the ambling horses in the world."

They all laughed, and the Distressed Lady went on:

"And this horse, if Malambruno means to put an end to our misfortune, will be in our presence before half an hour of the night has gone; because he gave me to understand that the sign he would give me by which I should know that he had found the knight I was looking for would be to send me the horse, wherever I was, conveniently and quickly."

"And how many will that horse hold?" asked Sancho.

The Distressed Lady answered:

"Two people: one in the saddle and the other on the crupper; and for the most part these two people are a knight and a squire, when there is no stolen maiden."

"I should like to know, Señora Distressed Lady," said Sancho, "what name that horse has."

"His name," answered the Distressed Lady, "is not like Bellerophon's horse, which was called Pegasus, or like Alexander the Great's, called Bucephalus, or like the furious Orlando's, whose name was Brigliadoro, still less Bayard, which was Reinaldos de Montalbán's, or Frontino, like Ruggiero's, or Boötes or Pyrois, as they say the horses of the Sun are called; nor is he called Orelia either, like the horse on which the unfortunate Rodrigo, the last king of the Goths, went into the battle where he lost his life and his kingdom."

"I would wager," said Sancho, "that since they have not given him any of those famous names of such well-known horses, they will not have given him my master's either — Rocinante, which for fitness beats all the ones that have been named."

"That is so," answered the bearded countess, "but still his name suits him very well, because he is called Clavileño the Swift — a name that agrees with his being made of wood, and with the peg he carries in his forehead, and with the lightness with which he travels; for in our tongue the peg is the clavija and the wood the leño. And so, as far as the name goes, he may well compete with the famous Rocinante."

"The name does not displease me," replied Sancho, "but with what bridle or with what halter is he steered?"

"I have already said," answered the Trifaldi, "that it is with the peg; for by turning it one way or the other the knight on his back makes him travel as he likes, whether through the air, or skimming and almost sweeping the ground, or by the middle way, which is the one to be looked for and to be kept to in all well-ordered actions."

"I should like to see it," answered Sancho; "but to think that I have to get up on him, either in the saddle or on the crupper, is asking pears of an elm tree. It is a fine thing that I can hardly keep my seat on my grey, and on a pack-saddle softer than silk itself, and now they want me to keep my seat on a wooden crupper without any cushion or padding at all! By God, I do not intend to pound myself to bits to take the beards off anybody. Let everybody shave as best suits him, for I do not intend to keep my master company on such a long journey. What is more, I cannot be as much to the point for the shaving of these beards as I am for the disenchantment of my lady Dulcinea."

"Yes you are, my friend," answered the Trifaldi, "and so much so that without your presence I understand we shall do nothing."

"Help, in the king's name!" said Sancho. "What have squires got to do with their masters' adventures? Are they to carry off the fame of the ones they finish, and are we to carry the labour? Body of me! If only the historians would say: 'Such and such a knight finished such and such an adventure, but with the help of so-and-so his squire, without whom it would have been impossible to finish it.' But they write bare and dry, 'Don Paralipomenon of the Three Stars finished the adventure of the six monsters,' without naming the person of his squire, who was present at the whole of it, as though he had never been in the world!

"Now, gentlemen, I say again that my master may go alone, and much good may it do him; and I shall stay here in the company of the duchess my lady, and it might be that when he came back he would find my lady Dulcinea's cause improved by a third and a fifth — because in my idle and unoccupied moments I mean to give myself a round of lashes that no hair shall cover."

"For all that, you must go with him if it is necessary, good Sancho, because good people will beg you to; and the faces of these ladies must not be left so thickly grown for your useless fear. That would certainly be a bad business."

"Help, in the king's name, again!" replied Sancho. "If this charity were being done for some sheltered maidens or for some charity-school girls, a man might venture on any labour; but to bear it for taking the beards off duennas — bad luck to it! I would sooner see them all bearded, from the greatest to the least, and from the most affected to the primmest."

"You get on badly with duennas, Sancho my friend," said the duchess. "You are following the Toledo apothecary's opinion very closely. But upon my word you are wrong; for there are duennas in my house who could be a model for duennas, and here is my Doña Rodríguez, who will not let me say otherwise."

"Let your excellency say it if you like," said Rodríguez; "for God knows the truth of everything, and good or bad, bearded or smooth as we duennas may be, our mother bore us like the other women; and since God threw us into the world, He knows why, and I hold by His mercy and not by anybody's beard."

"Well now, Señora Rodríguez," said Don Quixote, "and Señora Trifaldi and company: I trust in heaven that it will look with kind eyes on your troubles, and that Sancho will do what I order him — let Clavileño only come and let me only find myself face to face with Malambruno. For I know there would be no razor that could shave your worships as easily as my sword would shave Malambruno's head off his shoulders; for God suffers the wicked, but not for ever."

"Ah!" said the Distressed Lady at this. "May all the stars of the celestial regions look with kindly eyes on your greatness, valorous knight, and pour into your spirit all prosperity and valour, so that you may be the shield and protection of the abused and downtrodden duennaish race, abominated by apothecaries, gossiped about by squires and wheedled at by pages. Cursed be the wretched girl who in the flower of her years did not go and be a nun sooner than a duenna! Unfortunate creatures that we duennas are — for even if we came down in a straight line, man from man, from Hector the Trojan himself, our ladies would still not leave off throwing a 'you there' at us, if they thought it would make them queens by it. O giant Malambruno, who, enchanter though you are, are most certain in your promises! Send us the peerless Clavileño now, so that our misfortune may come to an end; for if the hot weather sets in and these beards of ours last, woe to our luck!"

The Trifaldi said this with so much feeling that she drew the tears out of the eyes of all the bystanders, and even flooded Sancho's; and he resolved in his heart to go with his master to the furthest parts of the world, if the taking of the wool off those venerable faces depended on it.
