Chapter 41: Of the Coming of Clavileño, with the End of This Long-Drawn-Out Adventure

Night came on at this, and with it the appointed moment when the famous horse Clavileño should arrive; whose lateness was already wearing at Don Quixote, since it seemed to him that, Malambruno being slow in sending him, either he was not the knight for whom that adventure was reserved or Malambruno did not dare to come to single battle with him.

But see here: all at once there came into the garden four wild men dressed all in green ivy, carrying a great wooden horse on their shoulders. They set him with his feet on the ground, and one of the wild men said:

"Let the man who has the spirit for it get up on this machine."

"I do not get up here," said Sancho, "because I have neither the spirit nor the knighthood."

And the wild man went on, saying:

"And let the squire take the crupper, if there is one; and let him trust the valorous Malambruno, for he shall be harmed by no sword but Malambruno's own and by no other malice. And there is nothing to do but turn this peg he has set on his neck, and he will carry them through the air to where Malambruno is waiting for them. But so that the height and loftiness of the road may not give them vertigo, they must have their eyes covered until the horse neighs, which will be the sign that their journey is over."

This said, leaving Clavileño, with a graceful bearing they went back the way they had come. The Distressed Lady, as soon as she saw the horse, said to Don Quixote almost in tears:

"Valorous knight, Malambruno's promises have proved certain. The horse is in the house, our beards are growing, and every one of us and with every hair of them begs you to shave us and shear us; since there is nothing more to it but for you to get up on him with your squire and give a happy beginning to your new journey."

"That I shall do, Señora Countess Trifaldi, most willingly and with the best will in the world, without stopping to take a cushion or put on my spurs, so as not to lose time: so great is my desire to see you, my lady, and all these duennas smooth and bare."

"That I shall not do," said Sancho, "either with a bad will or with a good one, on any account. And if this shaving cannot be done without my getting up on the crupper, my master may well look for another squire to go with him, and these ladies for another way of smoothing their faces; for I am no witch, to take pleasure in going about through the air. And what will my islanders say when they learn that their governor goes about taking walks on the winds?

"And another thing: there being three thousand and so many leagues from here to Candaya, if the horse gets tired or the giant gets annoyed we shall take half a dozen years to get back, and by then there will be neither isle nor isler in the world that knows me. And since it is commonly said that in delay lies danger, and that when they give you the heifer you should run with the halter, let these ladies' beards forgive me, but Saint Peter is well enough off in Rome — I mean I am well enough off in this house, where so much kindness is done me and from whose master I look for so great a benefit as seeing myself a governor."

To which the duke said:

"Sancho my friend, the isle I have promised you is not movable or fugitive: it has roots so deep, thrown down into the depths of the earth, that they will not pull it up or shift it from where it is at three tugs. And since you know that I know that there is no kind of office of any great value that is not got by some sort of bribe, one more and another less, the bribe I mean to take for this government is that you should go with your master Don Quixote to bring this memorable adventure to its top and its end. And whether you come back on Clavileño with the speed his lightness promises, or whether contrary fortune brings you back on foot, turned pilgrim from inn to inn and from tavern to tavern, whenever you come back you will find your isle where you left it, and your islanders with the same desire to receive you as their governor that they have always had, and my will shall be the same. And do not put this truth in doubt, Señor Sancho, for it would be doing a plain wrong to the desire I have to serve you."

"No more, sir," said Sancho. "I am a poor squire and I cannot carry so many courtesies on my back. Let my master mount, let them cover these eyes of mine and commend me to God; and let them tell me whether, when we are going through those high places, I may commend myself to Our Lord or call on the angels to favour me."

To which the Trifaldi answered:

"Sancho, you may very well commend yourself to God or to whomever you like; for Malambruno, though he is an enchanter, is a Christian, and works his enchantments with a great deal of shrewdness and a great deal of care, without meddling with anybody."

"Well then," said Sancho, "God help me, and the Most Holy Trinity of Gaeta!"

"Since the memorable adventure of the fulling mills," said Don Quixote, "I have never seen Sancho in such terror as now; and if I were as much of a believer in omens as some, his faint-heartedness would tickle my spirit a little. But come here, Sancho, for with these ladies' and gentlemen's leave I want to have two words with you apart."

And, drawing Sancho aside among some trees in the garden and taking both his hands, he said to him:

"You see now, brother Sancho, the long journey that is waiting for us, and that God knows when we shall come back from it, or what convenience and leisure our business will give us. And so I should like you to withdraw now to your room, as though you were going to look for something necessary for the road, and in the twinkling of an eye give yourself, on account of the three thousand three hundred lashes you are bound to, five hundred at least — which will be so many given; and to begin things is to have them half finished."

"By God," said Sancho, "your worship must be out of your mind! This is like what they say: 'You see me in a hurry and you ask me for my maidenhead!' Now, when I have to go and sit on a bare board, does your worship want me to hurt my backside? Truly and truly, your worship is not being reasonable. Let us go now and shave these duennas, and on the way back I promise your worship, as sure as I am who I am, to make such haste to get out of my obligation that your worship will be content; and I say no more."

And Don Quixote answered:

"Well, with that promise, good Sancho, I go consoled; and I believe you will keep it, because in fact, though a fool, you are a man of true colours."

"I am not of any colour, I am brown," said Sancho; "but even if I were of mixed cloth, I would keep my word."

And with this they went back to mount Clavileño, and as he mounted Don Quixote said:

"Cover yourself, Sancho, and mount, Sancho; for a man who sends for us from such far-off lands will not be one to deceive us, for the little glory that can come to him from deceiving somebody who trusts him. And, granting that everything turned out backwards from what I imagine, no malice can dim the glory of having undertaken this exploit."

"Let us go, sir," said Sancho, "for these ladies' beards and tears I have nailed into my heart, and I shall not eat a mouthful that tastes good to me until I see them in their first smoothness. Let your worship mount and cover yourself first; for if I am to go on the crupper, it is plain that the man in the saddle mounts first."

"That is the truth," replied Don Quixote.

And, taking a handkerchief out of his pocket, he asked the Distressed Lady to cover his eyes very well; and, having had them covered, he uncovered them again and said:

"If I remember rightly, I have read in Virgil that business of the Palladium of Troy, which was a wooden horse the Greeks presented to the goddess Pallas, and which went pregnant with armed knights who were afterwards the total ruin of Troy. And so it will be as well to see first what Clavileño has in his stomach."

"There is no call for it," said the Distressed Lady, "for I answer for him and know that Malambruno has nothing malicious or treacherous about him. Let your worship, Señor Don Quixote, mount without any dread, and on my head be it if any harm comes to you."

It seemed to Don Quixote that anything he might say about his own safety would be to the detriment of his valour; and so, without arguing any more, he got up on Clavileño and tried the peg, which turned easily. And, as he had no stirrups and his legs hung down, he looked like nothing so much as a figure in a Flemish tapestry, painted or woven into some Roman triumph.

Unwillingly and little by little Sancho got himself up; and, settling as best he could on the crupper, he found it rather hard and not at all soft, and asked the duke whether, if it were possible, they could let him have some cushion or some pillow, even if it were from my lady the duchess's drawing room or from some page's bed, because that horse's crupper seemed more of marble than of wood.

To this the Trifaldi said that Clavileño would suffer no harness or any kind of adornment on him; that what he could do was to sit sidesaddle, and then he would not feel the hardness so much. Sancho did so, and, saying goodbye, let himself be blindfolded; and then, after being blindfolded, he uncovered himself again, and, looking tenderly and with tears at everybody in the garden, asked them to help him in this pass with a paternoster and an ave apiece, so that God might furnish somebody to say them for them when they found themselves in the same pass. To which Don Quixote said:

"You thief, are you on the gallows by any chance, or at the last term of your life, to use prayers of that kind? Are you not, you soulless and cowardly creature, in the very place the fair Magalona occupied, from which she came down not to the grave but to be queen of France, if the histories are not lying? And I, who am at your side, may I not set myself beside the valorous Pierres, who pressed this very place I am pressing now? Cover yourself, cover yourself, you disheartened animal, and do not let the fear you feel come out at your mouth, at least in my presence."

"Cover me up," answered Sancho; "and since they will not have me commend myself to God or be commended, what wonder is it if I am afraid there may be some region of devils about here who will land us in the criminals' field?"

They covered themselves; and Don Quixote, feeling that he was as he ought to be, tried the peg. And he had hardly put his fingers on it when all the duennas and everybody present raised their voices, saying:

"God guide you, valorous knight!"

"God be with you, fearless squire!"

"Now, now you are going through the air, cutting through it faster than an arrow!"

"Now you are beginning to astonish and amaze everybody watching you from the ground!"

"Hold on, valorous Sancho, you are swaying! Mind you do not fall, for your fall will be worse than that of the bold young man who wanted to drive the chariot of the Sun, his father!"

Sancho heard the voices, and, squeezing up against his master and gripping him with his arms, said to him:

"Sir, how can these people say we are going so high, if their voices reach us here, and it sounds for all the world as if they were talking right next to us?"

"Do not stick at that, Sancho; for since these things and these flights go outside the ordinary courses, from a thousand leagues off you will see and hear whatever you like. And do not squeeze me so tight, for you are pulling me over. And truly I do not know what you are troubled or frightened about, for I would dare to swear that in all the days of my life I have never got up on a mount with a smoother pace: it seems for all the world as though we were not moving from one place. Banish fear, my friend, for in fact the thing is going as it ought and we have the wind behind us."

"That is the truth," answered Sancho, "for on this side there comes such a strong wind at me that it seems as if they were blowing on me with a thousand bellows."

And so it was, for some great bellows were making the air on him: so well was that adventure laid out by the duke and the duchess and their steward that it lacked nothing that could make it perfect.

Feeling himself blown on, then, Don Quixote said:

"Without any doubt, Sancho, we must be arriving now at the second region of the air, where the hail and the snows are engendered; the thunder, the lightning and the thunderbolts are engendered in the third region; and if we go on climbing in this way, we shall soon strike the region of fire, and I do not know how to temper this peg so that we do not climb to where we shall be burnt up."

At this, with some tow that lit and went out easily, hanging from a cane, they were warming their faces from a distance. Sancho, feeling the heat, said:

"May they kill me if we are not in the place of fire already, or very near it; because a good part of my beard has been singed, and I am half inclined, sir, to uncover myself and see what part of the world we are in."

"Do no such thing," answered Don Quixote, "and remember the true story of the licentiate Torralba, whom the devils carried off through the air, riding on a cane with his eyes shut, and in twelve hours he arrived in Rome and got down at the Torre di Nona, which is a street of the city, and saw the whole disaster and assault and the death of Bourbon; and by morning he was back in Madrid, where he gave an account of everything he had seen. He said too that when he was going through the air the devil ordered him to open his eyes, and he opened them and saw himself so close, as it seemed to him, to the body of the moon that he could have grasped it with his hand; and that he did not dare to look at the earth for fear of growing dizzy.

"So, Sancho, there is no call for us to uncover ourselves; for the man who has charge of us will answer for us, and perhaps we are circling up and climbing high so as to drop at one swoop on the kingdom of Candaya, as the saker or the peregrine does on the heron to catch her, however high she soars. And, although it seems to us that it is not half an hour since we set off from the garden, believe me, we must have come a long way."

"I do not know how it is," answered Sancho Panza. "I can only say that if the lady Magellan, or Magalona, was satisfied with this crupper, she cannot have been very tender of flesh."

All this talk of the two brave men was heard by the duke and the duchess and the people in the garden, from which they took extraordinary pleasure; and, wanting to bring the strange and well-made adventure to a close, they set fire to Clavileño's tail with some tow. And at once, the horse being full of thundering rockets, he flew through the air with a strange noise and pitched Don Quixote and Sancho Panza to the ground, half singed.

By this time the whole bearded squadron of duennas and the Trifaldi and all had disappeared out of the garden, and the people in the garden were left stretched out on the ground as if in a faint. Don Quixote and Sancho got up in a bad way, and, looking in every direction, were astounded to find themselves in the very garden they had set out from, and to see so many people stretched out on the ground.

And their astonishment grew still greater when at one side of the garden they saw a great lance driven into the ground, and hanging from it by two green silk cords a smooth white parchment, on which, in great gold letters, was written the following:

The illustrious knight Don Quixote of La Mancha has finished and completed the adventure of the Countess Trifaldi, otherwise called the Distressed Duenna, and company, merely by attempting it.

Malambruno declares himself content and satisfied to the full of his desire; the duennas' beards are now smooth and bare, and King Don Clavijo and Antonomasia are restored to their first estate. And when the squirely whipping has been completed, the white dove shall find herself free of the pestilent gerfalcons who persecute her and in the arms of her beloved and cooing mate; for so it is ordained by the wise Merlin, arch-enchanter of enchanters.

Don Quixote, then, having read the letters on the parchment, clearly understood that they were speaking of Dulcinea's disenchantment; and, giving many thanks to heaven that with so little danger he had finished so great a feat, restoring to their former complexion the faces of the venerable duennas, who were no longer to be seen, he went to where the duke and duchess had still not come round, and, taking the duke by the hand, said to him:

"Come, good sir, good courage; good courage, for it is all nothing! The adventure is over now, and without harm to anybody, as the writing set up on that pillar plainly shows."

The duke, little by little, and like a man waking from a heavy sleep, came round to himself; and in the same manner the duchess and everybody else who had fallen down about the garden, with such signs of wonder and terror that they could almost have given it to be understood that what they knew so well how to feign in play had really happened to them. The duke read the notice with his eyes half shut, and then with open arms went to embrace Don Quixote, telling him that he was the best knight who had ever been seen in any age.

Sancho was looking about for the Distressed Lady, to see what face she had without the beard, and whether she was as beautiful without it as her splendid figure promised; but they told him that as soon as Clavileño came down burning through the air and struck the ground, the whole squadron of duennas with the Trifaldi had disappeared, and that they were already shaved and without a stubble. The duchess asked Sancho how he had got on during that long journey. To which Sancho answered:

"I, my lady, felt that we were flying, as my master told me, through the region of fire, and I wanted to uncover my eyes a little; but my master, of whom I asked leave to uncover them, would not allow it. But I, having I do not know what shreds of curiosity in me and of wanting to know what is kept from me and blocked off, quietly and without anybody seeing, right beside my nose, moved aside just so much of the handkerchief that was covering my eyes, and looked out that way towards the earth; and it seemed to me that the whole of it was no bigger than a grain of mustard seed, and the men walking about on it a little bigger than hazelnuts — so you may see how high we must have been going then."

To this the duchess said:

"Sancho my friend, look at what you are saying; for by the sound of it you did not see the earth but the men walking about on it. And it is plain that if the earth looked to you like a grain of mustard seed and every man like a hazelnut, one man alone would have covered the whole earth."

"That is true," answered Sancho, "but for all that I uncovered it from one little side and saw the whole of it."

"Look, Sancho," said the duchess, "for from one little side you cannot see the whole of what you are looking at."

"I do not know about those ways of looking," replied Sancho. "I only know that your ladyship had better understand that, since we were flying by enchantment, by enchantment I could see the whole earth and all the men wherever I looked at them. And if this is not believed of me, neither will your worship believe how, uncovering myself right by my eyebrows, I saw myself so close to heaven that there was not a hand and a half between me and it; and by what I can swear, my lady, it is very big indeed.

"And it happened that we were going through the part where the seven little goats are — the Pleiades, that is. And in God and in my soul, since in my childhood I was a goatherd in my own country, as soon as I saw them such a longing came over me to amuse myself with them for a while! And if I had not satisfied it, I think I should have burst. So I come along and I take and — what do I do? Without saying anything to anybody, or to my master either, quietly and gently I got down off Clavileño and amused myself with the little goats, which are like gillyflowers and like flowers, for nearly three quarters of an hour; and Clavileño never stirred from his place or went on."

"And while good Sancho was amusing himself with the goats," asked the duke, "what was Señor Don Quixote amusing himself with?"

To which Don Quixote answered:

"Since all these things and these events go outside the natural order, it is no great matter that Sancho says what he says. For myself I can say that I neither uncovered myself above nor below, and I saw neither the sky nor the earth, nor the sea nor the sands. It is quite true that I felt I was passing through the region of the air, and even that I was touching that of fire; but that we passed beyond that I cannot believe, since, the region of fire being between the heaven of the moon and the last region of the air, we could not have reached the heaven where the seven little goats Sancho speaks of are without being burnt up. And, since we were not scorched, either Sancho is lying or Sancho is dreaming."

"I am neither lying nor dreaming," answered Sancho. "If you doubt it, ask me for the marks of those goats, and by them you will see whether I am telling the truth or not."

"Say them, then, Sancho," said the duchess.

"They are," answered Sancho, "two green, two red, two blue, and one mottled."

"That is a new kind of goat," said the duke, "and in this region of ours on the ground such colours are not in use — I mean goats of such colours."

"That is plain enough," said Sancho. "Why, there has to be some difference between the goats of the sky and the goats of the ground."

"Tell me, Sancho," asked the duke: "did you see any he-goat up there among those goats?"

"No, sir," answered Sancho, "but I have heard it said that none of them ever goes past the horns of the moon."

They would not ask him anything more about his journey, because it seemed to them that Sancho had the thread in hand for strolling through all the heavens and bringing news of everything that went on up there, without having stirred from the garden.

In short, this was the end of the adventure of the Distressed Duenna, which gave the duke and duchess something to laugh about, not only at that time but for the whole of their lives, and gave Sancho something to tell for centuries, if he had lived them. And Don Quixote, going up to Sancho, said in his ear:

"Sancho, since you want people to believe you about what you saw in the sky, I want you to believe me about what I saw in the cave of Montesinos; and I say no more to you."
