Chapter 42: Of the Advice Don Quixote Gave Sancho Panza Before He Went to Govern the Isle, with Other Well-Considered Matters

With the happy and amusing outcome of the adventure of the Distressed Lady, the duke and duchess were left so pleased that they decided to go further with their tricks, seeing what a convenient subject they had for having them taken for earnest. And so, having laid out the plan and the orders their servants and their vassals were to keep with Sancho in the government of the promised isle, the next day — which was the one after Clavileño's flight — the duke told Sancho to smarten himself up and get ready to go and be governor, for his islanders were already waiting for him like the rain in May. Sancho bowed to him and said:

"Ever since I came down from the sky, and ever since from its high summit I looked at the earth and saw it so small, the great longing I had to be a governor has cooled in me somewhat; because what greatness is there in ruling over a grain of mustard seed, or what dignity or empire in governing half a dozen men the size of hazelnuts — which, to my mind, was all there were in the whole earth? If your lordship would be pleased to give me a tiny little piece of the sky, even if it were no more than half a league, I would take it more willingly than the biggest isle in the world."

"Look, Sancho my friend," answered the duke, "I cannot give a piece of the sky to anybody, not even a piece the size of a fingernail, for those favours and graces are reserved to God alone. What I can give you I do give: an isle ready-made and proper, round and well proportioned and extremely fertile and rich, where if you know how to manage yourself you can, with the riches of earth, gain those of heaven."

"Well now," answered Sancho, "let this isle come; for I shall struggle to be such a governor that in spite of rascals I shall go to heaven. And this is not out of any greed I have to get above myself or to raise myself higher, but out of the desire I have to try what being a governor tastes like."

"If you once taste it, Sancho," said the duke, "you will be licking your fingers after the government, since it is the sweetest thing to command and be obeyed. It is a safe bet that when your master gets to be an emperor — which he undoubtedly will, the way his affairs are heading — they will not tear it away from him easily, and it will hurt and grieve him in the middle of his soul for the time he has spent without being one."

"Sir," replied Sancho, "I imagine it is a good thing to be in command, even if it is only of a flock of sheep."

"Let them bury me with you, Sancho, for you know about everything," answered the duke; "and I hope you will be as good a governor as your judgement promises. And let this rest here; and note that tomorrow, on that very day, you are to go to the government of the isle, and this afternoon they will fit you out with the proper clothes you are to wear and with all the things necessary for your departure."

"Let them dress me," said Sancho, "however they like; for whatever way I go dressed I shall be Sancho Panza."

"That is true," said the duke; "but the clothes have to fit the office or the dignity a man professes, for it would not be right for a jurist to dress like a soldier, or a soldier like a priest. You, Sancho, shall go dressed partly as a lawyer and partly as a captain; because in the isle I am giving you, arms are as necessary as letters, and letters as arms."

"Letters," answered Sancho, "I have few, because I do not even know my A B C; but it is enough for me to have the Christ-cross by heart to be a good governor. Of arms I shall handle whichever they give me until I drop, and God before us."

"With such a good memory," said the duke, "Sancho cannot go wrong in anything."

At this Don Quixote arrived; and, learning what was afoot and the speed with which Sancho was to set off to his government, with the duke's leave he took him by the hand and went with him to his own room, meaning to advise him how he was to conduct himself in his office.

Having gone into his room, then, he shut the door behind him and made Sancho sit down beside him almost by force; and in a composed voice he said to him:

"Infinite thanks I give heaven, Sancho my friend, that before and ahead of my coming across any good fortune of my own, good fortune has come out to receive and meet you. I, who had made over the payment of your services to my own good luck, find myself only at the beginnings of getting ahead; and you, ahead of time and against the law of reasonable expectation, find yourself rewarded in your desires.

"Others bribe, importune, solicit, get up early, beg, insist, and do not attain what they are after; and along comes another, and without knowing how or why finds himself with the charge and office that a great many others were after; and here it comes in and fits well to say that there is good and bad fortune in ambitions. You, who to my mind are without any doubt a blockhead, without getting up early or staying up late and without taking any pains at all, merely with the breath of knight-errantry that has touched you, find yourself, without any more ado, governor of an isle, as though it were nothing.

"All this I say, Sancho, so that you should not put down to your own deserts the favour you have received, but should give thanks to heaven, which disposes things gently — and afterwards you shall give them to the greatness that the profession of knight-errantry contains in itself. Your heart being disposed, then, to believe what I have told you, be attentive, my son, to this Cato of yours, who wants to advise you and to be the pole star and the guide to set you on your road and bring you out at a safe harbour from this stormy sea you are about to put out into; for offices and great charges are nothing but a deep gulf of confusions.

"First of all, my son, you must fear God, because in fearing him lies wisdom; and being wise you cannot go wrong in anything.

"Second, you must set your eyes on who you are, trying to know yourself — which is the most difficult knowledge that can be imagined. From knowing yourself will come your not puffing yourself up like the frog who wanted to make himself equal to the ox; for if you do that, the thought of having kept pigs in your own country will come to be the ugly feet to the spread tail of your folly."

"That is true," answered Sancho, "but it was when I was a boy; afterwards, when I was something of a young man, it was geese I kept and not pigs. But this seems to me beside the point, for not everybody who governs comes of the stock of kings."

"That is true," replied Don Quixote, "for which reason those who are not of noble beginnings must accompany the gravity of the charge they exercise with a mild gentleness which, guided by prudence, may free them from the malicious gossip that no station escapes.

"Make a display, Sancho, of the humbleness of your family, and do not be ashamed to say that you come of farm labourers; because, seeing that you are not put out of countenance, nobody will set about putting you out of countenance. And take more pride in being a virtuous humble man than a proud sinner. Innumerable are those who, born of low stock, have risen to the highest papal and imperial dignity; and of this truth I could bring you so many examples that they would tire you.

"Look, Sancho: if you take virtue as your means and pride yourself on doing virtuous deeds, there is no call to envy those who have princes and lords for parents; because blood is inherited and virtue is acquired, and virtue is worth by itself what blood is not worth.

"This being so, as it is, then if by any chance some relation of yours should come to see you when you are in your isle, do not turn him away or affront him; on the contrary, you must receive him, make much of him and entertain him. In doing so you will satisfy heaven, which is pleased that nobody should despise what it made, and you will answer to what you owe to a well-ordered nature.

"If you bring your wife with you — for it is not right that those who attend governments for a long time should be without their own wives — teach her, instruct her and rub off her natural roughness, because everything a judicious governor generally gains, a rustic and foolish woman generally loses and spills.

"If by any chance you should be widowed — a thing that can happen — and with your office should better yourself in a consort, do not take one of the kind who will serve you as a hook and a fishing rod, and as the 'no thank you — but drop it in my hood'; because in truth I tell you that for everything the judge's wife receives, the husband must give an account at the universal reckoning, where in death he shall pay fourfold the entries he did not charge himself with in life.

"Never be guided by the law of your own fancy, which generally finds a great deal of favour with ignorant men who presume to be sharp.

"Let the tears of the poor man find more compassion in you, but no more justice, than the depositions of the rich. Try to uncover the truth through the rich man's promises and gifts as much as through the poor man's sobs and importunities.

"When equity can and should have a place, do not lay all the rigour of the law on the offender, for the reputation of the severe judge is no better than that of the compassionate one.

"If you should happen to bend the rod of justice, let it not be with the weight of a gift but with that of mercy.

"When it falls to you to judge some case of an enemy of yours, take your mind off your own injury and set it on the truth of the case.

"Do not let your own passion blind you in another man's cause, for the mistakes you make in it will most often be past remedy; and if they are not, it will be at the cost of your credit and even of your property.

"If some beautiful woman comes to ask you for justice, take your eyes off her tears and your ears off her sighs, and consider at leisure the substance of what she is asking for, unless you want your reason to be drowned in her weeping and your goodness in her sighs.

"The man you have to punish in deeds, do not treat badly in words; for the pain of the punishment is enough for the wretched man, without the addition of hard words.

"Consider the guilty man who falls under your jurisdiction to be a miserable man, subject to the conditions of our depraved nature; and in everything that lies with you, without doing a wrong to the other party, show yourself merciful and clement to him. Because although all God's attributes are equal, to our eyes the attribute of mercy shines and shows itself more than that of justice.

"If you follow these precepts and these rules, Sancho, your days will be long, your fame will be everlasting, your rewards heaped up, your happiness beyond telling; you will marry your children as you like, they and your grandchildren will have titles, you will live in peace and in the good pleasure of the people, and in the last steps of your life the step of death will reach you, in a gentle and ripe old age, and the tender, delicate hands of your great-great-grandchildren will close your eyes.

"What I have told you so far are precepts that are to adorn your soul; listen now to those that are to serve for the adornment of the body."
