Chapter 43: Of the Second Set of Advice Don Quixote Gave Sancho Panza

Who could have heard Don Quixote's last speech without taking him for a very sane person and a very well-meaning one? But, as has been said many times in the course of this great history, he only went off the rails when they touched him on chivalry, and in all his other talk he showed himself to have a clear and unencumbered understanding — so that at every step his deeds discredited his judgement and his judgement his deeds. But in this second set of precepts he gave Sancho, he showed great charm and set his judiciousness and his madness at a very high pitch.

Sancho listened to him most attentively, and tried to keep his advice in his memory, like a man who meant to hold on to it and to come by it to a good delivery from the pregnancy of his government. Don Quixote went on, then, and said:

"As to how you are to govern your own person and household, Sancho, the first thing I charge you with is to be clean, and to cut your nails and not let them grow, as some do, whose ignorance has given them to understand that long nails make their hands beautiful — as if that excrement and outgrowth they leave uncut were a nail, when it is rather the claws of a lizard-hunting kestrel: a filthy and monstrous abuse.

"Do not go about ungirt and slack, Sancho, for disordered clothes are a sign of a feeble spirit — unless the disorder and the slackness come under the head of slyness, as was judged in Julius Caesar's case.

"Take the pulse with discretion of what your office may be worth; and if it will run to giving liveries to your servants, give them decent and useful ones rather than showy and gallant ones, and share them out between your servants and the poor. I mean that if you are to dress six pages, dress three and another three poor men, and then you will have pages for heaven and pages for the ground; and this new way of giving liveries is beyond the reach of the vainglorious.

"Do not eat garlic or onions, so that they may not find out your rusticity by the smell.

"Walk slowly; speak with composure, but not in such a way that you seem to be listening to yourself, for all affectation is bad.

"Eat little and sup even less, for the health of the whole body is forged in the workshop of the stomach.

"Be temperate in drinking, considering that too much wine keeps no secret and holds to no promise.

"Take care, Sancho, not to chew on both sides of your mouth, and not to eructate in front of anybody."

"That business of eructating I do not understand," said Sancho.

And Don Quixote said to him:

"To eructate, Sancho, means to belch; and this is one of the coarsest words the Castilian tongue has, although it is very expressive. And so people of taste have taken refuge in Latin, and for belching say eructating, and for belches, eructations. And if some people do not understand these terms, it matters little; usage will bring them in with time, so that they are easily understood — and this is enriching the language, over which the common people and usage have power."

"Truly, sir," said Sancho, "one of the pieces of advice and warning I mean to carry in my memory will be that of not belching, because I generally do it very often."

"Eructating, Sancho, not belching," said Don Quixote.

"Eructating I shall say from now on," answered Sancho, "and upon my word I shall not forget it."

"Also, Sancho, you must not mix into your talk the multitude of proverbs you generally do; for although proverbs are short judgements, you often drag them in so much by the hair that they look more like nonsense than judgements."

"God can put that right," answered Sancho, "because I know more proverbs than a book, and so many of them come into my mouth together when I talk that they fight one another to get out; but my tongue goes on throwing out the first ones it comes across, even if they are not to the point. But I shall take care from now on to say the ones that suit the gravity of my charge; for in a full house supper is soon cooked, and he who cuts the pack does not shuffle, and safe is the man who rings the alarm, and giving and holding needs some brains."

"That is it, Sancho!" said Don Quixote. "Jam them in, thread them, string them together, for there is nobody to hold you back! 'My mother beats me and I spin my top!' I am telling you to leave off proverbs, and in an instant you have thrown out a whole litany of them here, which fit what we are talking about about as well as the hills of Úbeda do. Look, Sancho, I am not telling you that a proverb brought in to the point looks bad; but to load and thread proverbs on helter-skelter makes conversation feeble and low.

"When you get on horseback, do not go throwing your body over the hind saddlebow, or carry your legs stiff and straight out and away from the horse's belly; nor go so slack that it looks as if you were on the grey. For riding makes some men horsemen and others horse-boys.

"Let your sleep be moderate, for the man who does not get up with the sun does not enjoy the day. And note, Sancho, that diligence is the mother of good fortune, and that laziness, her opposite, never reached the goal a good wish asks for.

"This last piece of advice I want to give you now, although it does not serve for the adornment of the body, I want you to carry very much in your memory, for I believe it will be of no less use to you than the ones I have given you so far. And it is that you should never set yourself to argue about lineages, at least by comparing them with each other; because of necessity, among those compared one has to be the better, and by the one you cast down you will be hated and by the one you raise up you will in no way be rewarded.

"Your dress shall be full hose, a long jerkin and a cloak a little longer; wide breeches, not by any means, for they suit neither knights nor governors.

"For now this is what has occurred to me, Sancho, to advise you. Time will go on, and according to the occasions so shall my precepts be, so long as you take care to let me know the state you find yourself in."

"Sir," answered Sancho, "I see well enough that everything your worship has told me is good and holy and profitable; but what use will it be if I remember none of it? It is true that the business of not letting my nails grow and of marrying again if it should happen will not slip out of my noddle; but all those other hotchpotches and tangles and jumbles, I do not remember them and shall remember them no more than last year's clouds. And so it will be necessary for them to be given me in writing; for although I cannot read or write, I shall give them to my confessor so that he can drive them into me and go over them with me when it is needed."

"Ah, sinner that I am," answered Don Quixote, "how badly it looks in governors not to be able to read or write! Because you must know, Sancho, that a man's not knowing how to read, or his being left-handed, argues one of two things: either that he was the son of parents who were excessively humble and low, or that he was so mischievous and bad that no good habits or good teaching could get into him. It is a great fault you carry about with you, and so I should like you to learn at least to sign your name."

"I know very well how to sign my name," answered Sancho; "for when I was steward of the confraternity in my village I learnt to make some letters like the mark on a bale, which they said made my name. And besides, I shall pretend that my right hand is crippled and get somebody else to sign for me; for there is a remedy for everything except death, and, having the command and the staff, I shall do what I like. What is more, the man whose father is mayor — and I being a governor, which is more than being a mayor, come along and see!

"No — let them jeer at me and slander me, and they will come for wool and go back shorn; and whom God loves, his house smells sweet; and a rich man's follies pass for wise judgements in this world; and, being one myself, being a governor and generous into the bargain, as I mean to be, no fault of mine will show. No — make yourself honey and the flies will eat you; you are worth as much as you have, a grandmother of mine used to say; and of a man with roots you will never get your revenge."

"Oh, God curse you, Sancho!" said Don Quixote at this. "May sixty thousand Satans carry you off and your proverbs with you! For an hour now you have been stringing them together and giving me a swallow of torment with each one. I assure you that these proverbs will take you to the gallows one day; because of them your vassals will take the government away from you, or there will be risings among them. Tell me, where do you find them, ignoramus, or how do you apply them, idiot? For me to say one and apply it properly, I sweat and labour as though I were digging."

"By God, sir our master," replied Sancho, "your worship complains about very small things. Why the devil do you fret about my making use of my own property, when I have no other and no other capital but proverbs and more proverbs? And now four occur to me that came in here exactly to the pattern, or like pears in a basket; but I shall not say them, because good silence they call Sancho."

"That Sancho is not you," said Don Quixote, "because you are not only not good silence, but bad speech and bad insisting. All the same, I should like to know what four proverbs came into your memory just now that were to the point here; for I am going over my own, which is a good one, and none occurs to me."

"What better," said Sancho, "than 'never put your thumbs between two wisdom teeth', and 'to "get out of my house" and "what do you want with my wife" there is no answering', and 'whether the pitcher hits the stone or the stone the pitcher, it goes badly for the pitcher' — all of which come to the point? Because nobody should take on his governor or the man who commands him, since he will come off hurt, like the man who puts his finger between two wisdom teeth; and even if they are not wisdom teeth, so long as they are teeth it does not matter. And to whatever the governor says there is no answering, as with 'get out of my house' and 'what do you want with my wife'. And as for the stone and the pitcher, a blind man would see it. So it is necessary that the man who sees the mote in his neighbour's eye should see the beam in his own, so that it may not be said of him: 'the dead woman was frightened of the one with her throat cut'; and your worship knows very well that a fool knows more in his own house than a wise man in another's."

"Not that, Sancho," answered Don Quixote; "for the fool knows nothing, either in his own house or in another's, since on the foundation of foolishness no judicious building will stand. And let us leave this here, Sancho; for if you govern badly, the fault will be yours and the shame mine. But I console myself that I have done what I ought in advising you with all the earnestness and judgement possible to me: with this I discharge my obligation and my promise. God guide you, Sancho, and govern you in your government, and get me out of the scruple I am left with that you are going to turn the whole isle upside down — a thing I could avoid by disclosing to the duke who you are, telling him that all that fat and that little person of yours is nothing but a sack full of proverbs and mischief."

"Sir," replied Sancho, "if it seems to your worship that I am not fit for this government, I release you from it here and now; for I care more for a single black speck of my soul's fingernail than for my whole body. And I shall keep myself alive as plain Sancho on bread and onions as well as as a governor on partridges and capons; and what is more, while we are asleep we are all equal, the great and the small, the poor and the rich. And if your worship looks into it, you will see that it was your worship alone who put me into this business of governing; for I know no more about governing isles than a vulture does. And if you imagine that because I am a governor the devil will carry me off, I would rather go to heaven as Sancho than to hell as a governor."

"By God, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "for these last words alone that you have said, I judge that you deserve to be governor of a thousand isles. You have a good nature, without which there is no learning worth anything. Commend yourself to God, and try not to go wrong in your first intention — I mean that you should always have the aim and firm purpose of getting things right in whatever business comes to you, because heaven always favours good desires. And let us go in to dinner, for I believe these ladies and gentlemen are waiting for us."
