Chapter 44: How Sancho Panza Was Taken to His Government, and of the Strange Adventure That Befell Don Quixote in the Castle

They say that in the very original of this history it is read that when Cide Hamete came to write this chapter, his interpreter did not translate it as he had written it — which was a kind of complaint the Moor made against himself for having taken in hand a history as dry and as limited as this one of Don Quixote, since it seemed to him that he always had to talk about him and about Sancho, without daring to spread himself into other digressions and episodes graver and more entertaining.

And he said that to have the understanding, the hand and the pen always tied to writing about a single subject and speaking through the mouths of a few people was an unbearable labour whose fruit did not redound to its author; and that, to escape this drawback, he had used in the first part the device of certain tales, such as The Ill-Advised Curiosity and that of the Captive Captain, which stand as though separate from the history, since the rest that are told there are cases that happened to Don Quixote himself and could not be left unwritten.

He also thought, as he says, that many people, carried away by the attention Don Quixote's exploits demand, would not give it to the tales and would pass over them either in a hurry or in annoyance, without noticing the elegance and craftsmanship they contain in themselves — which would show itself plainly in the open when they came out into the light on their own, without leaning on Don Quixote's madnesses or on Sancho's foolishness.

And so in this second part he did not want to insert loose or stuck-on tales but some episodes that should look like them, born of the very events that the truth provides — and even these limitedly, and with only the words that are enough to set them out. And since he holds and shuts himself within the narrow limits of the narrative, having the ability, sufficiency and understanding to deal with the whole universe, he asks that his labour should not be despised, and that he should be given praise not for what he writes but for what he has left unwritten.

And then the history goes on, saying that when Don Quixote had finished dinner on the day he gave Sancho his advice, that afternoon he gave it him in writing, so that he could look for somebody to read it to him. But hardly had he given it him when it fell out of his hands and came into the duke's, who shared it with the duchess; and the two of them marvelled afresh at Don Quixote's madness and his wit. And so, carrying their tricks further, that afternoon they sent Sancho with a great retinue to the place that was to be his isle.

It happened, then, that the man who had charge of him was a steward of the duke's, very judicious and very amusing — for there can be no amusement where there is no judgement — who had played the part of the Countess Trifaldi with the grace already described; and with this, and with being coached by his master and mistress on how he was to conduct himself with Sancho, he carried out his purpose marvellously.

I say, then, that it happened that as soon as Sancho saw this steward, he seemed to see the very face of the Trifaldi in his; and, turning to his master, he said to him:

"Sir, either the devil must carry me off from where I stand here, in justice and in belief, or your worship must admit to me that this face of the duke's steward here is the same as the Distressed Lady's."

Don Quixote looked attentively at the steward, and, having looked at him, said to Sancho:

"There is no call for the devil to carry you off, Sancho, either in justice or in belief — for I do not know what you mean. The Distressed Lady's face is the steward's, but that does not make the steward the Distressed Lady; for if it did, it would imply a very great contradiction. And this is not the time to make these investigations, for it would be getting ourselves into intricate labyrinths. Believe me, my friend, it is necessary to pray to Our Lord very earnestly to deliver the two of us from bad sorcerers and bad enchanters."

"It is no joke, sir," replied Sancho, "for a little while ago I heard him speak, and it sounded for all the world as though the Trifaldi's voice were ringing in my ears. Well now, I shall be quiet; but I shall not leave off going about on the watch from now on, to see whether I can find another sign that confirms or undoes my suspicion."

"That is what you must do, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and you shall give me notice of everything you find out in this business and of everything that happens to you in the government."

Sancho set off at last, attended by a great many people, dressed as a lawyer, and over that a very wide coat of tawny watered camlet with a cap of the same, riding a mule with short stirrups; and behind him, by the duke's orders, went the grey with harness and donkeyish trappings of silk and brand new. Sancho turned his head from time to time to look at his donkey, in whose company he went so contented that he would not have swapped with the emperor of Germany.

On taking his leave of the duke and duchess he kissed their hands, and took his master's blessing, which he gave him in tears; and Sancho received it with a pouting lip.

Let good Sancho go in peace and good luck, kind reader, and expect two bushels of laughter from learning how he conducted himself in his charge; and meanwhile attend to learning what happened to his master that night — at which, if you do not laugh, at least you will part your lips in an ape's grin, since Don Quixote's doings must be celebrated either with wonder or with laughter.

It is told, then, that Sancho had hardly set off when Don Quixote felt his loneliness; and if it had been possible for him to revoke his commission and take away his government, he would have done it. The duchess noticed his melancholy and asked him what he was sad about; and that if it was Sancho's absence, there were squires, duennas and maidens in her house who would serve him quite to the satisfaction of his wishes.

"It is true, my lady," answered Don Quixote, "that I feel Sancho's absence; but that is not the chief cause that makes me seem sad. And of the many offers your excellency makes me, I accept and choose only the good will with which they are made; and for the rest I beg Your Excellency to consent and permit that within my own room I alone should be the one to serve myself."

"Truly," said the duchess, "Señor Don Quixote, it must not be so: four of my maidens, as beautiful as flowers, shall serve you."

"For me," answered Don Quixote, "they will not be like flowers but like thorns to pierce my soul. They shall come into my room, or anything like it, about as soon as they can fly. If your greatness wants to go on doing me favours I do not deserve, let me be alone with myself and serve myself inside my own doors; let me put a wall between my desires and my chastity. And I do not want to lose this habit because of the generosity your highness wants to show me. In short, I would sooner sleep in my clothes than let anybody undress me."

"No more, no more, Señor Don Quixote," replied the duchess. "For my part I say that I shall give orders that not so much as a fly shall come into your chamber, let alone a maiden. I am not the person to spoil Señor Don Quixote's decency; for, as far as I can see, the virtue that shows most among his many virtues is that of chastity. Let your worship undress and dress by yourself and in your own way, how and when you like, for there will be nobody to stop you; and inside your room you will find the vessels needed by a man who sleeps behind a shut door, so that no natural necessity may oblige him to open it. Long live the great Dulcinea of El Toboso for a thousand ages, and let her name be spread over the whole round of the earth, since she has deserved to be loved by so valiant and so chaste a knight; and may the kindly heavens pour into the heart of Sancho Panza, our governor, a desire to finish his disciplines quickly, so that the world may go back to enjoying the beauty of so great a lady."

To which Don Quixote said:

"Your loftiness has spoken like the woman you are; for in the mouth of good ladies there can be nothing bad. And Dulcinea will be more fortunate and better known in the world for your greatness's having praised her than for all the praises the most eloquent men on earth could give her."

"Well now, Señor Don Quixote," replied the duchess, "the supper hour is coming on, and the duke must be waiting. Let your worship come and let us have supper, and you shall go to bed early; for the journey you made yesterday from Candaya was not so short that it will not have caused you some aching."

"I feel none, my lady," answered Don Quixote, "because I would venture to swear to Your Excellency that in all my life I have never got up on a quieter beast or one of a better pace than Clavileño; and I do not know what could have moved Malambruno to get rid of so light and so fine a mount, and burn it up like that without any more ado."

"It may be imagined about that," answered the duchess, "that, repenting of the harm he had done the Trifaldi and company and other people, and of the wickednesses he must have committed as a sorcerer and an enchanter, he wanted to make an end of all the instruments of his trade; and, as the chief one and the one that most kept him restless, wandering from land to land, he burned Clavileño. And with his burnt ashes and with the trophy of the notice, the valour of the great Don Quixote of La Mancha is made everlasting."

Don Quixote gave the duchess fresh thanks again; and after supper he withdrew alone to his room, without allowing anybody to come in with him to serve him — so much did he fear meeting with occasions that might move or force him to lose the chaste decorum he kept for his lady Dulcinea, always keeping in his imagination the goodness of Amadís, the flower and mirror of knights errant. He shut the door behind him, and by the light of two wax candles undressed; and as he was taking off his stockings — O disaster unworthy of such a person! — there escaped him not sighs or anything else that might discredit the cleanness of his manners, but as many as two dozen stitches of one stocking, which was left like a lattice.

The good gentleman was distressed in the extreme, and he would have given an ounce of silver to have a scruple of green silk there — I say green silk because the stockings were green.

Here Benengeli broke out and, writing, said: "O poverty, poverty! I do not know with what reason that great poet of Cordova was moved to call you

	holy gift ungratefully received!

"I, although a Moor, know very well, through the dealings I have had with Christians, that holiness consists in charity, humility, faith, obedience and poverty; but for all that, I say that a man must have a great deal of God in him who can come to be content with being poor — unless it is with that kind of poverty of which one of their greatest saints says: 'Have all things as though you had them not'; and this they call poverty of spirit. But you, second poverty — and it is you I am talking about — why do you want to dash yourself against gentlemen and the well born rather than against other people? Why do you oblige them to give their shoes a lick of lampblack, and to have the buttons on their jerkins some of silk, some of horsehair and some of glass? Why must their collars, for the most part, always be crimped and not spread open with a mould?"

And in this it will be seen that the use of starch and open collars is an old one. And he went on: "Wretched is the well-born man who goes about feeding his honour with thin broth, eating badly and behind a closed door, making a hypocrite of the toothpick he goes out into the street with after eating nothing that obliged him to clean his teeth! Wretched, I say, is the man who has a skittish honour and thinks that from a league off people can see the patch on his shoe, the sweat stains on his hat, the threadbare place on his cloak and the hunger in his stomach!"

All this was renewed for Don Quixote in the running of his stitches; but he consoled himself with seeing that Sancho had left him a pair of travelling boots, which he meant to put on the next day. Finally he lay down thoughtful and grieved, as much for the loss Sancho was to him as for the irreparable disaster of his stockings, whose stitches he would have taken up even with silk of another colour — which is one of the greatest signs of poverty a gentleman can give in the course of his long-drawn-out hardship.

He put out the candles; it was hot and he could not sleep; he got up from the bed and opened a little the window of a grating that looked out on a beautiful garden, and, on opening it, he felt and heard that there were people walking and talking in the garden. He set himself to listen attentively. The people below raised their voices enough for him to hear these words:

"Do not press me, Emerencia, to sing; for you know that from the moment this stranger came into this castle and my eyes looked at him, I do not know how to sing but only how to weep. What is more, my lady's sleep is lighter rather than heavy, and I should not want her to find us here for all the treasure in the world. And supposing she were asleep and did not wake, my song would be in vain if this new Aeneas, who has come to my regions to leave me mocked, sleeps and does not wake to hear it."

"Do not think so, Altisidora my friend," they answered. "For without any doubt the duchess and everybody in this house is asleep, except the lord of your heart and the awakener of your soul; because I heard just now that he was opening the window of the grating in his chamber, and no doubt he must be awake. Sing, my wounded one, in a low and gentle tone to the sound of your harp; and if the duchess hears us, we shall blame the heat."

"That is not the point of it, Emerencia," answered Altisidora, "but that I should not like my song to uncover my heart and have me judged by those who know nothing of the mighty power of love as a whimsical and light girl. But come what may, for a blush on the face is better than a stain on the heart."

And with this she heard a harp very sweetly played. Hearing which, Don Quixote was thunderstruck, because in that instant there came into his memory the infinite adventures like this one — of windows, gratings and gardens, music, love-making and swoonings — that he had read in his empty-headed books of chivalry.

Then he imagined that some maiden of the duchess's was in love with him, and that modesty forced her to keep her feeling secret. He was afraid she might overcome him, and he resolved in his mind not to let himself be conquered; and, commending himself with all good courage and good will to his lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, he determined to listen to the music. And, to give it to be understood that he was there, he gave a pretended sneeze, at which the maidens were not a little glad, for they wanted nothing else but that Don Quixote should hear them. The harp being run over, then, and tuned, Altisidora began this ballad:

	O you who lie in your bed
	between sheets of finest linen,
	sleeping with your legs stretched out
	from the night until the morning,
	the most valiant knight
	that La Mancha has ever produced,
	more chaste and more blessed
	than the fine gold of Arabia!
	Hear a sorrowful maiden,
	well grown and badly used,
	who in the light of your two suns
	feels her soul burning up.
	You go looking for your adventures
	and you find other people's misfortunes;
	you deal out the wounds and you deny
	the remedy that would heal them.
	Tell me, valorous young man
	— and God prosper your longings —
	whether you were raised in Libya
	or in the mountains of Jaca;
	whether serpents gave you milk;
	whether, by chance, your nurses were
	the roughness of the forests
	and the horror of the mountains.
	Dulcinea may very well,
	that plump and healthy girl,
	pride herself on having tamed
	a tigress and a fierce wild beast.
	For this she will be famous
	from Henares to Jarama,
	from the Tagus to Manzanares,
	from Pisuerga as far as Arlanza.
	I would trade myself for her,
	and give a petticoat on top,
	one of the gayest ones I have,
	with fringes trimmed with gold.
	Oh, to find myself in your arms,
	or if not, beside your bed,
	scratching your head for you
	and killing off your dandruff!
	I ask too much, and I am not worthy
	of so signal a favour:
	I should like to rub your feet,
	which is enough for a humble girl.
	Oh, what caps I would give you,
	what socks worked with silver,
	what hose of damask,
	what cloaks of the finest linen!
	What most excellent pearls,
	each one the size of an oak gall,
	which, if they had no companions,
	would be called the Peerless Ones!
	Do not look from your Tarpeian rock
	on this fire that burns me up,
	Manchegan Nero of the world,
	and do not fan it with your fury.
	I am a girl, a tender maiden;
	my age does not pass fifteen:
	I am fourteen and three months,
	I swear to you by God and my soul.
	I am not lame and I am not crippled,
	and I have nothing withered about me;
	my hair is like lilies,
	and, standing up, it trails on the ground.
	And though my mouth is aquiline
	and my nose is rather flat,
	my teeth being of topaz
	exalts my beauty to the sky.
	My voice, as you can hear if you listen,
	is a match for the sweetest;
	and I am of a figure
	something less than middling.
	These and my other graces
	are the spoils of your quiver;
	I am a maiden of this house,
	and Altisidora they call me.

Here the song of the sorely wounded Altisidora came to an end, and the dismay of the courted Don Quixote began; who, giving a great sigh, said to himself:

"That I must be such an unfortunate errant that there is no maiden who looks at me and does not fall in love with me...! That the peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso must be so short of luck that they will not leave her alone to enjoy my incomparable constancy...! What do you want with her, you queens? Why do you persecute her, you empresses? Why do you harry her, you maidens of fourteen and fifteen? Leave her, leave the poor girl to triumph and rejoice and take pride in the lot Love chose to give her in surrendering my heart to her and handing over my soul.

"See, you enamoured crew, that for Dulcinea alone I am of dough and sugar paste, and for all the rest I am of flint; for her I am honey and for you aloes; for me Dulcinea alone is the beautiful, the judicious, the chaste, the gallant and the well born, and the rest are the ugly, the foolish, the light and the worst born. Nature threw me into the world to be hers and no other woman's. Let Altisidora weep or sing; let the lady despair for whom they beat me in the castle of the enchanted Moor; for I have to be Dulcinea's, boiled or roast, clean, well brought up and chaste, in spite of all the sorcerous powers on earth."

And with this he shut the window with a bang; and, put out and grieved, as though some great misfortune had befallen him, he lay down on his bed, where we shall leave him for now, because the great Sancho Panza is calling us, wanting to make a beginning of his famous government.
