Chapter 45: Of How the Great Sancho Panza Took Possession of His Isle, and of the Manner in Which He Began to Govern

O perpetual discoverer of the antipodes, torch of the world, eye of heaven, sweet swayer of the water coolers, Thymbraeus here, Phoebus there, archer this way and physician that, father of Poetry, inventor of Music — you who always rise and, though it looks like it, never set! To you I speak, O sun, by whose help man begets man; to you I speak, that you may favour me and light up the darkness of my wits, so that I may go point by point through the narration of the great Sancho Panza's government; for without you I feel myself lukewarm, feeble and confused.

I say, then, that with all his retinue Sancho came to a town of about a thousand inhabitants, which was one of the best the duke had. They gave him to understand that it was called the isle of Barataria — either because the place was called Baratario, or because of the bargain rate at which the government had been given him. On reaching the gates of the town, which was walled, the town council came out to receive him; the bells were rung, and all the inhabitants gave signs of general gladness, and with a great deal of pomp they took him to the chief church to give thanks to God. And then, with some ridiculous ceremonies, they handed him the keys of the town and admitted him as perpetual governor of the isle of Barataria.

The dress, the beard, the fatness and the shortness of the new governor astonished all the people who did not know the crux of the joke, and even all those who did, and they were many. Finally, on bringing him out of the church, they took him to the judgement seat and sat him down in it; and the duke's steward said to him:

"It is an ancient custom in this isle, my lord governor, that whoever comes to take possession of this famous isle is obliged to answer a question that is put to him, which shall be somewhat intricate and difficult; and by his answer the people take and feel the pulse of their new governor's wits, and so are either glad or sorry at his coming."

While the steward was saying this to Sancho, he was looking at some large and numerous letters written on the wall opposite his seat; and, as he could not read, he asked what those paintings on the wall were. He was answered:

"Sir, there is written and noted the day on which Your Lordship took possession of this isle, and the inscription says: Today, on such and such a day of such and such a month and year, Señor Don Sancho Panza took possession of this isle: may he enjoy it many years."

"And who do they call Don Sancho Panza?" asked Sancho.

"Your lordship," answered the steward; "for no other Panza has come into this isle but the one sitting in that chair."

"Then note, brother," said Sancho, "that I have no Don, and there has never been one in my whole family. Plain Sancho Panza they call me, and Sancho my father was called, and Sancho my grandfather, and they were all Panzas without any additions of Dons or Doñas. And I imagine that in this isle there must be more Dons than stones. But enough: God understands me; and it may be that if the government lasts me four days I shall weed out these Dons, which by their numbers must be as annoying as gnats. Let the steward go on with his question, and I shall answer as best I know how, whether the people are sorry or not sorry."

At this moment two men came into the court, one dressed as a farmer and the other as a tailor, since he carried a pair of scissors in his hand; and the tailor said:

"My lord governor, I and this farmer come before your worship because this good man came to my shop yesterday — for I, saving the presence of those here, am a licensed tailor, God be blessed — and, putting a piece of cloth in my hands, asked me: 'Sir, would there be enough cloth in this to make me a cap?' I, measuring the cloth by eye, answered that there would. He must have imagined, as I imagine, and I imagined rightly, that I no doubt wanted to steal some part of the cloth off him, going on his own bad conscience and on the bad name of tailors; and he came back at me and asked me to see whether there would be enough for two. I guessed his thought and told him there would. And he, riding on his damaging first intention, went on adding caps and I went on adding yeses, until we got to five caps; and just now, at this minute, he has come for them. I give them to him, and he will not pay me for the making; on the contrary, he wants me to pay him or give him back his cloth."

"Is all this so, brother?" asked Sancho.

"Yes, sir," answered the man; "but let your worship make him show the five caps he has made me."

"Willingly," answered the tailor.

And, pulling his hand out from under his cloak on the instant, he showed on it five caps set on the five tips of the fingers of his hand, and said:

"Here are the five caps this good man is asking me for; and in God and in my conscience I have nothing left over of the cloth, and I shall submit the work to the inspectors of the trade."

Everybody present laughed at the multitude of caps and at the novel lawsuit. Sancho set himself to think a little, and said:

"It seems to me that in this suit there is no call for long delays, but for judging straight away by the judgement of a good man. And so I give it as my sentence that the tailor should lose his making and the farmer his cloth, and that the caps should be taken to the prisoners in the gaol, and there is an end of it."

If his other sentences moved the bystanders to wonder, this one provoked them to laughter; but in the end what the governor ordered was done. And before him there presented themselves two old men, one of whom carried a giant fennel stalk for a staff; and the one without a staff said:

"Sir, some days ago I lent this good man ten gold crowns in gold, to do him a pleasure and a good turn, on condition that he should give them back to me when I asked for them. Many days went by without my asking him for them, so as not to put him in greater difficulty over giving them back than he was in when I lent them. But, since it seemed to me that he was being slack about paying, I have asked him for them once and many times; and not only does he not give them back, he denies them and says that I never lent him any such ten crowns, and that if I did lend them him he has already given them back. I have no witnesses either to the loan or to the return, because he has not returned them. I should like your worship to put him on his oath; and if he swears he has given them back, I forgive him them here and before God."

"What do you say to this, good old man with the staff?" said Sancho.

To which the old man said:

"I, sir, confess that he lent them me; and let your worship lower that rod of yours. And since he leaves it to my oath, I shall swear that I have given them back and paid them really and truly."

The governor lowered the rod; and meanwhile the old man with the staff gave the staff to the other old man to hold for him while he swore, as if it were much in his way, and then laid his hand on the cross of the rod, saying that it was true that those ten crowns he was being asked for had been lent to him, but that he had given them back out of his own hand into the other's, and that, not realising this, the other kept asking for them again and again.

Which the great governor seeing, he asked the creditor what he answered to what his opponent said; and he said that without any doubt his debtor must be telling the truth, because he took him for an honest man and a good Christian, and that he himself must have forgotten how and when he had given them back, and that from then on he would never ask him for anything again. The debtor took his staff again and, bowing his head, went out of the court.

Seeing which, and that he was going off without any more ado, and seeing too the patience of the plaintiff, Sancho bowed his head over his chest and, putting the forefinger of his right hand over his eyebrows and his nose, stayed as though in thought for a short space; and then he raised his head and ordered them to call back the old man with the staff, who had already gone. They brought him back, and, seeing him, Sancho said:

"Give me that staff, good man, for I need it."

"Very willingly," answered the old man. "Here it is, sir."

And he put it into his hand. Sancho took it and, giving it to the other old man, said to him:

"Go, and God be with you, for now you are paid."

"I, sir?" answered the old man. "Why, is this fennel stalk worth ten gold crowns?"

"Yes," said the governor; "or if not, I am the greatest blockhead in the world. And now it will be seen whether I have the headpiece to govern a whole kingdom."

And he ordered that there, in front of everybody, the cane should be broken open. It was done, and in the heart of it they found ten crowns in gold. Everybody was amazed, and they held their governor for a new Solomon.

They asked him how he had gathered that those ten crowns were in that fennel stalk, and he answered that it was from having seen the old man who was swearing give his opponent that staff while he made his oath, and swear that he had really and truly given them to him; and then, on finishing the oath, ask him for the staff back again. From this it came into his imagination that inside it was the payment they were arguing about. From which it could be gathered that those who govern, even if they are fools, are sometimes set on the right road by God in their judgements. And besides, he had heard the curate of his village tell another case like that one; and he had such a great memory that if it were not for his forgetting everything he wanted to remember, there would not be such a memory in the whole isle.

Finally, the one old man shamefaced and the other paid, they went off; and the bystanders were left amazed, and the man who was writing down Sancho's words, deeds and movements could not settle whether he should hold him and set him down for a fool or for a judicious man.

Then, this suit being over, there came into the court a woman gripping tightly to a man dressed as a rich herdsman, and she came shouting loudly and saying:

"Justice, my lord governor, justice! And if I do not find it on earth, I shall go and look for it in heaven! My lord governor of my soul, this wicked man caught me in the middle of that field and has used my body as if it were a badly washed rag; and, wretched creature that I am, he has taken from me what I had kept for more than twenty-three years, defending it from Moors and Christians, from natives and foreigners; and I always as hard as a cork tree, keeping myself as whole as the salamander in the fire or as wool among the brambles — only for this good man to come along now with his clean hands to handle me."

"That still has to be found out — whether this gallant has clean hands or not," said Sancho.

And, turning to the man, he asked him what he said and what he answered to that woman's complaint. And he, all confused, answered:

"Gentlemen, I am a poor herdsman of pigs, and this morning I was leaving this place after selling — saving your presence — four pigs, and what they took off me in excise and extortions came to little less than they were worth. I was going back to my village, and on the road I came across this good dame; and the devil, who mixes everything up and cooks everything, made us lie together. I paid her enough, and she, not content, laid hold of me and has not let me go until she had brought me to this place. She says I forced her, and she lies, by the oath I make or mean to make; and this is the whole truth, without a mite missing."

Then the governor asked him whether he had any silver money on him; he said he had about twenty ducats in his bosom in a leather purse. He ordered him to take it out and hand it over, just as it was, to the complainant; he did it trembling. The woman took it and, making a thousand bows to everybody and praying God for the life and health of the lord governor, who looked after needy orphans and maidens in this way, went out of the court holding the purse gripped in both hands — although first she looked to see whether the money she was carrying inside it was silver.

She had hardly gone out when Sancho said to the herdsman, whose tears were already starting and whose eyes and heart were going after his purse:

"Good man, go after that woman and take the purse from her whether she wants it or not, and come back here with her."

And he did not say it to a fool or a deaf man, for he set off at once like lightning and went to do what he was told. Everybody present was in suspense, waiting for the end of that suit; and a little later the man and the woman came back gripping and gripped tighter than the first time: she with her skirt lifted up and the purse held in her lap, and the man struggling to get it off her — but it was not possible, so well did the woman defend it, and she was calling out:

"Justice of God and of the world! Look, your worship, my lord governor, at the shamelessness and the little fear of this soulless man, who in the middle of a town and in the middle of the street has tried to take away from me the purse your worship ordered to be given me."

"And has he taken it from you?" asked the governor.

"Taken it?" answered the woman. "I would sooner let them take my life than take the purse. A fine thing that would be! They will have to throw other cats than this wretched, disgusting creature in my face! Pincers and hammers, mallets and chisels would not be enough to get it out of my nails, nor even lions' claws: they would sooner have my soul out of the middle of the middle of my flesh!"

"She is right," said the man, "and I give myself up beaten and out of strength, and I confess that mine are not enough to take it from her; and I leave it."

Then the governor said to the woman:

"Show me that purse, honourable and valiant lady."

She gave it him at once, and the governor gave it back to the man and said to the woman who had used force and had none used on her:

"Sister of mine, if you had shown the same spirit and courage in defending your body that you have shown in defending this purse — and even half as much — the strength of Hercules could not have forced you. Go, and God be with you, and much bad luck; and do not stop anywhere in this whole isle or within six leagues around it, on pain of two hundred lashes. Go at once, I say, you brazen, shameless cheat!"

The woman was frightened and went off with her head down and ill contented; and the governor said to the man:

"Good man, go with God to your village with your money; and from now on, if you do not want to lose it, see that you do not take a fancy to lying with anybody."

The man thanked him as badly as he knew how, and went off; and the bystanders were left amazed all over again at their new governor's judgements and sentences. All of which, noted by his chronicler, was written at once to the duke, who was waiting for it with great eagerness.

And let good Sancho stay here, for his master is pressing us hard, being greatly stirred by Altisidora's music.
