Chapter 46: Of the Terrifying Bell-and-Cat Fright Don Quixote Received in the Course of the Enamoured Altisidora's Courtship

We left the great Don Quixote wrapped up in the thoughts the music of the enamoured maiden Altisidora had caused him. He went to bed with them; and, as though they were fleas, they did not let him sleep or rest a moment, and the ones he had lost out of his stockings joined them. But since time is swift and there is no gully that holds it up, it went riding on the hours, and the morning hour arrived very quickly.

Which Don Quixote seeing, he left the soft feathers and, in no way sluggish, put on his chamois suit and pulled on his travelling boots, to hide the disaster of his stockings; he threw his scarlet cloak over him and set on his head a cap of green velvet trimmed with silver braid; he hung his baldric over his shoulders with his good cutting sword, took up a great rosary he always carried with him, and with great pomp and swagger went out into the antechamber, where the duke and duchess were already dressed and apparently waiting for him.

And, as he was passing along a gallery, Altisidora and the other maiden her friend were waiting for him on purpose; and as soon as Altisidora saw Don Quixote she pretended to faint, and her friend caught her in her lap and in great haste began to unfasten her bodice. Don Quixote, seeing it, came up to them and said:

"I know very well what these attacks come from."

"I do not know what they come from," answered the friend, "because Altisidora is the healthiest maiden in this whole house, and I have never heard so much as an 'ah' out of her in all the time I have known her. A curse on all the knights errant there are in the world, if they are all as ungrateful as this. Go away, your worship, Señor Don Quixote, for this poor girl will not come round while your worship is here."

To which Don Quixote answered:

"Let your worship see, madam, that a lute is put in my room tonight, and I shall console this wounded maiden as best I can; for in the beginnings of love, prompt disenchantment is generally a well-approved remedy."

And with this he went off, so as not to be noticed by anybody who might see him there. He had hardly got away when the fainting Altisidora, coming round, said to her companion:

"It will be necessary for the lute to be put there; for no doubt Don Quixote means to give us some music, and it will not be bad, since it is his."

They went at once to tell the duchess what was afoot and about the lute Don Quixote was asking for; and she, extremely glad, arranged with the duke and with her maidens to play him a trick that should be more laughable than harmful, and they waited for the night with great pleasure. And the night came on as quickly as the day had come, which the duke and duchess spent in delicious talk with Don Quixote.

And the duchess that day really and truly sent off a page of hers — the one who had played the enchanted figure of Dulcinea in the wood — to Teresa Panza, with the letter from her husband Sancho Panza and with the bundle of clothes he had left to be sent to her, charging him to bring back a good account of everything that passed between them.

This done, and eleven o'clock at night having come, Don Quixote found a guitar in his room. He tuned it, opened the grating and heard that there were people about in the garden; and, having run over the frets of the guitar and tuned it as best he knew how, he spat and cleared his chest, and then, in a slightly hoarse but tuneful voice, sang the following ballad, which he had himself composed that day:

	The forces of love are apt
	to knock souls off their hinges,
	taking for their instrument
	a careless idleness.
	Sewing and needlework,
	and being always busy,
	are apt to be the antidote
	to the poison of love's longings.
	For sheltered young women
	who hope to be married,
	modesty is the dowry
	and the voice of their praises.
	Knights errant,
	and those who go about the court,
	pay their compliments to the loose
	and marry the modest.
	There are loves of the sunrise
	that pass between guests at an inn,
	which come quickly to their sunset,
	because they end in the parting.
	Love newly arrived,
	that came today and goes tomorrow,
	does not leave its images
	well printed on the soul.
	Painting laid over painting
	neither shows nor marks;
	and where there is a first beauty
	the second wins no trick.
	Dulcinea of El Toboso
	I have painted on the blank
	tablet of my soul in such a way
	that it is impossible to rub her out.
	Constancy in lovers
	is the part most to be prized,
	by which love works its miracles
	and by which it raises them up.

Don Quixote had got this far in his song — and the duke and duchess, Altisidora and almost all the people of the castle were listening to him — when all at once, from the top of a gallery that hung plumb over Don Quixote's grating, they let down a cord with more than a hundred cowbells tied to it; and then, after them, they emptied out a great sack of cats, which likewise had smaller bells tied to their tails.

So great was the noise of the bells and the yowling of the cats that, although the duke and duchess had been the inventors of the trick, it still startled them; and Don Quixote was left thunderstruck with fear. And it so happened that two or three cats got in through the grating of his chamber, and, dashing from one side to the other, it looked as though a region of devils were about the room. They put out the candles that were burning in the room, and went about looking for a way to escape. The letting down and pulling up of the cord of great bells did not stop; most of the people in the castle, who did not know the truth of the business, were bewildered and astonished.

Don Quixote got to his feet, and, laying his hand on his sword, began to lunge through the grating and to say in a loud voice:

"Away, malignant enchanters! Away, you sorcerous rabble; for I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, against whom your evil intentions have neither strength nor power!"

And, turning to the cats that were about the room, he let fly a great many sword-strokes at them. They made for the grating and got out that way — except one which, seeing itself so hard pressed by Don Quixote's slashes, sprang at his face and seized his nose with its claws and its teeth; at the pain of which Don Quixote began to shout as loudly as he could.

Hearing which, the duke and duchess, and guessing what it might be, ran with great haste to his chamber; and, opening it with a master key, they saw the poor knight struggling with all his strength to tear the cat off his face. They came in with lights and saw the unequal fight; the duke ran up to part it, and Don Quixote said loudly:

"Let nobody take him off me! Leave me hand to hand with this demon, with this sorcerer, with this enchanter, and I shall give him to understand between him and me who Don Quixote of La Mancha is!"

But the cat, taking no notice of these threats, growled and held on. In the end, though, the duke tore him loose and threw him out through the grating.

Don Quixote was left with his face riddled and his nose in no very sound state, though very put out that they had not let him finish the battle he had so well joined with that villainous enchanter. They had Aparicio's oil brought, that costly balm for wounds, and Altisidora herself with her snow-white hands put bandages over everything that was hurt. And, as she put them on, she said to him in a low voice:

"All these misadventures happen to you, you hard-hearted knight, for the sin of your hardness and obstinacy; and please God that your squire Sancho may forget to whip himself, so that this so beloved Dulcinea of yours may never come out of her enchantment, and you may never enjoy her or come to the marriage bed with her — at least while I am alive, who adore you."

To all this Don Quixote answered not a word, but only gave a deep sigh; and then he stretched himself out on his bed, thanking the duke and duchess for their kindness — not because he had any fear of that catty, enchanting, cowbell-ringing rabble, but because he had recognised the good intention with which they had come to help him. The duke and duchess left him to rest and went off, sorry at the bad outcome of the trick; for they had not believed that that adventure would turn out so heavy and so costly for Don Quixote, whom it cost five days of being shut up in bed, where another adventure happened to him more agreeable than the last — which his historian does not want to tell now, so as to attend to Sancho Panza, who was going about very busily and very amusingly in his government.
