Chapter 47: Where the Account of How Sancho Panza Conducted Himself in His Government Is Carried Further

The history tells that from the court they took Sancho Panza to a sumptuous palace, where in a great hall a royal and spotless table was laid; and, as soon as Sancho came into the hall, shawms sounded and four pages came out to give him water for his hands, which Sancho received with a great deal of gravity.

The music stopped, and Sancho sat down at the head of the table, because there was no other seat and no other cover on the whole of it. At his side there stood a personage who afterwards proved to be a doctor, with a whalebone wand in his hand. They lifted a very rich white cloth that was covering the fruit and a great variety of dishes of different foods; a man who looked like a student said grace, and a page put a laced bib on Sancho; another, who did the office of steward, set a dish of fruit in front of him.

But he had hardly eaten a mouthful when the man with the wand touched the dish with it, and it was taken away from in front of him with the greatest speed; but the steward brought him another with different food on it. Sancho was going to try it; but before he could reach it or taste it, the wand had touched it and a page had taken it up as quickly as he had the fruit. Which Sancho seeing, he was left bewildered; and, looking at everybody, he asked whether this dinner was to be eaten like a conjuring trick. To which the man with the wand answered:

"It is not to be eaten, my lord governor, except as is the use and custom in other isles where there are governors. I, sir, am a doctor, and I am salaried in this isle to be doctor to its governors; and I look after their health a great deal more than after my own, studying night and day and taking the measure of the governor's constitution, so as to get his cure right when he falls ill. And the chief thing I do is to attend his dinners and suppers, and to let him eat what seems to me suitable for him, and to take away from him what I imagine will do him harm and be noxious to his stomach.

"And so I ordered the dish of fruit taken away, for being excessively moist; and the dish of the other food I ordered taken away too, for being excessively hot and having a great many spices in it, which increase thirst; and the man who drinks a great deal kills and consumes the radical moisture, in which life consists."

"In that case, that dish of partridges over there, which are roasted and, to my mind, well seasoned, will do me no harm."

To which the doctor answered:

"Those the lord governor shall not eat as long as I have life in me."

"Well, why not?" said Sancho.

And the doctor answered:

"Because our master Hippocrates, the pole star and the light of medicine, says in an aphorism of his: Omnis saturatio mala, perdices autem pessima — which means, 'All surfeit is bad, but surfeit of partridges is the worst of all.'"

"If that is so," said Sancho, "let the doctor see, of all the dishes on this table, which will do me most good and least harm, and let me eat of it without his cudgelling it away from me; because, by the governor's life — and so may God let me enjoy it — I am dying of hunger; and denying me my food, however it may grieve the doctor and whatever more he may say to me, will sooner be taking my life away from me than adding to it."

"Your worship is right, my lord governor," answered the doctor; "and so it is my opinion that your worship should not eat any of those stewed rabbits over there, because it is a hairy sort of food. Of that veal, if it had not been roasted and pickled, one might still have tried it; but there is no call for it."

And Sancho said:

"That great dish over there that is steaming further along seems to me to be an olla podrida — that great mixed stew; and, given the variety of things there are in such stews, I cannot fail to come across something in it that will be to my taste and to my profit."

"Absit!" said the doctor. "Let so bad a thought go far from us: there is nothing in the world worse to live on than an olla podrida. Away with the mixed stews to the canons, or to the rectors of colleges, or to peasant weddings, and let them leave the tables of governors free, where all niceness and all refinement must be present. And the reason is that always and everywhere and by everybody simple medicines are more esteemed than compound ones, because in simple ones you cannot go wrong and in compound ones you can, by altering the quantity of the things they are compounded of. But what I know the lord governor must eat now, to preserve his health and strengthen it, is a hundred little rolled wafers and some thin little slices of quince paste, which will settle his stomach and help his digestion."

Hearing this, Sancho leaned back against the back of his chair and looked hard at this doctor, and in a grave voice asked him what he was called and where he had studied. To which he answered:

"I, my lord governor, am called Doctor Pedro Recio de Agüero, and I am a native of a place called Tirteafuera, which is between Caracuel and Almodóvar del Campo, on the right-hand side; and I have my doctor's degree from the university of Osuna."

To which Sancho answered, all fired up with choler:

"Well, Doctor Pedro Recio de Mal Agüero — Pedro Recio of Ill Omen — native of Get-You-Gone, a place that lies on the right-hand side as you go from Caracuel to Almodóvar del Campo, graduated at Osuna: get out of my sight this instant, or I swear by the sun that I shall take up a cudgel and that, beginning with you, there will not be a doctor left in the whole isle — at least of those I understand to be ignorant ones; for the wise, prudent and judicious doctors I shall set on top of my head and honour like divine persons.

"And I say again, Pedro Recio, be off with you from here; if not, I shall take this chair I am sitting in and smash it over your head. And let them ask me for it at my audit: I shall clear myself by saying that I did God a service in killing a bad doctor, who is the hangman of the commonwealth. And give me something to eat, or else take back your government; for an office that does not feed the man who holds it is not worth two beans."

The doctor was thrown into a fright at seeing the governor so choleric, and he wanted to do a get-you-gone out of the hall — except that at that instant a post horn sounded in the street; and the steward, leaning out of the window, came back saying:

"A courier is coming from the duke my lord; he must be bringing some despatch of importance."

The courier came in sweating and alarmed, and, taking a packet out of his bosom, put it into the governor's hands; and Sancho put it into the steward's, ordering him to read the address, which went thus: To Don Sancho Panza, governor of the isle of Barataria, into his own hand or into his secretary's. Hearing which, Sancho said:

"Who here is my secretary?"

And one of those present answered:

"I, sir, because I know how to read and write, and I am a Biscayan."

"With that addition," said Sancho, "you could very well be secretary to the emperor himself. Open that packet and see what it says."

The newborn secretary did so; and, having read what it said, he said that it was business to be dealt with in private. Sancho ordered the hall cleared, and that nobody should stay in it but the steward and the head steward; and the rest, and the doctor, went off. And then the secretary read the letter, which went like this:

It has come to my notice, Señor Don Sancho Panza, that certain enemies of mine and of that isle are to make a furious assault on it, I do not know on what night. It will be well to keep watch and be on the alert, so that they may not take you unprepared. I know too, from true spies, that four disguised persons have come into that place to take your life, because they are afraid of your wits. Keep your eye open, and look to who comes to speak to you, and do not eat anything they may offer you. I shall take care to come to your help if you find yourself in difficulty, and in everything you will act as is expected of your understanding. From this place, the sixteenth of August, at four in the morning.

Your friend,

The Duke.

Sancho was astounded, and the bystanders showed themselves astounded too; and, turning to the steward, he said:

"What must be done now, and it must be at once, is to put Doctor Recio in a dungeon; because if anybody is going to kill me, it is he, and by the most lingering and the worst kind of death, which is hunger."

"It seems to me too," said the head steward, "that your worship should not eat any of what is on this table, because it has been presented by some nuns; and, as they say, behind the cross stands the devil."

"I do not deny it," answered Sancho, "and for now give me a piece of bread and about four pounds of grapes, for no poison can come in them; because in fact I cannot get by without eating, and if we are to be ready for these battles that threaten us, it will be necessary to be well kept up, since it is guts that carry the heart and not the heart the guts.

"And you, secretary, answer the duke my lord and tell him that what he orders shall be carried out as he orders it, without a point missing; and you shall kiss my lady the duchess's hands on my behalf, and say that I beg her not to forget to send my letter and my bundle to my wife Teresa Panza by a special messenger, since I shall take it as a great kindness and shall take care to serve her with everything my strength can reach. And on your way you may jam in a kissing of hands to my lord Don Quixote of La Mancha, so that he may see that I am grateful bread. And you, as a good secretary and a good Biscayan, may add anything you like and whatever comes best to the point. And let this cloth be taken up and give me something to eat, and I shall deal with all the spies and murderers and enchanters that may come at me and at my isle."

At this a page came in and said:

"There is a farmer here with business who wants to speak to Your Lordship on a matter, as he says, of great importance."

"This is a strange business," said Sancho, "with these people with business. Is it possible that they are so foolish as not to see that hours like these are not the ones for coming to do business in? Are we who govern, we who are judges, not by any chance men of flesh and bone, and is it not necessary that they should let us rest for as long as need requires — or do they want us to be made of marble? By God and in my conscience, if the government lasts me — which it will not, as far as I can see through it — I shall bring more than one man of business to heel. Now tell that good man to come in; but let it first be made sure that he is not one of the spies or one of my murderers."

"No, sir," answered the page, "because he looks like a soul of a pitcher; and either I know very little, or he is as good as good bread."

"There is nothing to fear," said the steward, "for we are all here."

"Would it be possible," said Sancho, "head steward, now that Doctor Pedro Recio is not here, for me to eat something with some weight and substance to it, even if it were a piece of bread and an onion?"

"Tonight at supper the shortcomings of the dinner shall be made up, and Your Lordship will be satisfied and paid," said the head steward.

"God grant it," answered Sancho.

And with this the farmer came in, who was of very good appearance, and from a thousand leagues off you could see that he was good and a good soul. The first thing he said was:

"Which is the lord governor here?"

"Who should he be," answered the secretary, "but the man sitting in the chair?"

"I bow myself, then, before him," said the farmer.

And, going down on his knees, he asked him for his hand to kiss it. Sancho refused it, and ordered him to get up and say what he wanted. The farmer did so, and then said:

"I, sir, am a farmer, a native of Miguel Turra, a place two leagues from Ciudad Real."

"We have another Get-You-Gone!" said Sancho. "Speak, brother, for what I can tell you is that I know Miguel Turra very well, and that it is not very far from my village."

"The case is, then, sir," the farmer went on, "that I, by God's mercy, am married in the peace and presence of the Holy Roman Catholic Church; I have two sons who are students, the younger of whom is studying to be a bachelor and the elder to be a licentiate. I am a widower, because my wife died — or, better said, a bad doctor killed her for me by purging her when she was pregnant. And if God had been pleased for the birth to come out into the light, and if it had been a son, I would have set him to study to be a doctor, so that he should not envy his brothers the bachelor and the licentiate."

"So that," said Sancho, "if your wife had not died, or if they had not killed her, you would not be a widower now."

"No, sir, on no account," answered the farmer.

"We are in a fine way!" replied Sancho. "Get on, brother, for it is more the hour for sleeping than for doing business."

"I say, then," said the farmer, "that this son of mine who is to be a bachelor fell in love in that same village with a maiden called Clara Perlerina, daughter of Andrés Perlerino, an extremely rich farmer; and this name of Perlerines does not come to them from their ancestry or from any other family line, but because everybody of that line is palsy-struck — palsied being perlático in our speech — and, to better the name, they call them Perlerines, as though from perla, a pearl. Although, if the truth is to be told, the girl is like an oriental pearl; and looked at from the right-hand side she seems a flower of the field — from the left not so much, because she is missing that eye, which she lost to smallpox. And although the pits on her face are many and large, those who love her well say that they are not pits but graves in which the souls of her lovers are buried.

"She is so clean that, so as not to dirty her face, she carries her nose, as they say, turned up, so that it looks for all the world as if it were running away from her mouth. And with all this she looks extremely well, because she has a large mouth; and if she were not missing ten or twelve teeth and grinders, she could pass and hold her own among the best formed. Of her lips I have nothing to say, because they are so fine and delicate that if lips could be wound on a reel they could make a skein of them; but as they are a different colour from the one commonly in use for lips, they look miraculous, because they are mottled with blue and green and aubergine. And let the lord governor forgive me if I go painting so minutely the parts of the girl who in the end is to be my daughter; for I love her well and she does not seem bad to me."

"Paint whatever you like," said Sancho, "for I am enjoying the painting; and if I had eaten, there would have been no better dessert for me than your portrait."

"That is at your service," answered the farmer, "but the time will come when we shall be, if we are not now. And I say, sir, that if I could paint her gracefulness and the height of her body it would be a thing to wonder at; but it cannot be, on account of her being bent double and drawn in, and having her knees at her mouth. And with all that, it can be seen well enough that if she could straighten up she would knock her head on the ceiling. And she would have given her hand in marriage to my bachelor before now, only she cannot stretch it out, since it is knotted up; and even so, in her long, grooved nails you can see her goodness and her good making."

"That is well," said Sancho; "and take it, brother, that you have now painted her from head to foot. What is it you want now? And come to the point without going round about or down alleys, without scraps or additions."

"I should like, sir," answered the farmer, "your worship to do me the favour of giving me a letter of recommendation to my future in-law, begging him to be pleased for this marriage to be made, since we are not unequal in the goods of fortune or in those of nature. Because, to tell the truth, my lord governor, my son is possessed, and there is not a day when the malignant spirits do not torment him three or four times; and from having fallen once into the fire, he has his face wrinkled like parchment and his eyes rather watery and running. But he has the disposition of an angel, and if it were not that he beats himself and punches himself, he would be a blessed creature."

"Do you want anything else, good man?" replied Sancho.

"I should like one other thing," said the farmer, "except that I do not dare to say it. But let it come, for after all it is not going to rot in my breast, hit or miss. I say, sir, that I should like your worship to give me three hundred or six hundred ducats to help with my bachelor's marriage portion — I mean to help with setting up his house; because in the end they must live by themselves, without being subject to the impertinences of their in-laws."

"See whether you want anything else," said Sancho, "and do not leave it unsaid out of awkwardness or shame."

"No, certainly not," answered the farmer.

And he had hardly said this when the governor got to his feet, seized the chair he had been sitting in and said:

"I swear, you rustic and ill-mannered lout, that if you do not get away and hide yourself out of my presence this instant, I shall break your head open with this chair! You whoreson rascal, painter for the devil himself — and at this hour you come and ask me for six hundred ducats? And where have I got them, you stinking creature? And why should I give them to you even if I had them, you sly idiot? And what is Miguel Turra to me, or the whole line of the Perlerines? Get away from me, I say; if not, by the life of the duke my lord, I shall do what I have said! You cannot be from Miguel Turra, but some sly rogue that hell has sent here to tempt me. Tell me, you soulless man, it is not yet a day and a half since I have had the government, and already you want me to have six hundred ducats?"

The head steward made signs to the farmer to get out of the hall, which he did with his head down and, to all appearances, afraid that the governor would carry out his rage — for the great rogue knew how to do his office very well.

But let us leave Sancho with his choler, and let peace go round the ring, and let us come back to Don Quixote, whom we left with his face bandaged and treated for the cat's wounds, which he did not get better of for a week; and on one of those days there happened to him what Cide Hamete promises to tell with the exactness and the truth with which he generally tells the things of this history, however small they may be.
