Chapter 48: Of What Happened to Don Quixote with Doña Rodríguez, the Duchess's Duenna, with Other Events Worthy of Writing Down and of Everlasting Memory

The badly wounded Don Quixote was extremely vexed and melancholy, his face bandaged and marked — not by the hand of God but by the claws of a cat: misfortunes that belong to knight-errantry. Six days he spent without coming out in public; and on one of those nights, being awake and unable to sleep, thinking about his misfortunes and about Altisidora's pursuit of him, he heard somebody opening the door of his room with a key, and at once imagined that the enamoured maiden was coming to make an assault on his chastity and put him in danger of failing in the faith he owed to his lady Dulcinea of El Toboso.

"No," he said, believing his own imagination — and he said it in a voice that could be heard; "the greatest beauty on earth shall not be enough to make me leave off adoring the one I have graven and stamped in the middle of my heart and in the deepest part of my entrails, whether you are, my lady, transformed into an onion-fed peasant girl, or into a nymph of the golden Tagus weaving cloths of gold and silk, or whether Merlin or Montesinos keeps you where they please; for wherever you are you are mine, and wherever I am I have been and shall be yours."

The finishing of these words and the opening of the door were all one. He got up on his feet on the bed, wrapped from top to bottom in a coverlet of yellow satin, a nightcap on his head, and his face and his moustaches bandaged — his face because of the scratches and his moustaches so that they should not droop and fall; in which get-up he looked like the most extraordinary phantom that could be imagined.

He fixed his eyes on the door; and when he was expecting to see the conquered and wounded Altisidora come in by it, he saw come in a most reverend duenna with white headcloths, hemmed and so long that they covered her and mantled her from foot to head. Between the fingers of her left hand she carried half a lighted candle, and with her right she was shading herself so that the light should not get in her eyes, which were covered by a very large pair of spectacles. She came stepping very quietly, and moved her feet softly.

Don Quixote watched her from his lookout; and when he saw her get-up and noticed her silence, he thought that some witch or sorceress was coming in that dress to work some evil upon him, and he began to cross himself in great haste. The vision came closer; and when it got to the middle of the room it raised its eyes and saw the haste with which Don Quixote was making crosses. And if he was terrified at seeing such a figure, she was frightened at seeing his; because as soon as she saw him so tall and so yellow, with the coverlet and with the bandages that disfigured him, she gave a great shout, saying:

"Jesus! What is this that I see?"

And in her fright the candle fell out of her hands; and, finding herself in the dark, she turned her back to go, and in her fear she tripped over her own skirts and came down in a great fall. Don Quixote, terrified, began to say:

"I conjure you, phantom, or whatever you are, to tell me who you are and to tell me what it is you want of me. If you are a soul in torment, tell me so, and I shall do for you everything my strength can reach; for I am a Catholic Christian and a friend to doing good to everybody, and it was for this that I took up the order of knight-errantry that I profess, whose exercise stretches even to doing good to the souls in purgatory."

The bruised duenna, hearing herself conjured, gathered Don Quixote's fear from her own, and in a distressed and low voice answered him:

"Señor Don Quixote — if by any chance your worship is Don Quixote — I am no phantom or vision or soul out of purgatory, as your worship must have thought, but Doña Rodríguez, my lady the duchess's duenna of honour, who comes to your worship with one of those needs your worship is in the habit of relieving."

"Tell me, Señora Doña Rodríguez," said Don Quixote, "does your worship by any chance come to act as a go-between? Because I must let you know that I am of no use to anybody, thanks to the peerless beauty of my lady Dulcinea of El Toboso. I say, in short, Señora Doña Rodríguez, that so long as your worship keeps out and sets aside all messages of love, you may go and light your candle again and come back, and we shall talk over whatever you may command and whatever comes best to your pleasure — leaving out, as I say, all provoking coquetry."

"I, sir, with a message from anybody?" answered the duenna. "Your worship knows me badly. Why, I am not yet of such advanced years as to take refuge in childishness of that kind; for, God be praised, I have my soul in my flesh and all my teeth and grinders in my mouth, except a few that some catarrhs have stolen from me, which in this country of Aragon are so common. But wait a little for me, your worship: I shall go out to light my candle and come back in an instant to tell my troubles, as to the reliever of all the troubles in the world."

And, without waiting for an answer, she went out of the room, where Don Quixote was left quiet and thoughtful, waiting for her; but at once a thousand thoughts came over him about this new adventure, and it seemed to him a badly done and a worse thought-out thing to put himself in danger of breaking the faith he had promised his lady, and he said to himself:

"Who knows whether the devil, who is subtle and crafty, may want to deceive me now with a duenna, when he has not been able to do it with empresses, queens, duchesses, marchionesses or countesses? For I have heard it said many times and by many judicious people that if he can, he will sooner give her to you snub-nosed than aquiline. And who knows whether this solitude, this occasion and this silence may wake my sleeping desires and make me at the end of my years fall where I have never yet stumbled? And in cases like this it is better to flee than to wait for the battle.

"But I must not be in my right mind, since I am saying and thinking such absurdities; for it is not possible that a white-coifed, long-drawn-out, spectacled duenna could move or raise a lascivious thought in the most soulless breast in the world. Is there by any chance a duenna on earth with good flesh on her? Is there by any chance a duenna on the globe who is not impertinent and puckered and affected? Away with you, then, you duennaish herd, useless for any human pleasure! Oh, how well that lady did who they say kept two dummy duennas with their spectacles and their sewing cushions at the end of her drawing room, as though they were at work — and those statues served her as well for the dignity of the room as real duennas would!"

And, saying this, he threw himself off the bed, meaning to shut the door and not let Señora Rodríguez in; but when he got there to shut it, Señora Rodríguez was already coming back with a white wax candle lit. And when she saw Don Quixote closer to, wrapped in the coverlet, with the bandages and the nightcap, she was frightened again; and, drawing back a couple of steps, she said:

"Are we safe, sir knight? Because I do not take it for a very decent sign that your worship should have got out of his bed."

"That is the very thing I should ask, madam," answered Don Quixote; "and so I ask whether I shall be safe from being assaulted and forced."

"Of whom and from whom do you ask that safety, sir knight?" answered the duenna.

"Of you and from you I ask it," replied Don Quixote; "because I am not made of marble nor you of bronze, and it is not ten in the morning now but midnight, and even a little past, as I imagine, and in a room more shut up and secret than the cave must have been where the treacherous and daring Aeneas enjoyed the beautiful and merciful Dido. But give me your hand, madam, for I want no greater safety than that of my own continence and reserve, and the safety those most reverend headcloths offer."

And, saying this, he kissed his own right hand and took hold of hers, which she gave him with the same ceremonies.

Here Cide Hamete puts in a parenthesis and says that by Muhammad he would have given, to see the two of them going along hand in hand like that from the door to the bed, the better of the two Moorish cloaks he owned.

Don Quixote got into his bed at last, and Doña Rodríguez was left sitting in a chair somewhat away from the bed, without taking off her spectacles or putting down the candle. Don Quixote curled himself up and covered himself all over, leaving nothing but his face uncovered; and, the two of them having settled down, the first to break the silence was Don Quixote, saying:

"Your worship may now, my lady Doña Rodríguez, unstitch yourself and disgorge everything you have inside that troubled heart and those wounded entrails of yours; for it shall be heard by me with chaste ears and helped with merciful deeds."

"So I believe," answered the duenna; "for from your worship's gentle and agreeable presence nothing could be expected but so Christian an answer.

"The case is, then, Señor Don Quixote, that although your worship sees me sitting in this chair and in the middle of the kingdom of Aragon, and in the dress of a worn-out and knocked-about duenna, I am a native of the Asturias of Oviedo and of a family crossed by a great many of the best in that province. But my short luck and the carelessness of my parents, who fell into poverty before their time without knowing how or why, brought me to the court, to Madrid, where for the sake of peace and to avoid worse misfortunes my parents placed me to serve as a sewing maid to a lady of quality. And I want to make your worship knowing that in hemstitching and white work nobody has ever put a foot ahead of me in all my life.

"My parents left me in service and went back to their own country, and a few years later they must have gone to heaven, for they were exceedingly good and Catholic Christians. I was left an orphan, and dependent on the wretched wages and the pinched favours that are generally given to such servants in great houses. And at this time, without my giving any occasion for it, a squire of the household fell in love with me — a man already on in years, bearded and well set up and, above all, as much a gentleman as the king, because he came from the northern mountains.

"We did not carry on our love so secretly that it did not come to my mistress's notice; and she, to save chattering and gossip, married us in the peace and presence of the Holy Mother Roman Catholic Church. Of which marriage there was born a daughter, to finish off my good luck if I had any — not that I died in childbirth, for I had her straight and in season, but because a little later my husband died of a certain fright he had; and if there were room now to tell it, I know your worship would be amazed."

And with this she began to weep tenderly, and said:

"Forgive me, your worship, Señor Don Quixote, for it is not in my power to help it; because every time I remember my poor ill-fated man my eyes fill with tears. God bless me, and with what dignity he used to carry my lady on the crupper of a mighty mule, black as jet itself! For in those days coaches and chairs were not in use, as they say they are now, and ladies rode on the cruppers of their squires' mules. This at least I cannot leave untold, so that my good husband's breeding and punctiliousness may be noticed.

"Coming into the Calle de Santiago in Madrid, which is rather narrow, there came out along it a judge of the court with two constables in front of him; and as soon as my good squire saw him he turned the mule's reins about, making as if to go back and escort him. My mistress, who was riding on the crupper, said to him in a low voice: 'What are you doing, you wretched man? Do you not see that I am here?' The judge, out of courtesy, drew rein on his horse and said to him: 'Go your own way, sir, for it is I who ought to be escorting my lady Doña Casilda' — for that was my mistress's name.

"Still my husband kept insisting, with his cap in his hand, on wanting to go and escort the judge; seeing which, my mistress, full of choler and annoyance, took a stout pin — or I believe a bodkin — out of her case and drove it into his back, so that my husband gave a great shout and twisted his body in such a way that he brought his mistress down on the ground. Two footmen of hers ran to lift her up, and so did the judge and the constables. The Guadalajara Gate was thrown into an uproar — I mean the idle crowd that stands about there. My mistress came home on foot, and my husband went off to a barber's house saying that his entrails were pierced right through.

"My husband's courtesy got about so widely that the boys chased him through the streets; and for this reason, and because he was somewhat short-sighted, my lady the duchess dismissed him; from grief at which, without any doubt, I hold for myself that his mortal illness came on him.

"I was left a widow and unprotected, with a daughter on my hands who kept growing in beauty like the foam of the sea. Finally, as I had a name for being a great needlewoman, my lady the duchess, who was then newly married to the duke my lord, wanted to bring me with her to this kingdom of Aragon, and my daughter neither more nor less. And there, with days going and days coming, my daughter grew, and with her all the charm in the world: she sings like a lark, she steps like a thought, she dances like a mad thing, she reads and writes like a schoolmaster and she reckons like a miser. Of her cleanness I say nothing: running water is no cleaner. And she must be now, if I remember rightly, sixteen years, five months and three days old, one more or less.

"In short: with this girl of mine there fell in love the son of an extremely rich farmer who lives in a village of the duke my lord's, not very far from here. In fact I do not know how or why, but they came together, and, under his word of being her husband, he made a mock of my daughter and will not keep it. And although the duke my lord knows about it, because I have complained to him not once but many times and asked him to order this farmer to marry my daughter, he turns a merchant's ear and will hardly listen to me. And the reason is that, since the deceiver's father is so rich and lends him money and stands surety for his debts at every turn, he does not want to displease him or give him any distress in any way.

"I should like, then, my dear sir, your worship to take in hand the undoing of this wrong, either by entreaty or by arms; since, as all the world says, your worship was born into it to undo them and to right injustices and protect the wretched. And let your worship set before you my daughter's orphaned state, her gracefulness, her youth, with all the good parts I have said she has; for in God and in my conscience, of all the maidens my lady has, there is not one who comes up to the sole of her shoe; and one they call Altisidora, who is the one they hold to be the freest and the most gallant, put in comparison with my daughter does not come within two leagues of her.

"Because I want your worship to know, my dear sir, that all is not gold that glitters; for this little Altisidora has more of presumption about her than of beauty, and more of the forward than of the modest, besides not being very healthy — for she has a certain weary breath about her that a man cannot bear to be next to for a moment. And even my lady the duchess... I had better be quiet, for they say that walls have ears."

"What of my lady the duchess, on my life, Señora Doña Rodríguez?" asked Don Quixote.

"With that adjuration," answered the duenna, "I cannot help answering what I am asked with the whole truth. Does your worship see, Señor Don Quixote, the beauty of my lady the duchess, that complexion of her face, which looks like nothing but a polished and burnished sword blade, those two cheeks of milk and carmine, which have the sun in the one and the moon in the other, and that gallantry with which she goes treading and even scorning the ground, so that she seems to be scattering health wherever she passes? Well, your worship must know that she can be grateful for it first to God and then to two issues she has in her two legs, through which all the bad humours drain away that the doctors say she is full of."

"Holy Mary!" said Don Quixote. "And is it possible that my lady the duchess has such drains? I would not have believed it if barefoot friars had told me; but since Señora Doña Rodríguez says so, it must be true. But such fountains, and in such places, must run not with humours but with liquid amber. Truly I now finally believe that this business of having issues made must be an important thing for one's health."

Don Quixote had hardly finished saying this when with a great bang the doors of the room were thrown open; and at the shock of the bang the candle fell out of Doña Rodríguez's hand, and the chamber was left like a wolf's mouth, as the saying goes. Then the poor duenna felt two hands seizing her by the throat so tightly that they did not let her squeak; and another person, very quickly and without saying a word, lifted her skirts and, with what seemed to be a slipper, began to give her so many lashes that it was a thing to pity.

And although Don Quixote did pity her, he did not stir from his bed and did not know what it could be, and stayed still and quiet, and even fearing that the round and the drubbing of lashes might come his way. And his fear was not empty; because, having left the duenna ground to a pulp, the silent executioners — and she did not dare to complain — came to Don Quixote, and, unwrapping him from the sheet and the coverlet, pinched him so thick and so hard that he could not help defending himself with his fists; and all this in an astonishing silence.

The battle lasted nearly half an hour; the phantoms went out; Doña Rodríguez gathered up her skirts, and, groaning over her misfortune, went out at the door without saying a word to Don Quixote, who, sore and pinched, confused and thoughtful, was left alone — where we shall leave him, longing to know who the perverse enchanter had been who had put him in that state. But that shall be told in its own time, for Sancho Panza is calling us, and the good order of the history requires it.
