Chapter 49: Of What Happened to Sancho Panza While Going the Rounds of His Isle

We left the great governor annoyed and vexed with that painting, sly farmer — who, coached by the steward, and the steward by the duke, were making game of Sancho. But he held his own with all of them, dolt and rough thick-set fellow though he was; and he said to those who were with him, and to Doctor Pedro Recio, who, once the secret of the duke's letter was over, had come back into the hall:

"Now truly I understand that judges and governors must be, or have to be, of bronze, so as not to feel the importunities of people with business, who at all hours and at all times want to be listened to and dealt with, attending only to their own affairs, come what may. And if the poor judge does not listen to them and deal with them, either because he cannot or because that is not the time set aside for giving them audience, then they curse him and gossip about him and gnaw his bones, and even go into his family tree.

"Foolish man of business, idiot man of business, do not hurry: wait for the season and the right moment for doing business. Do not come at dinner time or at sleeping time, for judges are of flesh and bone and must give nature what nature naturally asks of them — unless it is I, who do not give mine anything to eat, thanks to the doctor Pedro Recio of Get-You-Gone here present, who wants me to die of hunger and declares that this death is life; and may God give him and all his breed the same. I mean the breed of bad doctors, for the good ones deserve palms and laurels."

Everybody who knew Sancho Panza was astonished to hear him talk so elegantly, and they did not know what to put it down to except that great offices and charges either sharpen the wits or dull them. Finally Doctor Pedro Recio Agüero of Get-You-Gone promised to give him supper that night, even if it went beyond all the aphorisms of Hippocrates.

With this the governor was content, and he waited with great anxiety for the night and the supper hour to come; and although time, to his mind, was standing still without moving from its place, still the so much longed-for hour did come round for him, when they gave him for supper a hash of beef with onion and some boiled calves' feet from a beast somewhat on in years. He fell to on it all with more pleasure than if they had given him francolins of Milan, pheasants of Rome, veal of Sorrento, partridges of Morón or geese of Lavajos; and, in the middle of supper, turning to the doctor, he said:

"Look, doctor: from now on do not bother to give me dainty things or exquisite dishes to eat, because it will be taking my stomach off its hinges. It is used to goat, to beef, to bacon, to dried meat, to turnips and to onions; and if by any chance it is given other palace dishes, it takes them squeamishly and sometimes with disgust.

"What the head steward can do is to bring me these things they call olla podridas — and the more rotten they are the better they smell — and into them he can pack and shut up anything he likes, so long as it is food, and I shall thank him for it and pay him for it one day. And let nobody make game of me, because either we are or we are not: let us all live and eat in good peace and fellowship, for when God sends the dawn, he sends it for everybody.

"I shall govern this isle without giving up a right or taking a bribe, and let everybody keep their eye open and look out for the bolt; because I let them know that the devil is in Cantillana, and that if they give me cause they shall see wonders. No — make yourself honey and the flies will eat you."

"Certainly, my lord governor," said the head steward, "your worship is quite right in everything you have said; and I offer, in the name of all the islanders of this isle, that they shall serve your worship with all punctuality, love and good will; because the gentle manner of governing your worship has shown in these beginnings gives them no room to do or think anything that could redound to your worship's disservice."

"I believe it," answered Sancho, "and they would be fools if they did or thought otherwise. And I say again that care is to be taken with my keep and with my grey's, which is what matters most and comes most to the point in this business; and, when the hour comes, let us go the rounds, for it is my intention to clear this isle of every kind of filth and of vagabond people, idlers and badly occupied folk. Because I want you to know, my friends, that idle and lazy people are in a commonwealth what the drones are in a hive, which eat the honey the working bees make. I mean to favour the farmers, keep their privileges to the gentry, reward the virtuous and, above all, have respect for religion and for the honour of religious men. What do you think of that, my friends? Am I saying something, or am I breaking my head for nothing?"

"Your worship says so much, my lord governor," said the steward, "that I am amazed to see a man as unlettered as your worship — who, as I believe, has no letters at all — say such things and so many of them, full of judgements and of warnings, so far outside everything that those who sent us and those of us who came here expected of your worship's wits. Every day new things are seen in the world: jokes turn into earnest and the jokers find themselves the ones joked with."

Night came, and the governor had supper with the doctor Recio's leave. They got themselves ready for the rounds; he went out with the steward, the secretary and the head steward, and the chronicler who had the task of putting his deeds on record, and constables and clerks, so many that they could have made up a middling squadron. Sancho went in the middle with his rod, and there was nothing else to look at; and, a few streets of the place having been walked, they heard the noise of sword-strokes. They ran there and found that it was only two men quarrelling; who, seeing the law coming, kept still. And one of them said:

"Help, in God's name and the king's! Is it to be borne that people are robbed in a settled town like this one, and that men go out to hold up travellers in the middle of the streets?"

"Calm yourself, honest man," said Sancho, "and tell me the cause of this quarrel, for I am the governor."

The other opponent said:

"My lord governor, I shall tell it as shortly as I can. Your worship must know that this gentleman has just now won more than a thousand reals in this gambling house opposite here — and God knows how; and I, being present, judged more than one doubtful throw in his favour, against everything my conscience was telling me. He walked off with his winnings; and when I was expecting him to give me at least one crown as a tip, as is the use and custom of giving it to men of quality like me, who stand by to see fair play through good and bad and to back up wrong throws and prevent quarrels, he pocketed his money and went out of the house.

"I came out after him in a rage, and with good, courteous words asked him to give me at least eight reals, since he knows I am an honourable man and have no trade or benefice, because my parents neither taught me one nor left me one; and the sly fellow — who is no more a thief than Cacus and no more a cardsharp than Andradilla — would not give me more than four reals. So your worship may see, my lord governor, how little shame and how little conscience! But upon my word, if your worship had not come along, I would have made him vomit up his winnings and he would have learnt how many notches the steelyard had."

"What do you say to this?" asked Sancho.

And the other answered that everything his opponent said was true, and that he had not been willing to give him more than four reals because he gave them him many times; and that people who expect tips must be civil and take with a cheerful face whatever they are given, without going into accounts with the winners — unless they knew for certain that they were sharpers and that what they had won was ill won. And that as a sign that he himself was an honest man and not a thief, as the other said, there was no greater one than his not having been willing to give him anything; for sharpers are always tributaries to the onlookers who know them.

"That is so," said the steward. "See, your worship, my lord governor, what is to be done with these men."

"What is to be done is this," answered Sancho. "You, winner, good or bad or indifferent, give this slasher of yours a hundred reals at once; and, what is more, you must lay out thirty for the poor prisoners in the gaol. And you, who have no trade and no benefice and go about as a spare man in this isle, take those hundred reals at once, and tomorrow in the course of the day leave this isle, banished for ten years, on pain, if you break it, of serving them out in the next life, since I shall hang you from a gibbet, or at least the hangman will by my orders. And let nobody answer me back, or I shall lay my hand on him."

The one paid out, the other took it in; this one left the isle and that one went home; and the governor was left saying:

"Now either I have little power, or I shall do away with these gambling houses; for it comes through to me that they are very harmful."

"This one at least," said a clerk, "your worship will not be able to do away with, because it belongs to a great personage; and what he loses in a year is beyond comparison more than what he takes out of the cards. Against other gaming dens of less standing your worship may show your power, for those are the ones that do most harm and cover up most insolences. In the houses of knights of quality and of great lords the famous sharpers do not dare to use their tricks; and, since the vice of gambling has turned into a common practice, it is better that people should play in great houses than in some tradesman's, where after midnight they catch some poor wretch and flay him alive."

"Now, clerk," said Sancho, "I know there is a great deal to be said about that."

And at this a bailiff came up bringing a young man gripped by the arm, and said:

"My lord governor, this young fellow was coming towards us; and as soon as he made out the law he turned his back and began to run like a fallow deer — a sign that he must be some offender. I set off after him; and if it had not been that he tripped and fell, I should never have caught him."

"Why were you running away, man?" asked Sancho.

To which the young man answered:

"Sir, to save myself from answering the many questions that officers of the law ask."

"What is your trade?"

"Weaver."

"And what do you weave?"

"Lance-heads, by your worship's good leave."

"So you are a wit, are you? You fancy yourself a joker? Very good! And where were you going just now?"

"Sir, to take the air."

"And where does one take the air in this isle?"

"Where it blows."

"Good: you answer very much to the point! You are a judicious young man; but take it that I am the air and that I am blowing you astern, and steering you to the gaol. Seize him there, and take him off, for I shall see that he sleeps there tonight without any air!"

"By God," said the young man, "your worship will make me sleep in gaol about as soon as you will make me king!"

"Why, and why shall I not make you sleep in gaol?" answered Sancho. "Have I not the power to arrest you and let you go whenever I like?"

"However much power your worship may have," said the young man, "it will not be enough to make me sleep in gaol."

"How not?" replied Sancho. "Take him off at once, where he shall see the truth with his own eyes — however much the warder may want to use his interested generosity on him; for I shall lay a penalty of two thousand ducats on him if he lets you take a single step out of the gaol."

"All that is a laughing matter," answered the young man. "The point is that all the men alive today will not make me sleep in gaol."

"Tell me, you devil," said Sancho, "have you got some angel to get you out and take off the fetters I mean to have put on you?"

"Now, my lord governor," answered the young man very charmingly, "let us be reasonable and come to the point. Suppose your worship orders me to be taken to gaol, and that there they put fetters and chains on me and shut me in a dungeon, and heavy penalties are laid on the warder if he lets me out, and he carries it out just as he is ordered: with all this, if I choose not to sleep and to stay awake all night without shutting an eyelid, will your worship, with all your power, be enough to make me sleep if I do not want to?"

"Certainly not," said the secretary, "and the man has carried his point."

"So that," said Sancho, "you would not leave off sleeping for any other reason than your own will, and not out of any wish to go against mine."

"No, sir," said the young man, "not by any means."

"Then go, and God be with you," said Sancho; "go home and sleep, and God give you a good sleep, for I do not want to take it from you. But I advise you from now on not to make game of the law, because you will come across some officer who will hit you over the head with your own joke."

The young man went off, and the governor carried on with his rounds. And a little later two bailiffs came up bringing a man gripped by the arm, and said:

"My lord governor, this person who looks like a man is not one but a woman, and not an ugly one, and she comes dressed in man's clothes."

They brought two or three lanterns up to her eyes, in whose light they made out a woman's face, apparently of sixteen years or a few more, her hair gathered up in a net of gold and green silk, and as beautiful as a thousand pearls. They looked her up and down, and saw that she was wearing crimson silk stockings with garters of white taffeta with gold and seed-pearl fringes; her breeches were green, of cloth of gold, and she wore a loose overjacket of the same, under which she had a doublet of the finest cloth of gold and white; and her shoes were white and a man's. She wore no sword at her belt but a very rich dagger, and on her fingers a great many very good rings.

Finally the girl pleased everybody, and none of those who saw her recognised her; and the natives of the place said they could not think who she might be, and those who were in on the tricks to be played on Sancho were the ones who were most astonished, because this event and discovery had not been arranged by them; and so they were in doubt, waiting to see where the business would end.

Sancho was thunderstruck at the girl's beauty, and asked her who she was, where she was going and what had moved her to dress in that way. She, with her eyes on the ground and in the deepest modest shame, answered:

"I cannot, sir, say so publicly what it mattered so much to me to keep secret. One thing I want to be understood: that I am no thief and no criminal, but an unfortunate maiden whom the force of jealousy has made break the decorum that is owing to modesty."

Hearing this, the steward said to Sancho:

"Have the people moved off, my lord governor, so that this lady may say what she wants with less embarrassment."

The governor ordered it so; everybody moved off except the steward, the head steward and the secretary. Finding themselves alone, then, the maiden went on, saying:

"I, gentlemen, am the daughter of Pedro Pérez Mazorca, the wool-farmer of this place, who often comes to my father's house."

"That does not stand up, madam," said the steward, "because I know Pedro Pérez very well and I know he has no children, neither son nor daughter. And what is more, you say he is your father and then add that he often comes to your father's house."

"I had already noticed that," said Sancho.

"Now, gentlemen, I am confused and do not know what I am saying," answered the maiden. "But the truth is that I am the daughter of Diego de la Llana, whom all your worships must know."

"That does stand up," answered the steward, "for I know Diego de la Llana and I know that he is a gentleman of quality and rich, and that he has a son and a daughter, and that since he was widowed there has been nobody in this whole place who can say he has seen his daughter's face; for he keeps her so shut up that he does not give the sun room to see her. And with all that, report says she is extremely beautiful."

"That is the truth," answered the maiden, "and I am that daughter; whether report lies or not about my beauty you will by now have found out for yourselves, gentlemen, since you have seen me."

And with this she began to weep tenderly. Seeing which, the secretary came up to the head steward's ear and said to him very softly:

"Without any doubt something of importance must have happened to this poor maiden, since in such a dress, and at such an hour, and being of such quality, she is out of her house."

"There is no doubting that," answered the head steward; "and what is more, her tears confirm that suspicion."

Sancho consoled her with the best words he knew, and asked her to tell them without any fear what had happened to her, for they would all try very earnestly and in every possible way to put it right.

"The case is, gentlemen," she answered, "that my father has kept me shut up for the last ten years, which are the same as the years the earth has been eating my mother. In our house they say Mass in a rich oratory; and in all this time I have not seen the sun of heaven by day or the moon and the stars by night, nor do I know what streets, squares or churches are, or even men, apart from my father and a brother of mine and Pedro Pérez the wool-farmer — who, because he comes into my house regularly, I took it into my head to say was my father, so as not to declare my own.

"This shutting up and this refusing to let me go out of the house, even to church, has for many days and months left me very disconsolate. I wanted to see the world, or at least the town where I was born, since it seemed to me that this desire did not go against the good decorum that maidens of quality owe to themselves. When I heard it said that they were running bulls and playing at canes and performing plays, I asked my brother, who is a year younger than I am, to tell me what those things were and a great many others I had never seen; he explained them to me in the best ways he knew, but it was all setting my desire to see them more alight.

"Finally, to shorten the story of my ruin, I say that I begged and asked my brother — and I wish I had never asked or begged such a thing..."

And she began to weep again. The steward said to her:

"Go on, madam, your worship, and finish telling us what has happened to you, for your words and your tears have us all in suspense."

"I have few left to say," answered the maiden, "though a great many tears left to weep; because badly placed desires can bring nothing with them but the like of this."

The maiden's beauty had settled in the head steward's soul, and he brought his lantern up again to look at her afresh; and it seemed to him that what she was weeping were not tears but seed pearls or the dew of the fields, and he even raised them higher and brought them up to oriental pearls; and he was hoping her misfortune might not be as great as the signs of her weeping and her sighs gave to understand. The governor was in despair at the girl's slowness in drawing out her story, and told her to leave off keeping them in suspense, for it was late and there was a great deal of the town still to be walked. She, between broken sobs and badly formed sighs, said:

"My misfortune is nothing else, and my ill luck is nothing else, but that I begged my brother to dress me in man's clothes with one of his suits and to take me out one night to see the whole town when our father was asleep. He, worn down by my entreaties, gave in to my wish; and, putting this suit on me and dressing himself in another of mine, which fits him as though he were born in it — because he has not a hair of beard and looks like nothing but a most beautiful girl — tonight, it must be an hour ago, more or less, we came out of the house.

"And, guided by our own boyish and disordered judgement, we went all round the town; and when we wanted to go back home we saw a great crowd of people coming, and my brother said to me: 'Sister, this must be the watch: make your feet light and put wings on them, and come running after me, so that they do not recognise us, for it would go badly with us.' And, saying this, he turned his back and began, I will not say to run, but to fly; and I, at less than six paces, fell down in the shock. And then the officer of the law came up who has brought me before your worships, where, for being a bad, capricious girl, I find myself shamed in front of so many people."

"So that in fact, madam," said Sancho, "no other mishap has happened to you, and jealousy, as you said at the beginning of your story, did not bring you out of your house?"

"Nothing has happened to me, and jealousy did not bring me out, but only the desire to see the world, which stretched no further than to seeing the streets of this town."

And what finished confirming that what the maiden said was true was the arrival of the bailiffs with her brother under arrest, whom one of them had caught when he ran off from his sister. He was wearing nothing but a rich petticoat and a short cloak of blue damask with fine gold braid, and his head bare of any headdress and adorned with nothing but his own hair, which was rings of gold, so fair and curly was it.

The governor, the steward and the head steward drew aside with him and, out of his sister's hearing, asked him how he came to be in that dress; and he, with no less shame and embarrassment, told the same as his sister had told — at which the enamoured head steward took great pleasure. But the governor said to them:

"Certainly, ladies and gentlemen, this has been a great piece of childishness; and to tell this piece of folly and daring there was no need for such long-drawn-out delays, or so many tears and sighs. By saying, 'We are so-and-so and so-and-so, and we came out of our parents' house on this contrivance simply out of curiosity, with no other design at all,' the story would have been over — and no little groans and little weepings and on and on."

"That is the truth," answered the maiden, "but your worships must know that the confusion I have been in has been so great that it has not let me keep the bounds I should have."

"Nothing has been lost," answered Sancho. "Let us go, and we shall leave your worships at your father's house; perhaps he will not have missed you. And from now on do not be such children, or so eager to see the world; for the honourable maiden keeps a broken leg and stays at home; and a woman and a hen are soon lost by wandering; and the girl who is eager to see is also eager to be seen. I say no more."

The young man thanked the governor for the kindness he wanted to do them in taking them back to their house; and so they made their way towards it, which was not very far from there. They arrived, then; and the brother threw a pebble at a grating, and at once a maidservant came down who was waiting for them and opened the door to them, and they went in — leaving everybody amazed both at their gracefulness and beauty and at the desire they had to see the world by night and without leaving the town. But they put it all down to their few years.

The head steward was left with his heart pierced through, and he resolved to ask her father for her hand in marriage the very next day, holding it for certain that he would not refuse him, since he was a servant of the duke's. And even Sancho was seized with a longing and a notion of marrying the young man to Sanchica his daughter, and he decided to bring it up in its own time, giving himself to understand that no husband could be refused to a governor's daughter.

With this the rounds of that night came to an end, and two days later the government came to an end too, with which all his designs were cut down and rubbed out, as will be seen further on.
