Chapter 50: Where It Is Declared Who the Enchanters and Executioners Were Who Whipped the Duenna and Pinched and Scratched Don Quixote, with What Happened to the Page Who Carried the Letter to Teresa Sancha, Sancho Panza's Wife

Cide Hamete, that most exact investigator of the atoms of this true history, says that at the time when Doña Rodríguez came out of her room to go to Don Quixote's chamber, another duenna who slept with her heard her; and, since all duennas are fond of knowing, finding out and nosing about, she went after her so silently that good Rodríguez did not notice it. And as soon as the duenna saw her go into Don Quixote's chamber, so that the general habit all duennas have of being gossips should not be wanting in her, she went at that moment to blab it to her lady the duchess, telling her how Doña Rodríguez was in Don Quixote's room.

The duchess told the duke, and asked his leave for her and Altisidora to go and see what that duenna wanted with Don Quixote. The duke gave it her; and the two of them, with great care and quietness, step by step, came and set themselves next to the door of the room, and so close that they could hear everything that was being said inside. And when the duchess heard that Rodríguez had thrown the Aranjuez of her issues out into the street — Aranjuez being the royal garden famous for its fountains — she could not bear it, and no more could Altisidora; and so, full of choler and eager for revenge, they burst into the room and riddled Don Quixote and whipped the duenna in the way that has been told; because affronts that go straight at women's beauty and their vanity wake anger in them in a very great degree and set alight their desire for revenge.

The duchess told the duke what had happened to her, at which he was much amused; and the duchess, going on with her intention of playing tricks and getting entertainment out of Don Quixote, sent off the page who had played the figure of Dulcinea in the agreement about her disenchantment — which Sancho Panza had quite forgotten with the business of his government — to Teresa Panza his wife, with her husband's letter and with another from herself, and with a great string of rich coral as a present.

The history says, then, that the page was very judicious and sharp; and, wanting to serve his master and mistress, he set off very willingly for Sancho's village. And before going into it he saw a number of women washing in a stream, and asked them whether they could tell him if there lived in that place a woman called Teresa Panza, wife of a certain Sancho Panza, squire to a knight called Don Quixote of La Mancha. At which question a young girl who was washing got to her feet and said:

"That Teresa Panza is my mother, and that Sancho is my lord father, and that knight is our master."

"Then come, my girl," said the page, "and show me your mother, because I bring her a letter and a present from this father of yours."

"That I shall do very willingly, my dear sir," answered the girl, who looked to be about fourteen years old, a little more or less.

And, leaving the washing she was doing to another companion, without putting on her headdress or her shoes — for she was bare-legged and tousled — she leapt out in front of the page's mount and said:

"Come, your worship, for our house is at the entrance of the village, and my mother is in it, in great distress at having had no news of my lord father for many days now."

"Well, I am bringing her such good news," said the page, "that she has good reason to thank God for it."

Finally, leaping and running and skipping, the girl reached the village; and before going into her house she called out from the door:

"Come out, mother Teresa, come out, come out, for here comes a gentleman who brings letters and other things from my good father."

At which shouts Teresa Panza her mother came out, spinning a bundle of tow, in a brown skirt. It seemed, so short was it, that it had been cut off at her shame; and she had a little brown bodice too and a shift. She was not very old, though she looked to be past forty; but she was strong, upright, sinewy and weather-browned. And, seeing her daughter and the page on horseback, she said:

"What is this, child? What gentleman is this?"

"He is a servant of my lady Doña Teresa Panza," answered the page.

And, suiting the deed to the word, he threw himself off the horse and went with great humility to kneel down before Señora Teresa, saying:

"Give me your hands, your worship, my lady Doña Teresa, as the lawful and particular wife of Señor Don Sancho Panza, proper governor of the isle of Barataria."

"Oh, my dear sir, get up from there; do not do that," answered Teresa. "For I am nothing of a court lady but a poor farm woman, the daughter of a clod-crusher and the wife of a wandering squire and not of any governor!"

"Your worship," answered the page, "is the most worthy wife of a most archly worthy governor; and, as proof of this truth, let your worship receive this letter and this present."

And he took out of his pocket on the instant a string of coral with gold ends and threw it round her neck and said:

"This letter is from my lord the governor, and another I am carrying and this coral are from my lady the duchess, who sends me to your worship."

Teresa was thunderstruck, and her daughter neither more nor less, and the girl said:

"May they kill me if our master Don Quixote is not behind this — he must have given father the government or the earldom he had promised him so many times."

"That is the truth," answered the page: "out of respect for Señor Don Quixote, Señor Sancho is now governor of the isle of Barataria, as will be seen by this letter."

"Read it to me, your worship, sir gentleman," said Teresa; "for although I can spin, I cannot read a crumb."

"Nor I either," added Sanchica; "but wait for me here, and I shall go and call somebody to read it — either the curate himself or the bachelor Sansón Carrasco, who will come very willingly to hear news of my father."

"There is no need to call anybody: I cannot spin, but I can read, and I shall read it."

And so he read the whole of it to her; which, having been already given, is not set down here. And then he took out another from the duchess, which went in this way:

Teresa my friend:

The good qualities of the goodness and the wit of your husband Sancho moved and obliged me to ask my husband the duke to give him the government of one of the many isles he has. I have news that he governs like a gerfalcon, at which I am very well pleased, and the duke my lord likewise; for which I give many thanks to heaven for not having been mistaken in choosing him for such a government. Because I want Señora Teresa to know that a good governor is hard to find in this world, and may God make me as good as Sancho is a governor.

I am sending you here, my dear, a string of coral with gold ends; I should have been glad if it had been of oriental pearls, but the man who gives you the bone would not like to see you dead. The time will come when we shall know each other and be in each other's company, and God knows what will come of it. Commend me to Sanchica your daughter, and tell her from me to get ready, for I mean to marry her highly when she least expects it.

They tell me that in that place of yours there are fat acorns: send me a couple of dozen, which I shall value greatly for being from your own hand; and write to me at length, letting me know about your health and your well-being. And if you should need anything, you have nothing to do but open your mouth, for your mouth shall be the measure. And God keep you. From this place.

Your friend, who is very fond of you,

The Duchess.

"Oh," said Teresa when she had heard the letter, "what a good, plain, humble lady! Let them bury me with ladies like that, and not with the gentlewomen who are in fashion in this village, who think that because they are gentlewomen the wind must not touch them, and go to church with as much airs as if they were queens themselves, and look for all the world as if they held it a dishonour to look at a farm woman. And see here how this good lady, being a duchess, calls me her friend and treats me as if I were her equal — and may I see her equal to the tallest belfry there is in La Mancha!

"And as to the acorns, my dear sir, I shall send her ladyship a peck of them, and they are so fat that people can come and look at them and marvel. And for now, Sanchica, see that this gentleman is looked after: get his horse seen to, and get eggs out of the stable, and cut plenty of bacon, and let us give him a dinner fit for a prince; for the good news he has brought us and his good face deserve it all. And meanwhile I shall go out and give my neighbours the news of our good fortune, and the father curate and Master Nicolás the barber, who are and have been such friends of your father's."

"I shall, mother," answered Sanchica; "but mind you must give me half of that string, for I do not think my lady the duchess such a fool as to have sent her the whole of it."

"It is all for you, daughter," answered Teresa, "but let me wear it round my neck for a few days, for truly it seems to gladden my heart."

"They will be glad too," said the page, "when they see the bundle in this portmanteau, which is a suit of the finest cloth that the governor wore only one day out hunting, and which he is sending in its entirety for Señora Sanchica."

"May he live a thousand years," answered Sanchica, "and the man who brings it neither more nor less, and even two thousand if there is need."

At this Teresa went out of the house with the letters and with the string round her neck, and went along drumming on the letters as though they were a tambourine; and, meeting the curate and Sansón Carrasco by chance, she began to dance and to say:

"Upon my word, now there are no poor relations! We have a nice little government! No — let the smartest gentlewoman take me on, and I shall trim her up like new!"

"What is this, Teresa Panza? What madness is this, and what papers are those?"

"There is no other madness but that these are letters from duchesses and governors, and these I am wearing round my neck are fine coral; the Ave Marias and the Our Fathers are of hammered gold, and I am a governess."

"Under God, we do not understand you, Teresa, and we do not know what you are saying."

"There they can see it for themselves," answered Teresa.

And she gave them the letters. The curate read them so that Sansón Carrasco heard them, and Sansón and the curate looked at each other as if amazed at what they had read; and the bachelor asked who had brought those letters. Teresa answered that they should come with her to her house and they would see the messenger, who was a young man like a golden pine, and that he was bringing her another present worth as much again.

The curate took the coral off her neck and looked at it and looked at it again, and, making certain that it was genuine, was amazed all over again, and said:

"By the habit I wear, I do not know what to say or what to think about these letters and these presents. On the one hand I see and touch the fineness of this coral, and on the other I read that a duchess is sending to ask for two dozen acorns."

"Match me those measurements!" said Carrasco then. "Well now, let us go and see the bearer of this packet, and we shall find out from him about the difficulties that occur to us."

They did so, and Teresa went back with them. They found the page sifting a little barley for his mount, and Sanchica cutting a rasher of bacon to pave it with eggs and give the page his dinner; and his appearance and his good dress pleased the two of them very much. And, after they had greeted him courteously and he them, Sansón asked him to tell them news both of Don Quixote and of Sancho Panza; for although they had read Sancho's letter and the lady duchess's, they were still confused and could not manage to hit on what this business of Sancho's government could be, and above all of an isle — since all or most of the isles there are in the Mediterranean belong to His Majesty. To which the page answered:

"That Señor Sancho Panza is a governor there is no doubting; whether what he governs is an isle or not, I do not meddle in that, but it is enough that it is a place of more than a thousand inhabitants. And as for the business of the acorns, I say that my lady the duchess is so plain and so humble that not merely sending to ask for acorns from a farm woman — she has even been known to send and ask a neighbour of hers for the loan of a comb. Because I want your worships to know that the ladies of Aragon, although they are of such great quality, are not as punctilious and as high-flown as Castilian ladies; they treat people with more plainness."

In the middle of this talk Sanchica burst in with a lapful of eggs, and asked the page:

"Tell me, sir: does my lord father by any chance wear tied hose now that he is a governor?"

"I have not looked at that," answered the page, "but he must do."

"Oh my God!" replied Sanchica. "And what a thing it will be to see my father in trunk hose! Is it not a fine thing that ever since I was born I have wanted to see my father in tied hose?"

"Your worship will see him in such things and worse if he lives," answered the page. "By God, he is on the way to travelling in a hooded cape if the government lasts him only two months."

The curate and the bachelor saw well enough that the page was talking slyly, but the fineness of the coral and the hunting suit Sancho was sending undid it all — for Teresa had already shown them the suit. And they could not help laughing at Sanchica's wish, and still more when Teresa said:

"Master curate, look about and see whether there is anybody going to Madrid or to Toledo, to buy me a round farthingale, a proper one and well made, in the fashion and one of the best there is; for truly and truly I mean to honour my husband's government as far as I can, and even, if I get annoyed, to go off to that court and set up a coach like everybody else. For the woman who has a governor for a husband may very well keep and maintain one."

"And how, mother!" said Sanchica. "Would to God it were today rather than tomorrow, even if those who saw me riding beside my lady mother in that coach were to say: 'Look at the such-and-such, daughter of the garlic-stuffed man, and how she goes sitting and stretched out in the coach as if she were a she-pope!' But let them tread the mud, and let me ride in my coach with my feet up off the ground. A bad year and a bad month to all the gossips in the world, and let me be warm and let people laugh! Am I right, mother?"

"And how right you are, daughter!" answered Teresa. "And all these good fortunes, and even greater ones, my good Sancho has prophesied to me; and you shall see, daughter, how he does not stop until he has made me a countess. It is all a matter of beginning to be lucky; and, as I have heard your good father say many times — and he is the father of proverbs as well as yours — when they give you the heifer, run with the halter; when they give you a government, take it; when they give you an earldom, grab it; and when they chuck you under the chin with some good gift, pocket it. No — go to sleep, and do not answer the good fortunes and the good luck that are knocking at the door of your house!"

"And what do I care," added Sanchica, "if anybody who likes says, when he sees me giving myself airs and putting on style: 'The dog got himself into hemp breeches...' and the rest of it?"

Hearing which, the curate said:

"I cannot help believing that all of this line of the Panzas were born with a sackful of proverbs inside them: I have never seen one of them who does not spill them at all hours and in every conversation they have."

"That is the truth," said the page; "for the lord governor Sancho says them at every turn, and, although a great many are beside the point, they still give pleasure, and my lady the duchess and the duke make much of them."

"And does your worship still hold to it, my dear sir," said the bachelor, "that this business of Sancho's government is true, and that there is a duchess in the world who sends him presents and writes to him? Because we, though we have touched the presents and have read the letters, do not believe it, and think that this is one of those affairs of Don Quixote our fellow townsman, who thinks everything is done by enchantment; and so I am half inclined to say that I want to touch and feel your worship, to see whether you are a fanciful ambassador or a man of flesh and bone."

"Gentlemen, I know no more about myself," answered the page, "than that I am a true ambassador, and that Señor Sancho Panza is an actual governor, and that my lord and lady the duke and duchess can give, and have given, that government; and that I have heard it said that this same Sancho Panza conducts himself in it most valiantly. Whether there is enchantment in this or not, let your worships argue it out among yourselves; for I know nothing else, by the oath I make, which is by the life of my parents, whom I have alive and love and am very fond of."

"It may very well be so," replied the bachelor, "but dubitat Augustinus."

"Let doubt who will doubt," answered the page, "the truth is what I have said, and it must always float on top of a lie, as oil does on water; and if not, operibus credite, et non verbis. Let one of your worships come with me and you shall see with your eyes what you do not believe with your ears."

"That journey is mine," said Sanchica. "Take me, sir, on your nag's crupper, for I shall go very willingly to see my lord father."

"Governors' daughters must not go along the roads alone, but attended by coaches and litters and a great number of servants."

"By God," answered Sancha, "I would go as well on a she-ass as in a coach. You have found your squeamish girl, have you not!"

"Be quiet, girl," said Teresa; "you do not know what you are saying, and this gentleman is right: as the times are, so the touch; when it is Sancho, Sancha, and when it is governor, my lady — and I do not know whether I am saying something."

"Señora Teresa says more than she thinks," said the page. "And give me something to eat and send me off soon, because I mean to go back this afternoon."

To which the curate said:

"Your worship shall come and take pot luck with me, for Señora Teresa has more good will than furnishings to serve so good a guest with."

The page refused; but in the end he had to agree to it for his own good, and the curate took him along very willingly, so as to have room to ask him at leisure about Don Quixote and his exploits.

The bachelor offered to write the answering letters for Teresa; but she did not want the bachelor to meddle in her affairs, for she took him for something of a joker; and so she gave a roll and two eggs to an altar boy who could write, who wrote her two letters, one for her husband and another for the duchess, dictated out of her own headpiece — and they are not the worst that are set down in this great history, as will be seen further on.
