Chapter 52: Where the Adventure of the Second Distressed, or Anguished, Duenna Is Told, Called by Another Name Doña Rodríguez

Cide Hamete tells that, Don Quixote being now healed of his scratches, it seemed to him that the life he was leading in that castle was against the whole order of chivalry he professed; and so he decided to ask the duke and duchess for leave to set out for Saragossa, whose festival was coming near, where he expected to win the suit of armour that is competed for at such festivals.

And, being one day at table with the duke and duchess and beginning to put his intention into practice and ask for leave, see here: all at once there came in at the door of the great hall two women — as they afterwards proved to be — covered in mourning from head to foot; and one of them, coming up to Don Quixote, threw herself at his feet, stretched out at full length, her mouth stitched to Don Quixote's feet, and she gave out groans so mournful, so deep and so pained that she threw everybody who heard and saw her into confusion.

And although the duke and duchess thought it must be some trick their servants wanted to play on Don Quixote, still, seeing the earnestness with which the woman sighed and groaned and wept, it left them doubtful and in suspense — until Don Quixote, out of compassion, raised her from the ground and made her uncover herself and take the mantle off her weeping face.

She did so, and showed herself to be what nobody could ever have imagined, because she uncovered the face of Doña Rodríguez, the duenna of the house; and the other woman in mourning was her daughter, the one deceived by the rich farmer's son. All those who knew her were astonished, and the duke and duchess more than anybody; for although they took her for a fool and a good-natured creature, they did not take her for one who would come to commit follies. Finally Doña Rodríguez, turning to her master and mistress, said to them:

"May your excellencies be pleased to give me leave to have a few words with this knight, since it is needful for me to come well out of the business the boldness of an ill-meaning peasant has put me in."

The duke said that he gave it her, and that she might have as many words with Señor Don Quixote as she pleased. She, directing her voice and her face to Don Quixote, said:

"Many days ago, valorous knight, I gave you an account of the wrong and the treachery a wicked farmer has done unto my dearly loved daughter — who is this unfortunate girl here present — and you have promised me to stand up for her and to right the injustice that has been done her. And now it has come to my notice that you mean to leave this castle in search of the good adventures that God may send you. And so I should like, before you slip away along those roads, that you should challenge this untamed rustic and make him marry my daughter, in fulfilment of the word he gave her of being her husband before and ere he lay with her. Because to think that the duke my lord will do me justice is to ask pears of an elm, for the reason I have already declared to your worship in confidence. And with this, may Our Lord give your worship much health, and not leave us unprotected."

To which words Don Quixote answered with a great deal of gravity and pomp:

"Good duenna, temper your tears — or, better said, dry them and save your sighs; for I take upon my own charge the remedy of your daughter, who would have done better not to be so ready to believe lovers' promises, which for the most part are light in the promising and very heavy in the keeping. And so, with the leave of the duke my lord, I shall set out at once in search of that soulless young man; and I shall find him and challenge him and kill him whenever and however he excuses himself from keeping the word he promised. For the chief business of my profession is to pardon the humble and punish the proud — I mean, to come to the help of the wretched and destroy the harsh."

"There is no need," answered the duke, "for your worship to put yourself to the labour of looking for the rustic this good duenna complains of; nor is there any need for your worship to ask my leave to challenge him. I take him as challenged, and I take it upon myself to let him know of this challenge and to make him accept it and come and answer for himself at this castle of mine, where I shall give the two of you a safe field, keeping all the conditions that generally are and ought to be kept in such matters, and keeping his justice equally to each of you, as all those princes are bound to do who give free field to men who fight within the bounds of their lordships."

"Then with that safe conduct and with your greatness's good leave," replied Don Quixote, "from here I say that for this once I renounce my gentle birth, and level and adjust myself to the lowness of the offender, and make myself his equal, qualifying him to fight with me. And so, though he is absent, I challenge and defy him, on the grounds that he did wrong in cheating this poor girl, who was a maiden and through his fault is one no longer; and that he must keep the word he gave her of being her lawful husband, or die in the attempt."

And then, pulling off a glove, he threw it into the middle of the hall; and the duke picked it up, saying that, as he had already said, he accepted that challenge in the name of his vassal, and set the term at six days from then; and the field, in the square of that castle; and the arms, the ones customary among knights: lance and shield and articulated armour with all the other pieces, without deceit, trickery or any superstition, examined and inspected by the judges of the field.

"But before anything else, it is necessary that this good duenna and this bad maiden should put the right of their case into Señor Don Quixote's hands; for otherwise nothing will be done, and the challenge will never come to be duly carried out."

"I do put it," answered the duenna.

"And I too," added the daughter, all in tears and all shamefaced and in bad spirits.

This memorandum being taken down, then, and the duke having imagined what he would do in the case, the women in mourning went off; and the duchess ordered that from then on they should not be treated as her servants but as adventuring ladies who had come to her house to ask for justice. And so they gave them a separate suite and served them as strangers, not without alarm among the rest of the servants, who did not know where the foolishness and forwardness of Doña Rodríguez and her ill-fortuned daughter were going to end.

While they were at this, to finish making the feast merry and give the dinner a good ending, see here where there came into the hall the page who had taken the letters and presents to Teresa Panza, wife of the governor Sancho Panza; at whose arrival the duke and duchess were greatly pleased, being eager to know what had happened to him on his journey. And, on their asking him, the page answered that he could not tell it so publicly or in a few words: let their excellencies be pleased to leave it until they were alone, and meanwhile entertain themselves with these letters. And, taking out two letters, he put them into the duchess's hands.

One had on its address: Letter for my lady the duchess of such-and-such, of I do not know where; and the other: To my husband Sancho Panza, governor of the isle of Barataria, whom God prosper more years than me. The duchess's bread would not bake, as the saying goes, until she had read her letter; and, opening it and reading it to herself and seeing that she could read it aloud so that the duke and the bystanders could hear it, she read in this way:

Letter from Teresa Panza to the Duchess

Great pleasure it gave me, my lady, the letter your greatness wrote me, which truly I had wanted very much. The string of coral is very good, and my husband's hunting suit is not one step behind it. That your ladyship should have made Sancho my consort a governor has given great pleasure to this whole place, though there is nobody who believes it — chiefly the curate, and Master Nicolás the barber, and Sansón Carrasco the bachelor. But I do not care a bit; for, so long as it is so, as it is, let everybody say what they like — although, to tell the truth, if the coral and the suit had not come, I should not have believed it either, because in this village everybody takes my husband for a blockhead, and, apart from governing a flock of goats, they cannot imagine what government he can be good for. God grant it, and set it on the road as He sees His children need.

I, lady of my soul, have made up my mind, with your worship's leave, to bring this good day into my house by going to the court to stretch myself out in a coach, so as to put out the eyes of the thousand envious people I have already. And so I beg your excellency to order my husband to send me a little money, and let it be something worth having, because at court expenses are great: bread is at a real and meat thirty maravedís the pound, which is a judgement. And if he does not want me to go, let him warn me in good time, because my feet are itching to be on the road; for my friends and my neighbours tell me that if my daughter and I go about grand and puffed up at court, my husband will come to be known through me more than I through him, since a great many people will have to ask: "Who are these ladies in this coach?" And a servant of mine will answer: "The wife and daughter of Sancho Panza, governor of the isle of Barataria." And in this way Sancho will be known and I shall be respected, and off to Rome with the whole thing.

It grieves me, as much as it can grieve me, that this year there has been no crop of acorns in this village; even so, I am sending your highness about half a peck of them, which I went and gathered and picked one by one on the mountain, and I could not find any bigger; I wish they had been like ostrich eggs.

Do not let your pomposity forget to write to me, for I shall take care of the answer, letting you know of my health and of everything there is to let you know from this place, where I remain praying to Our Lord to keep your greatness, and not to forget me. Sancha my daughter and my son kiss your worship's hands.

She who wants more to see your ladyship than to write to you, your servant,

Teresa Panza.

Great was the pleasure everybody took in hearing Teresa Panza's letter, and chiefly the duke and duchess; and the duchess asked Don Quixote's opinion whether it would be right to open the letter that had come for the governor, which she imagined must be an excellent one. Don Quixote said that he would open it to give them pleasure, and so he did; and he saw that it went in this way:

Letter from Teresa Panza to Sancho Panza Her Husband

Your letter I received, my Sancho of my soul, and I promise you and swear to you as a Catholic Christian that I came within two fingers of going mad with pleasure. Look, brother: when I came to hear that you are a governor, I thought I should fall down dead there of pure joy, for you know they say that sudden gladness kills as much as great grief. As for Sanchica your daughter, her waters went from her without her noticing it, out of pure contentment.

I had the suit you sent me in front of me, and the coral my lady the duchess sent me round my neck, and the letters in my hands, and the man who brought them there present; and with all that I believed and thought that everything I saw and touched was a dream. Because who could think that a goatherd would come to be governor of isles? You know, my friend, that my mother used to say that you had to live a long time to see a great deal; I say it because I expect to see more if I live longer, for I do not mean to stop until I see you a tax-farmer or an excise-man — which are offices that, though the devil carries off whoever uses them badly, still in the end always have money and handle it.

My lady the duchess will tell you the wish I have to go to the court; think it over and let me know your pleasure, for I shall try to do you honour there by going about in a coach.

The curate, the barber, the bachelor and even the sacristan cannot believe that you are a governor, and they say it is all humbug or a matter of enchantment, as everything to do with your master Don Quixote is. And Sansón says he means to go and look for you and get the government out of your head and the madness out of Don Quixote's skull; and I do nothing but laugh and look at my string and plan out the dress I am to make for our daughter out of your suit.

Some acorns I sent my lady the duchess; I wish they had been of gold. Send me some strings of pearls, if they are in use in that isle.

The news from this place is that the Berrueca woman has married her daughter to a bad painter who came to this village to paint whatever might turn up. The council ordered him to paint His Majesty's arms over the doors of the town hall; he asked two ducats, they gave them to him in advance, he worked for a week, at the end of which he had painted nothing and said he could not manage to paint so many odds and ends; he gave the money back, and even so he got married on the strength of being a good workman. It is true that he has now dropped the brush and taken up the hoe, and goes into the fields like a gentleman.

Pedro de Lobo's son has taken minor orders and the tonsure, meaning to become a priest; Minguilla, Mingo Silvato's granddaughter, got to know of it and has brought a suit against him, saying that he has given her a promise of marriage. Bad tongues will have it that she has been with child by him, but he denies it flat-footedly.

There are no olives this year, and there is not a drop of vinegar to be found in this whole village. A company of soldiers came through here; on their way they carried off three girls from this village; I do not want to tell you who they are: perhaps they will come back, and there will be no lack of men to take them for wives, with their good or bad blemishes.

Sanchica makes lace edging; she earns eight maravedís clear every day, which she keeps dropping into a money box to help with her dowry. But now that she is a governor's daughter, you will give her the dowry without her working for it. The fountain in the square dried up; lightning struck the pillory, and much I care.

I hope for an answer to this and for a decision about my going to the court; and with this, may God keep you more years than me, or as many, for I should not like to leave you in this world without me.

Your wife,

Teresa Panza.

The letters were made much of, laughed over, valued and marvelled at; and, to finish setting the seal on it, the courier arrived who was carrying the one Sancho was sending to Don Quixote, which was likewise read publicly, and which put the governor's foolishness in doubt.

The duchess withdrew to learn from the page what had happened to him in Sancho's village, which he told her at great length, without leaving out a single circumstance. He gave her the acorns, and a cheese as well that Teresa had given him for being a very good one, better than the cheeses of Tronchón. The duchess received it with the greatest pleasure — with which we shall leave her, so as to tell the end that the government of the great Sancho Panza came to, the flower and mirror of all island governors.
