Chapter 53: Of the Wearied End and Close That Sancho Panza's Government Came To

"To think that in this life its affairs will always stay in one state is to think the impossible. Rather it seems that it all goes round in a circle — I mean, round and round: spring follows summer, summer high summer, high summer autumn, autumn winter and winter spring, and so time goes back to travelling on this continual wheel. Only human life runs to its end, lighter than time, without hope of being renewed except in the next life, which has no bounds to limit it."

So says Cide Hamete, that Mohammedan philosopher; because this business of understanding the swiftness and instability of the present life and the everlastingness of the eternal one that is looked for has been understood by many without the light of faith, and only by the light of nature. But here our author says it because of the speed with which Sancho's government ended, was used up, was undone and went off like a shadow and a smoke.

Sancho, being in his bed on the seventh night of the days of his government — not full of bread or of wine but of judging and giving opinions and making statutes and decrees — when sleep, in spite and defiance of his hunger, was beginning to close his eyelids, heard such a great noise of bells and of voices that it sounded for all the world as though the whole isle were sinking. He sat up in bed and stayed listening attentively, to see whether he could hit on what might be the cause of such a great uproar. But not only did he not find out; on the contrary, with the noise of infinite trumpets and drums adding itself to the voices and the bells, he was left more confused and full of fear and terror.

And, getting to his feet, he put on a pair of slippers because of the damp of the floor, and, without putting on a dressing gown or anything of the kind, he went out to the door of his room, just as he saw coming along some galleries more than twenty people with lighted torches in their hands and with their swords drawn, all of them shouting at the tops of their voices:

"To arms, to arms, my lord governor, to arms! For infinite enemies have come into the isle, and we are lost if your skill and valour do not come to our help."

With this noise, fury and uproar they came to where Sancho was, astounded and dumbfounded by what he was hearing and seeing; and when they came up to him one of them said:

"Arm yourself at once, your lordship, if you do not want to be lost and this whole isle to be lost!"

"What am I to arm myself with?" answered Sancho. "And what do I know about arms or about relieving people? These things had better be left to my master Don Quixote, who will polish them off and put them out of danger in two shakes; for I, sinner that I am before God, understand nothing about these emergencies."

"Ah, my lord governor!" said another. "What slackness is this? Arm yourself, your worship, for here we bring you offensive and defensive arms; and come out into that square and be our guide and our captain, since it is your right to be so, being our governor."

"Arm me then, and welcome," replied Sancho.

And at once they brought him two pavises, which they had come provided with; and they put them over his shirt without letting him put on any other clothes, one pavise in front and another behind, and through some hollows they had made in them they pulled his arms out and tied him up very tightly with cords, so that he was left walled in and boarded up, straight as a spindle, unable to bend his knees or to stir a single step. They put a lance in his hands, which he leaned on so as to be able to keep on his feet. When they had him like this, they told him to march and to guide them all and encourage them; for, he being their pole star, their lantern and their morning star, their affairs would come to a good end.

"How am I to march, wretched man that I am," answered Sancho, "when I cannot work my kneecaps, because these boards that are stitched so tight to my flesh are stopping me? What you must do is carry me in your arms and set me, laid across or upright, in some gateway, and I shall guard it, either with this lance or with my body."

"Get on, my lord governor," said another; "it is fear more than the boards that is stopping your step. Have done and stir yourself, for it is late, and the enemies are growing, and the shouting is getting louder and the danger is pressing."

At which urgings and abuse the poor governor tried to move, and came down on the ground with such a great crash that he thought he had smashed himself to pieces. He was left like a tortoise shut up and covered by its shells, or like half a side of bacon between two troughs, or exactly like a boat run aground on the sand; and, for all their seeing him fallen, those mocking people felt no compassion for him at all. On the contrary, putting out the torches, they went back to redoubling their shouts and repeating their "to arms!" in such great haste, walking right over poor Sancho and dealing him endless sword-strokes on the pavises, that if he had not gathered himself in and shrunk up, putting his head between the pavises, the poor governor would have come off very badly. Shut up in that tightness, he sweated and sweated again, and with his whole heart commended himself to God to bring him out of that danger.

Some tripped over him, others fell down, and there was one who stood on top of him for a good while and from there, as from a watchtower, directed the armies, saying at the top of his voice:

"Here, our men — the enemy is pressing harder on this side! Let that breach be guarded, let that gate be shut, let those ladders be barred! Bring fire-pots, pitch and resin in cauldrons of boiling oil! Barricade the streets with mattresses!"

In short, he named with all earnestness all the odds and ends and instruments and engines of war with which the assault on a city is generally defended; and the battered Sancho, who was listening to it all and putting up with it all, said to himself:

"Oh, if only my Lord were pleased for this isle to be finally lost, and for me to see myself either dead or out of this great anguish!"

Heaven heard his petition, and, when he least expected it, he heard voices saying:

"Victory, victory! The enemy are beaten! Come, my lord governor, get up, your worship, and come and enjoy the victory and share out the spoils that have been taken from the enemy by the valour of that invincible arm!"

"Lift me up," said the aching Sancho in a pained voice.

They helped him up; and, on his feet, he said:

"The enemy I have conquered — I want them to nail him on my forehead. I do not want to share out spoils from any enemy, but to ask and beg some friend, if I have one, to give me a swallow of wine, for I am parched, and to dry this sweat off me, for I am turning into water."

They wiped him, brought him the wine, untied the pavises; he sat down on his bed and fainted away from the fear, the shock and the labour. The people of the trick were already sorry at having made it so heavy for him; but Sancho's coming round tempered the grief his fainting had given them. He asked what time it was; they answered that day was already breaking. He said nothing; and, without saying another word, he began to dress, buried in silence, and everybody watched him and waited to see where the haste with which he was dressing was going to end.

He dressed at last; and little by little, because he was battered and could not go very fast, he went off to the stable, followed by everybody who was there. And, coming up to the grey, he embraced him and gave him a kiss of peace on the forehead, and, not without tears in his eyes, said to him:

"Come here, my companion and my friend and the sharer of my labours and my miseries: when I got along with you and had no thoughts but those that came to me from the cares of mending your harness and keeping your little body going, my hours and my days and my years were happy ones. But since I left you and climbed up on the towers of ambition and pride, a thousand miseries, a thousand labours and four thousand disquiets have got into my soul."

And while he was saying these things he was likewise putting the pack-saddle on the donkey, without anybody saying anything to him. The grey being saddled, then, with great pain and grief he got up on him; and, directing his words and arguments to the steward, the secretary, the head steward and Pedro Recio the doctor, and to a great many others who were there present, he said:

"Make way, my dear sirs, and let me go back to my old liberty; let me go and look for my past life, so that it may raise me up from this present death. I was not born to be a governor, or to defend isles or cities from enemies who may want to attack them. I understand ploughing and digging and pruning and trimming the vines better than making laws or defending provinces or kingdoms. Saint Peter is well enough off in Rome — I mean that everybody is well enough off practising the trade he was born for. A sickle fits my hand better than a governor's sceptre; I would rather have my fill of gazpacho than be subject to the misery of an impertinent doctor who kills me with hunger; and I would rather lie down in the shade of an oak in summer and wrap myself in a shaggy sheepskin in winter, in my liberty, than go to bed under the subjection of a government between fine linen sheets and dress myself in onion-sables.

"Your worships stay with God, and tell the duke my lord that naked I was born and naked I find myself: I neither lose nor gain — I mean that I came into this government without a farthing and I go out of it without one, quite the other way round from how governors of other isles generally go out. And stand aside: let me go, for I am off to be poulticed; because I believe I have all my ribs crushed, thanks to the enemies who have been walking about on top of me tonight."

"It must not be like this, my lord governor," said Doctor Recio; "for I shall give your worship a draught against falls and bruisings that will restore you at once to your first soundness and vigour. And in the matter of food, I promise your worship to mend my ways, letting you eat plentifully of everything you like."

"Too late, chick!" answered Sancho. "I shall no more leave off going than I shall turn Turk. These jokes are not for twice over. By God, I shall stay in this government, or take another, about as soon as I shall fly to heaven without wings. I am of the line of the Panzas, who are all pig-headed; and if they once say odds, odds it has to be, even if it is evens, in spite of all the world.

"Let the ant's wings stay here in this stable — the wings that raised me into the air so that swifts and other birds could eat me — and let us go back to walking on the ground on a level foot; and if it is not adorned with pinked cordovan shoes, it will not go short of rough rope sandals. Every ewe with her own mate, and let nobody stretch his leg further than the sheet is long. And let me pass, for it is getting late for me."

To which the steward said:

"My lord governor, we would very willingly let your worship go, although it will grieve us greatly to lose you, for your wit and your Christian conduct oblige us to want you. But it is well known that every governor is obliged, before leaving the place where he has governed, first to give an account of his term: let your worship give an account of the ten days you have had the government, and go in the peace of God."

"Nobody can ask it of me," answered Sancho, "except whoever the duke my lord may order; I am going to see him, and to him I shall give it to the pattern. What is more, going out naked as I do, no other sign is needed to give it to be understood that I have governed like an angel."

"By God the great Sancho is right," said Doctor Recio, "and I am of the opinion that we should let him go, because the duke will take infinite pleasure in seeing him."

They all agreed to it and let him go, first offering him company and everything he wanted for the comfort of his person and the convenience of his journey. Sancho said he wanted no more than a little barley for the grey and half a cheese and half a loaf for himself; for, the road being so short, he had no need of a bigger or a better larder. They all embraced him, and he, weeping, embraced them all, and left them astonished, both at his words and at his decision, so resolute and so judicious.
