Chapter 54: Which Deals with Matters Touching This History and No Other

The duke and duchess made up their minds that the challenge Don Quixote had made to their vassal, for the reason already given, should go forward. And since the young man was in Flanders, where he had gone in flight so as not to have Doña Rodríguez for a mother-in-law, they arranged to put in his place a Gascon footman called Tosilos, first coaching him very thoroughly in everything he had to do.

Two days later the duke told Don Quixote that in four days his opponent would come and present himself in the field, armed as a knight, and would maintain that the girl lied by half her beard, and even by her whole beard, if she declared that he had given her a promise of marriage. Don Quixote took great pleasure in this news, and promised himself to work marvels in the case, and counted it a great piece of luck that an occasion had offered itself where those nobles might see how far the valour of his mighty arm reached. And so, with excitement and contentment, he waited out the four days, which, by the reckoning of his eagerness, were turning into four hundred centuries.

Let us leave them to pass, as we leave other things to pass, and let us go and keep Sancho company, who came riding along on the grey, between glad and sad, to look for his master, whose company pleased him more than being governor of all the isles in the world.

It happened, then, that, not having got very far from the isle of his government — for he never set himself to find out whether what he governed was an isle, a city, a town or a village — he saw coming along the road he was travelling six pilgrims with their staves, of those foreigners who beg for alms by singing; who, on coming up to him, drew up in a line and, all raising their voices together, began to sing in their own language what Sancho could not understand, except one word he clearly made out: alms — by which he understood that it was alms they were asking for in their song.

And as he was, according to Cide Hamete, exceedingly charitable, he took half a loaf and half a cheese out of his saddlebags, which he had come provided with, and gave it them, telling them by signs that he had nothing else to give them. They took it very willingly and said:

"Gelt! Gelt!"

"I do not understand," answered Sancho, "what it is you are asking me for, good people."

Then one of them took a purse out of his bosom and showed it to Sancho, by which he understood that they were asking him for money; and he, putting his thumb to his throat and spreading his hand upwards, gave them to understand that he had not a scrap of coin; and, spurring the grey, he pushed through them. And as he passed, one of them, having been looking at him very attentively, rushed at him, throwing his arms round his waist, and said in a loud and very Castilian voice:

"God bless me! What is this I see? Is it possible that I have in my arms my dear friend, my good neighbour Sancho Panza? I have, without a doubt, because I am not asleep and I am not drunk just now."

Sancho was astonished to hear himself named by his name and to see himself embraced by the foreign pilgrim; and, after looking at him very attentively without saying a word, he could not recognise him at all. But the pilgrim, seeing his bewilderment, said to him:

"How, and is it possible, brother Sancho Panza, that you do not know your neighbour Ricote the Morisco, the shopkeeper of your village?"

Then Sancho looked at him more attentively and began to make out his features; and finally he came to know him at every point, and, without getting off the donkey, threw his arms round his neck and said:

"Who the devil would have known you, Ricote, in that mummer's dress you are wearing? Tell me: who has turned you into a Frenchy, and how do you dare to come back to Spain, where if they catch you and recognise you it will go very badly with you?"

"If you do not give me away, Sancho," answered the pilgrim, "I am safe enough that in this dress there will be nobody to recognise me. And let us turn off the road to that poplar grove over there, where my companions mean to eat and rest; and you shall eat with them there, for they are very pleasant people. I shall have room to tell you what has happened to me since I left our village, in obedience to His Majesty's edict, which threatened the unfortunate people of my nation with such severity, as you heard."

Sancho did so; and, Ricote speaking to the other pilgrims, they turned off to the poplar grove they could see, well away from the high road. They threw down their staves, took off their pilgrims' capes and were left in their shirtsleeves; and they were all young men and very fine-looking, except Ricote, who was a man already on in years. They all carried saddlebags, and all of them, by the look of it, came well provided, at least with provoking things that call up a thirst from two leagues off.

They stretched themselves out on the ground and, making tablecloths of the grass, laid out on them bread, salt, knives, walnuts, slices of cheese and bare ham bones which, if they would not let themselves be chewed, did not forbid being sucked. They also laid out a black dish they say is called caviare, made of fish eggs, a great awakener of thirst. Nor were olives wanting, though dry and without any pickle, but tasty and entertaining. But what showed most in the field of that banquet was six wineskins, each man taking his own out of his saddlebag; even good Ricote, who had transformed himself from a Morisco into a German or a High Dutchman, took his out, which in size could compete with the other five.

They began to eat with the greatest pleasure and very slowly, savouring every mouthful, which they took on the point of the knife, and very little of each thing. And then, at that instant, all together, they raised their arms and their wineskins in the air; their mouths set to the skins' mouths, their eyes fixed on the sky, they looked for all the world as if they were taking aim at it; and in this way, moving their heads from one side to the other — signs that bore witness to the pleasure they were taking — they stayed for a good while, decanting the bowels of the vessels into their stomachs.

Sancho watched it all and grieved over none of it; on the contrary, to keep the proverb he knew very well, "when you go to Rome, do as you see done," he asked Ricote for the wineskin and took his aim like the rest, and with no less pleasure than they.

Four times the wineskins allowed themselves to be tilted up; but the fifth time it was not possible, because by then they were drier and more parched than esparto grass — a thing that withered the gladness they had shown until then. From time to time one of them would join his right hand to Sancho's and say:

"Spaniard and Dutchman, all one: good companion."

And Sancho would answer: "Good companion, by God!"

And he would let off a burst of laughter that lasted him an hour, not remembering anything just then of what had happened to him in his government; because over the hour and the time when a man is eating and drinking, cares generally have very little jurisdiction.

Finally the running out of the wine was the beginning of a sleep that came over them all, and they were left asleep on the very tables and tablecloths. Only Ricote and Sancho stayed awake, because they had eaten more and drunk less; and, Ricote drawing Sancho aside, they sat down at the foot of a beech, leaving the pilgrims buried in sweet sleep. And Ricote, without stumbling at all into his Morisco tongue, in pure Castilian said him the following words:

"You know very well, Sancho Panza, my neighbour and my friend, how the proclamation and the edict His Majesty ordered published against those of my nation put terror and fright into all of us. At least it put it into me in such a way that it seemed to me that before the time allowed us for taking ourselves out of Spain, the severity of the penalty was already carried out on my person and on my children's.

"I arranged, then — prudently, to my mind, exactly like a man who knows that at a certain time they are going to take away the house he lives in and provides himself with another to move to — I arranged, I say, to leave my village alone, without my family, and go and look for somewhere to take them conveniently and without the haste with which the rest went out. Because I saw clearly, and all our elders saw, that those proclamations were not merely threats, as some said, but real laws that would be put into execution at their appointed time. And I was forced to believe this truth by knowing the base and disordered designs our people had, and such that it seems to me it was divine inspiration that moved His Majesty to put so gallant a resolution into effect — not because we were all guilty, for there were some firm and true Christians; but they were so few that they could not stand against those who were not, and it was not right to breed the serpent in the bosom, having the enemies inside the house.

"In short, we were punished with justice by the penalty of exile — mild and gentle to the mind of some, but to ours the most terrible that could be given us. Wherever we are, we weep for Spain; for in the end we were born in it and it is our natural country. Nowhere do we find the welcome our misfortune longs for; and in Barbary and in all the parts of Africa, where we hoped to be received and taken in and treated well, that is where they most offend and ill-treat us. We did not know the good until we had lost it; and the longing almost all of us have to come back to Spain is so great that most of those — and there are many — who know the language as I do come back to it and leave their wives and children over there unprotected: so great is the love they bear it. And now I know and feel by experience what is generally said: that the love of one's country is sweet.

"I left our village, as I say, and went into France; and although they gave us a good welcome there, I wanted to see everything. I crossed into Italy and got to Germany, and there it seemed to me that one could live with more freedom, because its inhabitants do not stick at a great many niceties: everybody lives as he likes, because in most of it people live with liberty of conscience. I took a house in a town near Augsburg; I joined these pilgrims, who have a habit of coming to Spain in great numbers every year to visit the shrines of it, which they take for their Indies and for the most certain source of profit and known gain. They go over almost the whole of it, and there is no village they do not come out of fed and watered, as they say, and with at least a real in money; and at the end of their journey they come out with more than a hundred crowns over, which, changed into gold — either in the hollow of their staves or among the patches of their capes or by whatever contrivance they can manage — they get out of the kingdom and carry over to their own countries, in spite of the guards at the posts and ports where they are searched.

"Now my intention, Sancho, is to dig up the treasure I left buried — which, being outside the village, I can do without danger — and to write or go over from Valencia to my daughter and my wife, who I know is in Algiers, and lay a plan to bring them to some French port and from there take them to Germany, where we shall wait for what God may be pleased to do with us. For in short, Sancho, I know for certain that Ricota my daughter and Francisca Ricota my wife are Catholic Christians; and although I am not so much of one, still I have more of the Christian in me than of the Moor, and I always pray God to open the eyes of my understanding and let me know how I am to serve Him. And what astonishes me is not knowing why my wife and my daughter went to Barbary rather than to France, where she could have lived as a Christian."

To which Sancho answered:

"Look, Ricote, that must not have been in her hands, because Juan Tiopieyo, your wife's brother, took them; and, as he must be a thorough Moor, he went where it suited him best. And I can tell you another thing: I believe you are going in vain to look for what you left hidden, because we had news that they took a great many pearls and a great deal of money in gold off your brother-in-law and your wife, which they were carrying unregistered."

"That may well be," replied Ricote, "but I know, Sancho, that they did not touch my hiding place, because I did not tell them where it was, for fear of some mishap. And so, if you, Sancho, will come with me and help me to get it out and hide it, I shall give you two hundred crowns, with which you can put your needs right; for you know that I know you have plenty of them."

"I would do it," answered Sancho, "but I am not at all greedy. If I were, I let an office go out of my hands this morning where I could have made the walls of my house of gold and been eating off silver plates within six months. And so, both for this reason and because it seems to me I should be doing my king a treason by giving help to his enemies, I would not go with you, even if instead of the two hundred crowns you promise me you gave me four hundred here in cash."

"And what office is it you have left, Sancho?" asked Ricote.

"I have left off being governor of an isle," answered Sancho, "and such a one that upon my word they will not find another like it at three tugs."

"And where is this isle?" asked Ricote.

"Where?" answered Sancho. "Two leagues from here, and it is called the isle of Barataria."

"Be quiet, Sancho," said Ricote; "isles are out there in the sea, for there are no isles on dry land."

"How not?" replied Sancho. "I tell you, Ricote my friend, that this morning I set out from it, and yesterday I was in it governing at my pleasure like a very lord of creation; but for all that I have left it, since being a governor seems to me a dangerous office."

"And what have you gained in the government?" asked Ricote.

"I have gained," answered Sancho, "the knowing that I am not good for governing anything but a flock of sheep, and that the riches that are gained in such governments are at the cost of losing your rest and your sleep and even your food; because in isles the governors must eat little, especially if they have doctors to look after their health."

"I do not understand you, Sancho," said Ricote, "but it seems to me that everything you say is nonsense. For who would give you isles to govern? Were there no abler men in the world to be governors than you are? Be quiet, Sancho, and come to your senses, and see whether you will come with me, as I have told you, to help me get out the treasure I left hidden; for truly there is so much of it that it can be called a treasure, and I shall give you enough to live on, as I have said."

"I have told you already, Ricote," replied Sancho, "that I do not want to; be content that I shall not give you away, and go on your road and good luck to you, and let me follow mine. For I know that what is well gained is lost, and what is ill gained, itself and its owner with it."

"I will not press you, Sancho," said Ricote, "but tell me: were you in our village when my wife and my daughter and my brother-in-law left it?"

"I was," answered Sancho, "and I can tell you that your daughter went out so beautiful that everybody in the village came out to see her, and they all said she was the loveliest creature in the world. She went along weeping and embracing all her friends and acquaintances and everybody who came up to see her, and asked them all to commend her to God and to Our Lady his mother; and this with so much feeling that it made me weep, and I am not generally much of a weeper. And upon my word, a good many wanted to hide her and go out and take her away from them on the road; but the fear of going against the king's order held them back.

"The one who showed himself most passionate about it was Don Gaspar Gregorio, that rich young heir you know, who they say was very much in love with her; and after she left he has never appeared again in our village, and we all think he went after her to carry her off — but up to now nothing has been heard."

"I always had a bad suspicion," said Ricote, "that that gentleman was in love with my daughter; but, trusting in my Ricota's worth, it never grieved me to know that he loved her well. For you must have heard it said, Sancho, that Morisco women seldom or never made love matches with old Christians; and my daughter, who, as I believe, attended more to being a Christian than to being in love, would not have troubled herself about that young heir's attentions."

"God grant it," replied Sancho, "for it would go badly with them both. And let me set off from here, Ricote my friend, for I want to get tonight to where my master Don Quixote is."

"God go with you, brother Sancho, for my companions are stirring already, and it is time we went on with our journey too."

And then the two of them embraced, and Sancho got up on his grey and Ricote leaned on his staff, and they parted.
