Chapter 55: Of Things That Happened to Sancho on the Road, and Others as Good as Can Be Seen

Sancho's having stopped with Ricote gave him no room to reach the duke's castle that day, although he came within half a league of it, where night caught him — rather dark and thick; but, as it was summer, it did not distress him much. And so he turned off the road, meaning to wait for the morning; and his short and unfortunate luck willed that, while he was looking for a place to settle himself better, he and the grey fell into a deep and very dark pit that lay among some very ancient buildings. And as he fell he commended himself to God with all his heart, thinking he would not stop until the bottom of the abyss. And it was not so, for at a little over three times a man's height the grey struck bottom, and Sancho found himself on top of him without having taken any hurt or harm at all.

He felt himself all over his body and held his breath, to see whether he was sound or holed anywhere; and, finding himself well and whole and catholic in his health, he could not have done thanking God Our Lord enough for the kindness He had done him, for he had certainly thought he was smashed to a thousand pieces. He also felt with his hands along the walls of the pit, to see whether it would be possible to get out of it without anybody's help; but he found them all sheer and without any handhold, at which Sancho was greatly distressed, and especially when he heard the grey groaning tenderly and painfully — and no wonder, for he was not complaining out of self-indulgence, since in truth he was in a bad way.

"Oh," said Sancho Panza then, "what unthought-of things happen at every turn to those who live in this wretched world! Who would have said that the man who yesterday saw himself enthroned as governor of an isle, commanding his servants and his vassals, would today see himself buried in a pit, with nobody at all to help him and no servant or vassal to come to his rescue? Here we shall have to perish of hunger, my donkey and I — if we do not die first, he of being battered and broken and I of grief.

"At least I shall not be as lucky as my master Don Quixote of La Mancha was when he went down into the cave of that enchanted Montesinos, where he found people to treat him better than at home, so that it looks for all the world as if he went to a laid table and a made bed. There he saw beautiful and pleasant visions, and here I shall see, as I believe, toads and snakes. Unlucky man that I am, and what have my madnesses and fancies come to! From here they will take out my bones, when heaven is pleased for them to be found — bare and white and scraped, and my good grey's along with them; from which perhaps it will be made out who we are, at least by those who know that Sancho Panza never left his ass, nor his ass Sancho Panza.

"Again I say: wretched creatures that we are, whose short luck has not willed that we should die in our own country and among our own people, where, even if our misfortune found no remedy, there would be no lack of somebody to grieve over it and to close our eyes in the last hour of our passing! O my companion and my friend, what a bad return I have made you for your good services! Forgive me, and ask fortune, in the best way you know how, to bring us out of this wretched trouble the two of us are put in; for I promise to put a crown of laurel on your head, so that you shall look like nothing but a laureate poet, and to give you your rations double."

In this way Sancho Panza lamented, and his donkey listened to him without answering him a word — such was the strait and anguish the poor creature was in. Finally, having spent that whole night in wretched complaints and lamentations, the day came, by whose brightness and light Sancho saw that it was impossible with every impossibility to get out of that well without being helped; and he began to lament and to shout, to see whether anybody could hear him; but all his shouting was done in the desert, since there was nobody in all those parts who could have heard him, and then he finally gave himself up for dead.

The grey was lying on his back, and Sancho Panza arranged him in such a way that he got him on his feet, which he could hardly keep. And, taking out of the saddlebags — which had run the same fortune of the fall — a piece of bread, he gave it to his donkey, who did not find it bad. And Sancho said to him, as though he would understand:

"All sorrows are good with bread."

At this he made out at one side of the pit a hole big enough for a person to get through if he bent over and shrank himself up. Sancho Panza went to it and, crouching down, got in through it, and saw that inside it was spacious and long; and he could see it, because through what might be called the roof there came in a ray of sunlight that showed the whole of it. He saw too that it widened out and stretched away into another spacious hollow. Seeing which, he went back out to where the donkey was, and with a stone began to crumble away the earth of the hole, so that in a little while he made room for the ass to get in easily, as he did; and, taking him by the halter, he began to travel forward along that grotto, to see whether he could find some way out at the other end. Sometimes he went in the dark, and sometimes without light, but never without fear.

"God almighty help me!" he said to himself. "This, which for me is a misadventure, would be a better adventure for my master Don Quixote. He indeed would take these depths and dungeons for flowery gardens and for Galiana's palaces, and would expect to come out of this darkness and this narrowness into some flowery meadow. But I, luckless man, short of counsel and cut down in courage, at every step think another pit deeper than the last is suddenly going to open under my feet and finish swallowing me. Welcome, trouble, if you come alone!"

In this way and with these thoughts it seemed to him that he must have travelled a little over half a league, at the end of which he made out a confused brightness that seemed to be daylight and to be coming in somewhere — a sign that this road of his to the other life had an open end.

Here Cide Hamete Benengeli leaves him and goes back to dealing with Don Quixote, who, excited and contented, was waiting for the appointed time of the battle he was to fight with the robber of the honour of Doña Rodríguez's daughter, whose wrong and injury, wickedly done unto her, he meant to set right.

It happened, then, that, going out one morning to train and rehearse himself in what he had to do in the pass he expected to be in the next day, giving Rocinante a sudden pull-up or charge, he came to set his feet so close to a cave that if he had not tugged strongly at the reins it would have been impossible not to fall into it. In short, he held him and did not fall; and, coming a little nearer without dismounting, he looked at that depth. And, while he was looking at it, he heard loud shouts inside; and, listening attentively, he could make out and understand that the man who was giving them was saying:

"Ho, up there! Is there any Christian who hears me, or any charitable knight who will pity a sinner buried alive, or an unfortunate ungoverned governor?"

It seemed to Don Quixote that he heard Sancho Panza's voice, at which he was bewildered and amazed; and, raising his voice as much as he could, he said:

"Who is down there? Who is complaining?"

"Who can be here, or who is to complain," they answered, "but the worn-out Sancho Panza, governor, for his sins and his ill fortune, of the isle of Barataria, and squire that was to the famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha?"

Hearing which, Don Quixote's astonishment doubled and his amazement grew, it coming into his mind that Sancho Panza must be dead and that his soul was doing penance there; and, carried away by this idea, he said:

"I conjure you by everything I can conjure you by as a Catholic Christian, to tell me who you are; and if you are a soul in torment, tell me what you want me to do for you. For since it is my profession to favour and help those in need in this world, I shall also be ready to help and aid the needy of the other world, who cannot help themselves."

"In that case," they answered, "your worship who is speaking to me must be my master Don Quixote of La Mancha; and indeed by the organ of the voice it is nobody else, without any doubt."

"Don Quixote I am," replied Don Quixote, "who make it my profession to help and aid the living and the dead in their needs. So tell me who you are, for you have me astounded; because if you are my squire Sancho Panza and you are dead, and if the devils have not carried you off but by the mercy of God you are in purgatory, our Holy Mother the Roman Catholic Church has intercessions enough to bring you out of the pains you are in, and I, for my part, shall solicit them for you as far as my property will reach. So finish declaring yourself and tell me who you are."

"I swear," they answered, "and by the birth of whoever your worship likes, I swear, Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha, that I am your squire Sancho Panza, and that I have never died in all the days of my life. Only, having left my government for things and reasons that need more room to tell, last night I fell into this pit where I lie, and the grey with me, who will not let me lie — for, as a further sign, he is here with me."

And there is more: it looked for all the world as if the donkey understood what Sancho said, because at that moment he began to bray so loudly that the whole cave rang with it.

"A famous witness!" said Don Quixote. "I know that bray as if I had given birth to it, and I hear your voice, my Sancho. Wait for me; I shall go to the duke's castle, which is close by here, and bring somebody to get you out of this pit where your sins must have put you."

"Go, your worship," said Sancho, "and come back quickly, for the one God's sake, for I cannot bear being buried alive here any longer, and I am dying of fear."

Don Quixote left him and went to the castle to tell the duke and duchess about Sancho Panza's mishap, at which they were not a little amazed, although they understood well enough that he must have fallen in by the connection with that grotto which had been there from time immemorial; but they could not think how he had left the government without their having notice of his coming.

Finally, as they say, they brought ropes and cables; and, at the cost of a great many people and a great deal of labour, they got the grey and Sancho Panza out of that darkness into the light of the sun. A student saw him and said:

"This is how all bad governors ought to come out of their governments — as this sinner comes out of the depths of the pit: dead with hunger, colourless and without a farthing, as I believe."

Sancho heard him and said:

"Eight days or ten it is, brother gossip, since I went in to govern the isle they gave me; and in all that time I never had my fill of bread for so much as an hour. In them doctors have persecuted me and enemies have crushed my bones; and I have had no chance to take bribes or to collect fees. And this being so, as it is, I did not deserve, to my mind, to come out like this; but man proposes and God disposes, and God knows what is best and what suits each man; and as the times are, so the touch; and let nobody say 'I shall not drink of this water', for where you think there are flitches of bacon there are not even hooks. And God understands me, and that is enough, and I say no more, though I could."

"Do not be angry, Sancho, or take it hard from whatever you hear, for it would be never-ending. Come with a clear conscience and let them say what they will; and to want to tie the tongues of slanderers is the same as wanting to put doors on the open field. If the governor comes out of his government rich, they say of him that he has been a thief; and if he comes out poor, that he has been a good-for-nothing and an idiot."

"For a safe bet," answered Sancho, "this time they will take me for a fool rather than for a thief."

In this talk they came, surrounded by boys and by a great many other people, to the castle, where the duke and duchess were already waiting in a gallery for Don Quixote and Sancho. But Sancho would not go up to see the duke without first having settled the grey in the stable, because he said he had spent a very bad night at his lodging; and then he went up to see his master and mistress, before whom, on his knees, he said:

"I, my lord and lady, because your greatness willed it so and through no deserving of my own, went to govern your isle of Barataria, which I entered naked and naked I find myself: I neither lose nor gain. Whether I have governed well or badly, I have had witnesses in front of me who will say whatever they like. I have cleared up doubts and given judgement in lawsuits, always dying of hunger, because Doctor Pedro Recio, native of Get-You-Gone, an isle-and-governor doctor, willed it so.

"Enemies attacked us by night; and, having put us in a great strait, the people of the isle say they came out free and victorious by the valour of my arm — and may God give them as much health as they are telling truth.

"In short, in this time I have taken the measure of the burdens that governing brings with it, and the obligations; and I have found by my reckoning that my shoulders will not be able to carry them, that they are no weight for my ribs and no arrows for my quiver. And so, before the government pitched me over the side, I chose to pitch the government over the side myself; and yesterday morning I left the isle as I found it, with the same streets, houses and roofs it had when I went into it. I have not borrowed from anybody or got into any money-making; and although I meant to make some useful ordinances, I made none, for fear they would not be kept — which is the same as making them or not making them.

"I left the isle, as I say, with no company but my grey's; I fell into a pit, I came along it until this morning, when by the light of the sun I saw the way out — but not so easy a one that if heaven had not furnished me with my master Don Quixote I should not have stayed there until the end of the world.

"So, my lord duke and lady duchess, here is your governor Sancho Panza, who in the ten days alone that he has had the government has gained the knowledge that he would not give a farthing to be governor, not merely of an isle but of the whole world. And on this understanding, kissing your worships' feet, and copying the boys' game where they say 'You jump, and now you give it me', I jump out of the government and pass over into the service of my master Don Quixote; for with him, though I eat my bread in alarm, at least I have my fill — and for me, so long as I am full, it is all one whether it is carrots or partridges."

With this Sancho made an end of his long speech, Don Quixote all the while fearing that he was going to say thousands of absurdities in it; and, when he saw him finish with so few, he gave thanks to heaven in his heart. And the duke embraced Sancho and told him it grieved him to the soul that he had left the government so soon; but that he would arrange for him to be given some other office on his estate with less burden and more profit. The duchess embraced him likewise, and ordered him to be well looked after, since he gave signs of coming badly battered and worse used.
