Chapter 56: Of the Monstrous and Never-Before-Seen Battle That Took Place Between Don Quixote of La Mancha and the Footman Tosilos, in Defence of the Duenna Doña Rodríguez's Daughter

The duke and duchess were not left regretting the trick they had played on Sancho Panza with the government they gave him — and the more so as that very day their steward came and told them point by point almost all the words and actions Sancho had said and done in those days, and finally set out for them at length the assault on the isle and Sancho's fear and his departure, from which they took no small pleasure.

After this, the history tells that the day of the appointed battle came round; and the duke, having warned his footman Tosilos once and a great many times how he was to manage with Don Quixote so as to conquer him without killing or wounding him, ordered the heads to be taken off the lances, telling Don Quixote that the Christian charity he prided himself on did not allow that battle to be fought with so much risk and danger to their lives, and that he should be content that he was giving him a free field on his own land, although this went against the decree of the Holy Council, which forbids such challenges, and that he should not want to carry so hard a pass through in all its severity.

Don Quixote said that His Excellency might arrange the affairs of that business as he was best pleased, and that he would obey him in everything.

The dreaded day having come, then, and the duke having ordered a spacious scaffold to be built in front of the castle square, where the judges of the field and the duennas, mother and daughter, the plaintiffs, should sit, an infinite number of people had come from all the neighbouring towns and villages to see the novelty of that battle — for the like of it had never been seen or heard of in that country by those who were living or by those who had died.

The first to come into the field and the lists was the master of the ceremonies, who measured the ground and walked all over it, so that there should be no trick in it or anything hidden to trip over and fall on. Then the duennas came in and sat down in their seats, covered with their mantles up to their eyes and even up to their breasts, with signs of no small feeling.

Don Quixote being present in the lists, a little later, attended by a great many trumpets, there appeared at one side of the square, on a mighty horse, making the whole of it echo, the great footman Tosilos, his visor down and all stiffly encased in strong, shining armour. The horse looked to be a Frisian, broad and dapple-grey; from each fore and hind fetlock there hung a good bushel of hair.

The valorous combatant came well informed by the duke his master how he was to conduct himself with the valorous Don Quixote of La Mancha, warned that on no account was he to kill him but was to try to dodge the first charge, so as to escape the danger of Don Quixote's death, which was certain if he ran him full on. He rode round the square; and, coming to where the duennas were, he stopped a while to look at the one who was asking for him as a husband.

The marshal of the field called Don Quixote, who had already presented himself in the square; and, along with Tosilos, he spoke to the duennas, asking them whether they consented to Don Quixote of La Mancha's standing up for their right. They said they did, and that everything he did in that case they held for well done, for binding and for valid.

By this time the duke and duchess had taken their places in a gallery that looked over the lists, the whole of which was crowned with an infinite number of people waiting to see the severe and never-before-seen encounter. It was a condition of the combatants that if Don Quixote won, his opponent was to marry Doña Rodríguez's daughter; and if he were beaten, his adversary was free of the promise that was being demanded of him, without giving any other satisfaction.

The master of the ceremonies divided the sun between them and set each of the two in the place where they were to stand. The drums sounded, the sound of the trumpets filled the air, the earth trembled underfoot; the hearts of the watching crowd hung in suspense, some fearing and others hoping for the good or the bad outcome of that business.

Finally Don Quixote, commending himself with his whole heart to God Our Lord and to the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso, was waiting for the exact signal for the charge to be given him. But our footman had different thoughts: he was thinking of nothing but what I shall now tell.

It seems that when he stood looking at his enemy, she seemed to him the most beautiful woman he had seen in all his life; and the little blind boy, whom people up and down these streets generally call Love, did not want to lose the chance that offered itself of triumphing over a footman's soul and putting it on the list of his trophies. And so, coming up to him nicely without anybody seeing him, he ran a two-yard arrow into the poor footman's left side and pierced his heart right through; and he could do it in perfect safety, because Love is invisible and goes in and out wherever he likes, without anybody asking him to account for what he does.

I say, then, that when they gave the signal for the charge, our footman was carried away, thinking about the beauty of the woman he had already made the mistress of his liberty; and so he took no notice of the sound of the trumpet, as Don Quixote did, who had hardly heard it when he charged and, at the fastest gallop Rocinante allowed, set off against his enemy. And, his good squire Sancho seeing him set off, he said in a loud voice:

"God guide you, cream and flower of knights errant! God give you the victory, since you have right on your side!"

And, although Tosilos saw Don Quixote coming at him, he did not stir a step from his place; on the contrary, he called out loudly to the marshal of the field, who, coming to see what he wanted, was told:

"Sir, is this battle not being fought about whether I marry that lady or not?"

"That is so," he was answered.

"Well, I," said the footman, "am afraid for my conscience, and I should put a great load on it if I went on with this battle. And so I say that I give myself up as beaten, and that I want to marry that lady at once."

The marshal of the field was astonished at Tosilos's words; and, as he was one of those who were in on the machinery of that business, he did not know how to answer him a word. Don Quixote pulled up in the middle of his career, seeing that his enemy was not attacking him. The duke did not know why the battle was not going forward, but the marshal of the field went and explained to him what Tosilos was saying, at which he was left bewildered and extremely choleric.

While this was going on, Tosilos came up to where Doña Rodríguez was and said in a loud voice:

"I, madam, want to marry your daughter, and I do not want to get by lawsuits and quarrels what I can get in peace and without danger of death."

The valorous Don Quixote heard this and said:

"Since this is so, I am left free and released from my promise: let them be married and good luck to them; and since God Our Lord gave her him, let Saint Peter bless her to him."

The duke had come down into the castle square, and, coming up to Tosilos, said to him:

"Is it true, sir knight, that you give yourself up as beaten, and that, urged on by your timorous conscience, you want to marry this maiden?"

"Yes, my lord," answered Tosilos.

"He does very well," said Sancho Panza at this, "because what you are going to give the mouse, give the cat, and it will save you trouble."

Tosilos was unlacing his helmet, and begged them to help him quickly, because his breath was failing him and he could not bear to be shut up so long in the narrowness of that lodging. They took it off him quickly, and his footman's face was left uncovered and plain to see. Which Doña Rodríguez and her daughter seeing, they said in a great outcry:

"This is a fraud, this is a fraud! They have put Tosilos, the duke my lord's footman, in the place of my true husband! Justice of God and of the King on so much malice — not to say roguery!"

"Do not distress yourselves, ladies," said Don Quixote, "for this is neither malice nor roguery; and if it is, the cause has not been the duke but the wicked enchanters who persecute me, who, envious that I should attain the glory of this victory, have turned your husband's face into that of this man you say is the duke's footman. Take my advice, and, in spite of my enemies' malice, marry him, for he is undoubtedly the very man you want to get for a husband."

The duke, who heard this, was ready to break out into laughter and forget all his choler, and said:

"The things that happen to Señor Don Quixote are so extraordinary that I am inclined to believe that this footman of mine is not one. But let us use this trick and dodge: let us put off the wedding for a fortnight, if they like, and keep this personage who has us in doubt shut up; in which time it might be that he would go back to his first shape — for the enchanters' grudge against Señor Don Quixote cannot last so long, and the more so as they get so little out of using these humbugs and transformations."

"Oh, my lord," said Sancho, "these villains have it for a habit and a custom by now to change one thing into another where my master is concerned. A knight he conquered a few days ago, called the Knight of the Mirrors, they turned into the shape of the bachelor Sansón Carrasco, a native of our village and a great friend of ours; and my lady Dulcinea of El Toboso they have turned into a country wench. And so I imagine that this footman will live and die a footman all the days of his life."

To which Rodríguez's daughter said:

"Let this man who asks for me as his wife be whoever he may be, I am grateful to him for it; for I would rather be the lawful wife of a footman than the mistress of a gentleman who has made a mock of me — although the man who made a mock of me is no gentleman."

In short, all these tales and events came round to Tosilos's being shut up until it should be seen what came of his transformation. Everybody proclaimed the victory for Don Quixote, and most of them were left sad and melancholy at seeing that the two so long expected combatants had not smashed each other to pieces — exactly as the boys are sad when the hanged man they are waiting for does not come out, because either the injured party or the law has pardoned him. The people went off; the duke and Don Quixote went back to the castle; they shut Tosilos up; Doña Rodríguez and her daughter were left extremely pleased at seeing that, one way or the other, that business was going to end in a marriage; and Tosilos expected nothing less.
