Chapter 57: Which Deals with How Don Quixote Took His Leave of the Duke, and with What Happened to Him with the Witty and Forward Altisidora, the Duchess's Maiden

It now seemed to Don Quixote that it would be as well to get out of all the idleness he was living in at that castle; for he imagined that his person was greatly missed by his staying shut up and lazy among the infinite indulgences and delights those nobles gave him as a knight errant, and it seemed to him that he would have to give a strict account to heaven for that idleness and confinement. And so one day he asked the duke and duchess for leave to depart. They gave it him, with signs that it grieved them greatly that he should leave them.

The duchess gave Sancho Panza his wife's letters, over which he wept, and said:

"Who would have thought that hopes as great as those that the news of my government bred in the breast of my wife Teresa Panza should end in my going back now to the dragged-about adventures of my master Don Quixote of La Mancha? Still, I am content to see that my Teresa answered to being who she is by sending the acorns to the duchess; for if she had not sent them, I should have been grieved and she would have shown herself ungrateful.

"What consoles me is that this gift cannot be given the name of a bribe, because I already had the government when she sent them, and it stands to reason that those who receive some kindness, even if it is only trifles, should show themselves grateful. In fact I went into the government naked and I come out of it naked; and so I can say with a clear conscience — which is no small thing — 'naked I was born and naked I find myself: I neither lose nor gain'."

This is what Sancho was saying to himself on the day of their departure; and, Don Quixote coming out, having taken his leave of the duke and duchess the night before, one morning he presented himself armed in the castle square. All the people of the castle watched him from the galleries, and the duke and duchess likewise came out to see him. Sancho was on his grey with his saddlebags, his valise and his stores, extremely pleased, because the duke's steward, the man who had been the Trifaldi, had given him a little purse with two hundred gold crowns to make up for the needs of the road — and Don Quixote did not yet know about this.

While, as has been said, everybody was watching him, all at once, among the duchess's other duennas and maidens who were looking at him, the forward and witty Altisidora raised her voice and said in a mournful tone:

	Listen, wicked knight;
	hold your reins a little;
	do not wear out the flanks
	of your badly ruled beast.
	Look, false man, that you are not fleeing
	from any fierce serpent
	but from a little lamb
	that is a long way from being a ewe.
	You have made a mock, hideous monster,
	of the loveliest maiden
	that Diana saw on her mountains,
	that Venus looked on in her woods.
	Cruel Bireno, fugitive Aeneas,
	may Barabbas go with you; settle it out there.
	You carry off — impious carrying! —
	in the claws of your hands
	the entrails of a girl who is humble
	and, being in love, tender.
	You carry off three headcloths
	and a pair of garters from legs
	that are a match for pure marble
	in smoothness, in whiteness and in blackness.
	You carry off two thousand sighs
	which, if they were of fire, could
	burn up two thousand Troys,
	if there were two thousand Troys.
	Cruel Bireno, fugitive Aeneas,
	may Barabbas go with you; settle it out there.
	Of that Sancho, your squire,
	may the bowels be so stubborn
	and so hard that Dulcinea
	never comes out of her enchantment.
	For the fault that is yours
	may the poor girl carry the penalty;
	for in my country the just
	sometimes pay for the sinners.
	May your finest adventures
	be turned into misadventures,
	your pastimes into dreams,
	your constancies into forgettings.
	Cruel Bireno, fugitive Aeneas,
	may Barabbas go with you; settle it out there.
	May you be held for false
	from Seville to Marchena,
	from Granada as far as Loja,
	from London to England.
	If you play at kings,
	or at hundreds, or at primero,
	may the kings run away from you;
	may you see neither aces nor sevens.
	If you cut your corns,
	may the cuts run blood,
	and may the stumps stay in you
	if you have your grinders pulled.
	Cruel Bireno, fugitive Aeneas,
	may Barabbas go with you; settle it out there.

While the wounded Altisidora was complaining in the way that has been described, Don Quixote stood looking at her; and, without answering her a word, he turned his face to Sancho and said to him:

"By the memory of your ancestors, my Sancho, I conjure you to tell me a truth. Tell me: do you by any chance have the three headcloths and the garters this enamoured maiden speaks of?"

To which Sancho answered:

"The three headcloths I do have; but the garters, no more than the hills of Úbeda."

The duchess was astonished at Altisidora's forwardness; for although she took her for bold, amusing and free, she did not take her for free to the point of daring such forwardnesses as these. And, since she had not been warned about this trick, her astonishment grew still greater. The duke wanted to reinforce the joke, and said:

"It does not seem well to me, sir knight, that, having received in this castle of mine the good welcome that has been given you in it, you should have dared to carry off three headcloths at the least — and at the most my maiden's garters. They are signs of a bad heart and evidences that do not answer to your fame. Give her back the garters; if not, I challenge you to mortal battle, without any fear that villainous enchanters may turn or change my face, as they have done with Tosilos my footman's, who went into battle with you."

"God forbid," answered Don Quixote, "that I should draw my sword against your most illustrious person, from whom I have received so many kindnesses. The headcloths I shall give back, because Sancho says he has them; the garters is impossible, because neither I have received them nor he either; and if this maiden of yours will look in her hiding places, it is a safe bet that she will find them. I, my lord duke, have never been a thief, nor do I mean to be one in all my life, so long as God does not take His hand off me. This maiden speaks, as she says herself, as a woman in love, for which I am not to blame; and so I have nothing to ask pardon for, either from her or from Your Excellency — whom I beg to hold me in a better opinion and to give me leave once more to follow my road."

"May God give you so good a one, Señor Don Quixote," said the duchess, "that we may always hear good news of your doings. And go with God; for the longer you stay, the more you increase the fire in the breasts of the maidens who look at you. And I shall punish my own in such a way that from now on she will not let herself go with her eyes or with her words."

"One thing more only I want you to hear from me, O valorous Don Quixote," said Altisidora then; "and it is that I ask your pardon for the theft of the garters, because, in God and in my soul, I have them on, and I have fallen into the carelessness of the man who went looking for his ass while he was riding it."

"Did I not say so?" said Sancho. "A fine one I am for hiding thefts! Why, if I had wanted to commit any, the chance came to me on a plate in my government."

Don Quixote bowed his head and made a bow to the duke and duchess and to all the bystanders; and, turning Rocinante's reins, with Sancho following him on the grey, he went out of the castle and made his way towards Saragossa.
