Chapter 58: Which Deals with How Adventures Came Thick and Fast on Don Quixote, So Many That They Gave Each Other No Room

When Don Quixote saw himself in the open country, free and disencumbered of Altisidora's love-making, it seemed to him that he was at his own centre and that his spirits were being renewed for taking up the business of his chivalries afresh; and, turning to Sancho, he said:

"Liberty, Sancho, is one of the most precious gifts heaven gave to men; with it the treasures the earth encloses and the sea covers cannot be compared. For liberty, as for honour, a man can and should venture his life; and, on the contrary, captivity is the greatest evil that can come to men.

"I say this, Sancho, because you have seen well enough the indulgence and the abundance we have had in that castle we have left; well, in the middle of those seasoned banquets and those iced drinks it seemed to me that I was in the straits of hunger, because I did not enjoy them with the freedom I should have if they had been my own. For the obligations of repaying kindnesses and favours received are bonds that do not let a free spirit range. Happy is the man to whom heaven gave a piece of bread without his being obliged to thank anybody for it but heaven itself!"

"For all that your worship has told me," said Sancho, "it is not right that we should leave without a show of gratitude the two hundred gold crowns the duke's steward gave me in a little purse, which I carry over my heart like a poultice and a cordial against whatever may turn up; for we shall not always find castles where they treat us well — sometimes we shall come across inns where they thrash us."

In these and other arguments the errants, knight and squire, were going along, when they saw, having travelled a little over a league, that on the grass of a small green meadow, on top of their cloaks, about a dozen men dressed as farm labourers were eating. Next to them they had what looked like white sheets covering something that was underneath; they were propped up and spread out and set at intervals.

Don Quixote came up to the men who were eating; and, greeting them courteously first, he asked them what those cloths were covering. One of them answered him:

"Sir, under these cloths there are some images in relief and carved work that are to serve in an altarpiece we are making in our village; we carry them covered so that they may not be rubbed, and on our shoulders so that they may not be broken."

"If you would be so good," answered Don Quixote, "I should be glad to see them; for images that are carried with so much care must undoubtedly be good ones."

"And how good they are!" said another. "If not, let the price say so; for truly there is not one of them that stands at less than fifty ducats. And so that your worship may see this truth, wait, your worship, and you shall see it with your own eyes."

And, getting up, he left off eating and went and took the covering off the first image, which turned out to be Saint George on horseback, with a serpent coiled at his feet and the lance thrust through its mouth, with the fierceness with which he is generally painted. The whole image looked like a live coal of gold, as the saying goes. Don Quixote, seeing it, said:

"This knight was one of the best errants the divine soldiery ever had: he was called Don Saint George, and he was besides a defender of maidens. Let us see this other one."

The man uncovered it, and it turned out to be Saint Martin on horseback, dividing his cloak with the poor man; and Don Quixote had hardly seen it when he said:

"This knight was also one of the Christian adventurers, and I believe he was more generous than valiant, as you can see, Sancho, from his dividing his cloak with the poor man and giving him half. And it must undoubtedly have been winter at the time, for if not he would have given him the whole of it, so charitable was he."

"That must not have been it," said Sancho, "but that he must have held to the proverb that says that for giving and keeping, brains are needed."

Don Quixote laughed and asked them to take off another cloth, under which was uncovered the image of the Patron of the Spains on horseback, his sword bloody, trampling Moors and treading on heads; and, on seeing it, Don Quixote said:

"This one is a knight indeed, and of the squadrons of Christ; this one is called Don Saint James the Moor-slayer, one of the most valiant saints and knights the world ever had and heaven has now."

Then they uncovered another cloth, and it turned out to hide Saint Paul's fall from his horse, with all the circumstances that are generally painted in the altarpiece of his conversion. When he saw it so much to the life that one would have said Christ was speaking to him and Paul answering, he said:

"This man was the greatest enemy the Church of God Our Lord had in his time, and the greatest defender of it that it will ever have: a knight errant in his life and a saint standing still in his death, a tireless labourer in the Lord's vineyard, a teacher of the nations, whose schools were the heavens and whose professor and master, to teach him, was Jesus Christ himself."

There were no more images, and so Don Quixote ordered them to cover them again, and said to the men who were carrying them:

"I have taken it for a good omen, brothers, to have seen what I have seen; because these saints and knights professed what I profess, which is the exercise of arms — only that the difference between me and them is that they were saints and fought in the divine way, and I am a sinner and fight in the human way. They conquered heaven by main force, because heaven suffers violence; and I so far do not know what I am conquering by the force of my labours. But if my Dulcinea of El Toboso were to come out of the sufferings she is in, and my fortune were to improve and my judgement be mended, it might be that I should set my steps on a better road than the one I am on."

"May God hear it and sin be deaf," said Sancho on this occasion.

The men were astonished, both at Don Quixote's figure and at his words, without understanding half of what he meant to say in them. They finished eating, took up their images and, taking their leave of Don Quixote, went on their journey.

Sancho was left once more as if he had never known his master, astonished at what he knew, since it seemed to him that there could not be a history in the world or an event that he did not have at his fingertips and nailed into his memory; and he said to him:

"Truly, sir our master, if what has happened to us today can be called an adventure, it has been one of the smoothest and sweetest that has happened to us in the whole course of our wanderings. We have come out of it without cudgellings and without a fright, and we have not laid hand to our swords or beaten the earth with our bodies, and we are not left hungry. Blessed be God, who has let me see such a thing with my own eyes."

"You speak well, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "but you must note that not all times are alike, nor do they run in the same way. And these things that the common people generally call omens, which are not founded on any natural reason, ought to be held and judged for good happenings by the man who is judicious.

"One of these omen-mongers gets up in the morning, comes out of his house and meets a friar of the order of the blessed Saint Francis; and, as though he had met a griffin, he turns his back and goes home again. Another spills the salt on the table, and melancholy is spilt over his heart — as though nature were obliged to give signs of coming misfortunes by things as trifling as the ones I have mentioned. The judicious and Christian man must not go splitting hairs over what heaven means to do.

"Scipio arrives in Africa, trips as he leaps ashore, and his soldiers take it for a bad omen; but he, embracing the ground, said: 'You shall not be able to escape me, Africa, for I have you gripped and in my arms.' So, Sancho, my having met these images has been for me a most happy happening."

"I believe so too," answered Sancho, "and I should like your worship to tell me what the reason is that the Spaniards say, when they mean to give battle and are calling on that Saint James the Moor-slayer, 'Santiago, and close, Spain!' Is Spain by any chance open, and in such a way that it needs closing? Or what ceremony is this?"

"You are the simplest of the simple, Sancho," answered Don Quixote. "Look, God has given this great knight of the red cross to Spain for her patron and protection, especially in the hard passes the Spaniards have had with the Moors; and so they call on him and invoke him as their defender in all the battles they undertake, and many times they have seen him visibly in them, knocking down, trampling, destroying and killing the squadrons of Hagar. And of this truth I could bring you a great many examples that are told in the true Spanish histories."

Sancho changed the subject and said to his master:

"I am amazed, sir, at the forwardness of Altisidora, the duchess's maiden: that fellow they call Love must have wounded and run her through bravely — the one they say is a blear-eyed little blind boy who, though he has rheumy eyes, or, better said, no sight at all, if he takes a heart for his target, however small it may be, hits it and runs it through from side to side with his arrows. I have also heard it said that on the modesty and reserve of maidens the arrows of love are blunted and dulled; but on this Altisidora it looks as though they were sharpened rather than blunted."

"Note, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "that love neither looks at rank nor keeps to the bounds of reason in its arguments, and that it has the same nature as death: that it attacks the high castles of kings just as it does the humble huts of shepherds; and when it takes complete possession of a soul, the first thing it does is take away its fear and its shame. And so, without any shame, Altisidora declared her desires — which bred in my breast confusion rather than pity."

"Notorious cruelty!" said Sancho. "Unheard-of ingratitude! For myself I can say that the least little loving word of hers would have conquered me and made me her vassal. Whoreson, and what a heart of marble, what entrails of bronze and what a soul of mortar! But I cannot think what it was this maiden saw in your worship to conquer and enslave her like that: what elegance, what spirit, what charm, what face — that any one of these things by itself, or all of them together, should have made her fall in love. Because truly and truly I often stop to look at your worship from the tip of your foot to the last hair on your head, and I see more things to frighten a woman than to make her fall in love; and, having also heard it said that beauty is the first and chief part that makes people fall in love, your worship having none at all, I do not know what the poor girl fell in love with."

"Note, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "that there are two kinds of beauty: one of the soul and another of the body. That of the soul shows and displays itself in the understanding, in decency, in good conduct, in generosity and in good breeding; and all these qualities can fit and be found in an ugly man. And when the aim is set on this beauty and not on that of the body, love is generally born with force and with advantages. I, Sancho, see well enough that I am not handsome; but I also know that I am not deformed. And it is enough for an honest man not to be a monster to be well loved, so long as he has the gifts of the soul I have told you of."

In these words and this talk they were going into a wood that lay off the road; and all at once, without thinking about it, Don Quixote found himself tangled in some nets of green thread that were stretched from one tree to another; and, unable to imagine what that could be, he said to Sancho:

"It seems to me, Sancho, that this business of the nets must be one of the newest adventures that can be imagined. May they kill me if the enchanters who persecute me are not trying to tangle me in them and hold up my road, as revenge for the severity I have shown Altisidora. Well, I let them know that even if these nets, instead of being made of green thread, were of the hardest diamonds, or stronger than the one with which the jealous god of the blacksmiths tangled up Venus and Mars, I should break them as though they were made of sea rushes or shreds of cotton."

And, wanting to go forward and break the whole thing, all of a sudden there appeared in front of him, coming out from among some trees, two most beautiful shepherdesses — at least dressed as shepherdesses, except that their jerkins and skirts were of fine brocade; I mean that the skirts were very rich petticoats of gold tabby. They wore their hair loose over their shoulders, which in fairness could compete with the rays of the sun itself, and it was crowned with two garlands woven of green laurel and red amaranth. Their age, to look at them, was neither under fifteen nor over eighteen.

This was a sight that astonished Sancho, bewildered Don Quixote, made the sun stop in his course to look at them, and held all four of them in a marvellous silence. Finally the one who spoke first was one of the two shepherdesses, who said to Don Quixote:

"Hold your step, sir knight, and do not break the nets; for they are stretched there not to do you any harm but for our entertainment. And, since I know you are going to ask me why they have been put there and who we are, I want to tell you in a few words.

"In a village up to two leagues from here, where there are a great many people of quality and a great many gentlemen and rich men, it was agreed among a large number of friends and relations that with their sons, wives and daughters, their neighbours, friends and relations, we should come and enjoy ourselves at this spot, which is one of the most agreeable in all these parts, forming among us all a new and pastoral Arcadia, the girls dressing as shepherdesses and the young men as shepherds. We have two eclogues by heart, one by the famous poet Garcilaso and another by the most excellent Camões in his own Portuguese tongue, which we have not yet performed.

"Yesterday was the first day we came here. We have some tents pitched among these branches — they say they are called field tents — on the bank of a plentiful stream that makes all these meadows fertile. Last night we stretched these nets from these trees to trap the simple little birds which, driven up by the noise we make, come and blunder into them. If it pleases you, sir, to be our guest, you shall be entertained generously and courteously; because for now neither heaviness nor melancholy is to come into this place."

She fell silent and said no more. To which Don Quixote answered:

"Certainly, most beautiful lady, Actaeon cannot have been left more bewildered or astonished when he suddenly saw Diana bathing in the waters than I have been left thunderstruck at seeing your beauty. I praise the design of your entertainments, and I thank you for your offers; and if I can serve you, you may command me with the certainty of being obeyed, because this is not my profession but to show myself grateful and a doer of good to every sort of person, and especially to the sort of quality your persons represent. And if these nets, which must take up some small space, took up the whole round of the earth, I should look for new worlds to pass through without breaking them. And so that you may give some credit to this exaggeration of mine, see that it is promised you, at the very least, by Don Quixote of La Mancha — if this name has reached your ears."

"Oh, friend of my soul," said the other shepherdess then, "what great good fortune has happened to us! Do you see this gentleman we have in front of us? Well, I let you know that he is the most valiant and the most in love and the most courteous man in the world, unless a history of his exploits that is in print and that I have read is lying to us and deceiving us. I would wager that this good man who comes with him is a certain Sancho Panza, his squire, whose drolleries have no equals."

"That is the truth," said Sancho: "I am that droll and that squire your worship speaks of, and this gentleman is my master, the very Don Quixote of La Mancha of the history and the report."

"Oh," said the other, "let us beg him to stay, my friend; for our fathers and our brothers will take infinite pleasure in it. For I too have heard the same of his valour and his charms as you have told me; and, above all, they say of him that he is the firmest and most loyal lover known, and that his lady is a certain Dulcinea of El Toboso, to whom in all Spain they give the palm of beauty."

"With reason they give it her," said Don Quixote, "unless your peerless beauty puts it in doubt. Do not wear yourselves out in detaining me, ladies, because the strict obligations of my profession do not let me rest anywhere."

At this there came to where the four of them were a brother of one of the two shepherdesses, dressed likewise as a shepherd, with richness and finery to match the girls'. They told him that the man who was with them was the valorous Don Quixote of La Mancha, and the other his squire Sancho, of whom he already had news through having read their history. The gallant shepherd offered his services and asked him to come with him to their tents; Don Quixote had to grant it, and so he did.

At this the beaters came up; the nets were filled with various little birds which, deceived by the colour of the nets, fell into the danger they were fleeing from. There gathered in that place more than thirty people, all of them splendidly dressed as shepherds and shepherdesses, and in an instant they were informed who Don Quixote and his squire were, at which they took no small pleasure, since they already had news of him from his history. They went to the tents, found the tables laid, rich, plentiful and clean; they honoured Don Quixote by giving him the first place at them; they all looked at him and marvelled at the sight of him.

Finally, the cloth being taken away, with great composure Don Quixote raised his voice and said:

"Among the greatest sins men commit, although some say it is pride, I say it is ingratitude, holding to what is generally said: that hell is full of the ungrateful. This sin, as far as it has been possible for me, I have tried to run from ever since I had the use of reason. And if I cannot repay the good works done me with other works, I put in their place the wish to do them; and when these are not enough, I publish them abroad — because the man who tells and publishes the good works he receives would also repay them with others if he could, since for the most part those who receive are inferior to those who give. And so God is above all, because He is the giver above all; and man's gifts cannot answer to God's on equal terms, by an infinite distance; and this narrowness and shortness is in a certain way made up for by gratitude.

"I, then, being grateful for the kindness that has been done me here, and unable to answer it in the same measure, keeping myself within the narrow limits of my power, offer what I can and what I have of my own growing. And so I say that for two whole days I shall maintain in the middle of that royal road that goes to Saragossa that these ladies here, counterfeit shepherdesses, are the most beautiful and the most courteous maidens in the world, excepting only the peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso, the sole lady of my thoughts — be it said without offence to all the men and women who hear me."

Hearing which, Sancho, who had been listening to him with great attention, said in a great shout:

"Is it possible that there are people in the world who dare to say and swear that this master of mine is mad? Say, your worships, gentlemen shepherds: is there a village curate, however judicious and however much of a student he may be, who could say what my master has said? Or is there a knight errant, however great a reputation for valour he may have, who could offer what my master has offered here?"

Don Quixote turned to Sancho and, his face fired up and choleric, said to him:

"Is it possible, Sancho, that there is anybody in the whole globe who says you are not a fool, lined with the same and with I do not know what trimmings of the malicious and the rogue? Who brings you into my affairs, and into establishing whether I am judicious or an idiot? Be quiet and do not answer me back, but saddle Rocinante if he is unsaddled: let us go and put my offer into effect; for, with the right that is on my side, you may count as beaten all those who may want to contradict it."

And with great fury and signs of anger he got up from his chair, leaving the bystanders astonished and making them doubt whether they should take him for mad or for sane. Finally, having urged him not to put himself to such a demand, since they took his grateful good will as well enough known and there was no need of fresh demonstrations to know his valorous spirit, since those reported in the history of his deeds were enough — for all that, Don Quixote carried out his intention; and, set on Rocinante, gripping his shield and taking his lance, he placed himself in the middle of a royal road that lay not far from the green meadow. Sancho followed him on his grey, along with all the people of the pastoral flock, eager to see where his arrogant and never-before-seen offer would end.

Don Quixote, then, being placed in the middle of the road, as I have told you, struck the air with words like these:

"O you travellers and wayfarers, knights, squires, people on foot and on horseback who pass along this road, or are to pass along it in these next two days! Know that Don Quixote of La Mancha, knight errant, is placed here to maintain that all the beauties and courtesies of the world are surpassed by those shut up in the nymphs who inhabit these meadows and woods, leaving aside the lady of my soul, Dulcinea of El Toboso. Therefore let anybody who is of a contrary opinion come, for here I wait for him."

Twice he repeated these same words, and twice they were heard by no adventurer. But fortune, which was directing his affairs from better to better, arranged that a little later there should appear along the road a multitude of men on horseback, a great many of them with lances in their hands, all travelling packed together in a troop and in great haste.

Those who were with Don Quixote had hardly seen them when, turning their backs, they got well away from the road, because they knew that if they waited some danger might come to them. Only Don Quixote, with a fearless heart, stood still, and Sancho Panza sheltered himself behind Rocinante's hindquarters.

The troop of lancers arrived, and one of them, who came in front, began to say to Don Quixote at the top of his voice:

"Get out of the road, man of the devil, for these bulls will smash you to pieces!"

"Come, you rabble," answered Don Quixote, "for me there are no bulls worth anything, even if they are the fiercest that the Jarama breeds on its banks! Confess, you villains, all together and without more ado, that what I have published here is true; if not, you have me to fight with."

The herdsman had no room to answer, and Don Quixote had none to get out of the way even if he had wanted to; and so the troop of fierce bulls and of tame lead-oxen, with the multitude of herdsmen and other people who were taking them to be penned in a place where they were to be run the next day, went over Don Quixote and over Sancho, Rocinante and the grey, bringing them all to the ground and sending them rolling over the earth.

Sancho was left battered, Don Quixote terrified, the grey pounded and Rocinante not very catholic in his health; but in the end they all got up, and Don Quixote in great haste, tripping here and falling there, began to run after the herd, calling out:

"Stop and wait, you villainous rabble, for a single knight is waiting for you — one who is not of the nature or the opinion of those who say that for the enemy who flees you should build a bridge of silver!"

But the hurrying runners did not stop for that, nor did they take any more notice of his threats than of last year's clouds. Weariness stopped Don Quixote; and, more angry than avenged, he sat down in the road waiting for Sancho, Rocinante and the grey to come up. They came, master and man got up again, and, without going back to take their leave of the pretended or counterfeit Arcadia, and with more shame than pleasure, they went on their road.
