Chapter 59: Where the Extraordinary Event Is Told, Which May Be Counted an Adventure, That Happened to Don Quixote

The dust and the weariness that Don Quixote and Sancho carried away from the bulls' rudeness were relieved by a clear, clean spring they found among a cool grove of trees; on whose bank, leaving the grey and Rocinante free, without halter or bridle, the two worn-out master and man sat down. Sancho went to the larder of his saddlebags and took out of them what he generally called his victuals; he rinsed out his mouth, Don Quixote washed his face, and with this refreshment their fainting spirits took heart again.

Don Quixote did not eat, out of pure grief, and Sancho did not dare to touch the food he had in front of him, out of pure politeness, and waited for his master to taste it first. But, seeing that, carried away by his imaginings, he did not remember to lift the bread to his mouth, Sancho did not open his own; and, trampling on every kind of good breeding, he began to pack into his stomach the bread and cheese that offered itself.

"Eat, Sancho my friend," said Don Quixote; "keep life going, for it matters more to you than to me, and let me die at the hands of my thoughts and by the force of my misfortunes. I, Sancho, was born to live dying, and you to die eating. And, so that you may see I am telling you the truth in this, consider me: in print in histories, famous in arms, courteous in my actions, respected by princes, courted by maidens; and in the end, when I was expecting palms and triumphs and crowns earned and deserved by my valorous exploits, this morning I have seen myself trodden on and kicked and battered by the feet of filthy and vulgar animals. This thought sets my teeth on edge, dulls my grinders, numbs my hands and takes away my appetite altogether — so that I mean to let myself die of hunger: the cruellest of all deaths."

"In that case," said Sancho without leaving off chewing hard, "your worship will not approve that proverb they say: 'let Martha die, and die full'. I at least do not mean to kill myself; on the contrary, I mean to do like the cobbler, who pulls the leather with his teeth until he makes it stretch where he wants it. I shall stretch my life by eating until it reaches the end heaven has settled for it. And let me tell you, sir, that there is no greater madness than the one that touches on wanting to give oneself up to despair, as your worship does. Believe me, and after you have eaten, lie down and sleep a little on the green mattresses of this grass, and you will see how when you wake you find yourself somewhat relieved."

Don Quixote did so, since it seemed to him that Sancho's arguments were more a philosopher's than an idiot's, and he said to him:

"If you, Sancho, would do for me what I shall tell you now, my reliefs would be more certain and my griefs not so great. And it is that, while I sleep, obeying your advice, you should go off a little way from here and, with Rocinante's reins, throwing your flesh open to the air, give yourself three or four hundred lashes on account of the three thousand and more you have to give yourself for Dulcinea's disenchantment; for it is no small pity that that poor lady should be enchanted through your carelessness and neglect."

"There is a great deal to say about that," said Sancho. "Let us both sleep for now, and afterwards God has said what will be. Let your worship know that this business of a man whipping himself in cold blood is a hard thing, and the more so if the lashes fall on a badly kept and worse fed body. Let my lady Dulcinea have patience, for when she least expects it she will see me riddled like a sieve with lashes; and until death, it is all life — I mean that I still have mine, along with the wish to carry out what I have promised."

Don Quixote thanked him for it, ate a little and Sancho a great deal, and they both lay down to sleep, leaving those two constant companions and friends Rocinante and the grey to graze at their own will and without any restraint on the plentiful grass that meadow was full of.

They woke rather late, mounted again and went on their road, hurrying to reach an inn that could be made out, apparently a league from there. I say it was an inn because Don Quixote called it so, outside his habit of calling all inns castles.

They came to it, then, and asked the host whether there was lodging. They were answered that there was, with all the comfort and indulgence they could have found in Saragossa. They dismounted, and Sancho put away his stores in a room, of which the host gave him the key; he took the beasts to the stable and gave them their feeds; he came out to see what Don Quixote, who was sitting on a stone bench, wanted of him, giving particular thanks to heaven that this inn had not seemed a castle to his master.

Supper time came round; they went to their room; Sancho asked the host what he had to give them for supper. To which the host answered that his mouth should be the measure; and so let him ask for whatever he wanted, for that inn was provided with the little birds of the air, the fowls of the earth and the fishes of the sea.

"There is no need for so much," answered Sancho; "with a couple of chickens roasted for us we shall have enough, because my master is delicate and eats little, and I am not excessively much of a glutton."

The host answered him that he had no chickens, because the kites had cleaned him out of them.

"Then let the master host," said Sancho, "have a pullet roasted, a tender one."

"A pullet? My father!" answered the host. "Truly and truly, I sent more than fifty to the city yesterday to be sold; but apart from pullets, let your worship ask for whatever you like."

"In that case," said Sancho, "there will be no lack of veal or kid."

"In the house just now," answered the host, "there is none, because it has run out; but next week there will be plenty."

"We are in a fine way with that!" answered Sancho. "I will wager that all these shortages come round to being made up by the plenty there must be of bacon and eggs."

"By God," answered the host, "my guest is a nice slow one! Why, I have told him that I have neither pullets nor hens, and he wants me to have eggs? Range over other dainties, if you like, and leave off asking for hens."

"Let us settle it, body of me," said Sancho, "and tell me finally what you have, and leave off ranging, master host."

The innkeeper said:

"What I really and truly have is a couple of cow-heels that look like calves' feet, or a couple of calves' feet that look like cow-heels; they are boiled with their chickpeas, onions and bacon, and at this hour they are saying, 'Eat me! Eat me!'"

"I mark them as mine from here," said Sancho; "and let nobody touch them, for I shall pay better than anybody else for them, because for me nothing else could be looked for that would be more to my taste; and it would not matter to me at all whether they were feet, so long as they were heels."

"Nobody will touch them," said the innkeeper, "because other guests I have, being of such quality, bring a cook and a steward and their own larder with them."

"If it is a matter of quality," said Sancho, "nobody has more than my master; but the office he follows does not allow larders or wine cellars: we stretch ourselves out in the middle of a meadow and fill ourselves with acorns or medlars."

This was the conversation Sancho had with the innkeeper, without Sancho wanting to go any further in answering him; for he had already asked him what office or what employment his master's was.

Supper time came round, then; Don Quixote went to his room; the host brought the pot just as it was, and sat down to sup very much in earnest. It seems that in another room next to Don Quixote's, divided from it by nothing but a thin partition, Don Quixote heard somebody say:

"On your life, Señor Don Jerónimo, while they are bringing the supper let us read another chapter of the second part of Don Quixote of La Mancha."

Don Quixote had hardly heard his own name when he got to his feet and listened with an alert ear to what they were saying about him; and he heard this same Don Jerónimo answer:

"Why does your worship want us to read this nonsense, Señor Don Juan? Anybody who has read the first part of the history of Don Quixote of La Mancha cannot possibly take any pleasure in reading this second one."

"For all that," said Don Juan, "it will be as well to read it, since there is no book so bad that it has not something good in it. What displeases me most in this one is that it paints Don Quixote as having fallen out of love with Dulcinea of El Toboso."

Hearing which, Don Quixote, full of anger and indignation, raised his voice and said:

"Whoever says that Don Quixote of La Mancha has forgotten, or can forget, Dulcinea of El Toboso, I shall make him understand with equal arms that he is very far from the truth; because the peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso can neither be forgotten, nor can forgetfulness find room in Don Quixote. His blazon is constancy, and his profession is to keep it gently and without doing himself any violence."

"Who is it that answers us?" they answered from the other room.

"Who should it be," answered Sancho, "but the very Don Quixote of La Mancha, who will make good everything he has said, and everything he may say? For a good payer does not mind pledges."

Sancho had hardly said this when in at the door of their room came two gentlemen — for such they looked — and one of them, throwing his arms round Don Quixote's neck, said to him:

"Neither can your presence give the lie to your name, nor can your name fail to bear out your presence: undoubtedly you, sir, are the true Don Quixote of La Mancha, pole star and morning star of knight-errantry, in spite and in defiance of the man who has tried to usurp your name and annihilate your exploits, as the author of this book I hand you here has done."

And, putting into his hands a book his companion was carrying, Don Quixote took it, and without answering a word began to leaf through it; and a little later he handed it back, saying:

"In this little I have seen, I have found three things in this author deserving reproof. The first is some words I have read in the prologue; the second, that the language is Aragonese, since he sometimes writes without articles; and the third, which most confirms him for an ignorant man, is that he goes wrong and departs from the truth in the chief matter of the history — because here he says that the wife of Sancho Panza my squire is called Mari Gutiérrez, and she is not called that at all but Teresa Panza. And a man who goes wrong in so chief a matter as this may well be feared to go wrong in all the rest of the history."

To this Sancho said:

"A pretty sort of historian! Certainly he must be well up in the tale of our doings, since he calls Teresa Panza, my wife, Mari Gutiérrez! Take the book again, sir, and see whether I go about in it and whether he has changed my name too."

"From hearing you talk, my friend," said Don Jerónimo, "you must undoubtedly be Sancho Panza, Señor Don Quixote's squire."

"I am," answered Sancho, "and I pride myself on it."

"Well, upon my word," said the gentleman, "this modern author does not treat you with the cleanness your person shows: he paints you as a great eater, and simple, and not at all amusing, and quite another Sancho from the one described in the first part of your master's history."

"God forgive him," said Sancho. "He should have left me in my corner without remembering me; because let him play the tune who knows it, and Saint Peter is well enough off in Rome."

The two gentlemen asked Don Quixote to come over to their room to have supper with them, since they well knew that in that inn there was nothing suitable for his person. Don Quixote, who was always courteous, gave in to their request and had supper with them. Sancho stayed behind with the stew, with full and mixed jurisdiction over it; he sat down at the head of the table, and with him the innkeeper, who was no less fond than Sancho of his feet and his heels.

In the course of the supper Don Juan asked Don Quixote what news he had of the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso: whether she had married, whether she had been brought to bed or was with child, or whether, being still whole, she remembered — keeping her decency and good decorum — the loving thoughts of Señor Don Quixote. To which he answered:

"Dulcinea is still whole, and my thoughts are firmer than ever; our dealings are in their old dryness; her beauty is transformed into that of a coarse country wench."

And then he went on telling them point by point about the lady Dulcinea's enchantment, and what had happened to him in the cave of Montesinos, along with the orders the wise Merlin had given him for disenchanting her, which were the lashes for Sancho.

The two gentlemen took the greatest pleasure in hearing Don Quixote tell the strange events of his history, and they were as astonished by his absurdities as by the elegant manner in which he told them. Here they took him for judicious, and there he slipped away from them into an idiot, without their being able to settle what degree they should give him between judgement and madness.

Sancho finished his supper; and, leaving the innkeeper making X's with his legs, he went over to his master's room; and, on coming in, he said:

"May they kill me, gentlemen, if the author of that book your worships have does not mean that we shall not eat off the same dish; and I should like it that, since he calls me a glutton, as your worships say, he should not call me a drunkard too."

"He does call you one," said Don Jerónimo, "but I do not remember in what way — although I know the words are ill-sounding, and, what is more, lies, as I can see from the physiognomy of the good Sancho here present."

"Believe me, your worships," said Sancho, "that the Sancho and the Don Quixote of that history must be different men from the ones who go about in the one Cide Hamete Benengeli composed, which are us: my master valiant, judicious and in love; and I simple and amusing, and neither a great eater nor a drunkard."

"So I believe," said Don Juan; "and if it were possible, an order ought to be given that nobody should dare to deal with the affairs of the great Don Quixote except Cide Hamete, his first author — exactly as Alexander ordered that nobody should dare to paint his portrait except Apelles."

"Let anybody who likes paint me," said Don Quixote, "but let him not maul me; for patience often falls down when it is loaded with insults."

"None," said Don Juan, "can be offered to Señor Don Quixote that he cannot avenge, if he does not fend it off on the shield of his patience — which, to my mind, is strong and great."

In these and other talks a great part of the night went by; and, although Don Juan would have liked Don Quixote to read more of the book, to see what he carped at, they could not bring him to it, for he said that he counted it as read and confirmed it as wholly foolish, and that he did not want its author, if it should come to his notice that he had had it in his hands, to be pleased with thinking that he had read it; for from obscene and filthy things one's thoughts must be kept away, and still more one's eyes.

They asked him where he had decided to take his journey. He answered that it was to Saragossa, to be present at the jousts for the suit of armour that are generally held in that city every year. Don Juan told him that that new history related how Don Quixote — whoever he might be — had been present at a ring-tilting there, short of invention, poor in mottoes, extremely poor in liveries, though rich in silliness.

"For that very reason," answered Don Quixote, "I shall not set foot in Saragossa; and so I shall bring out into the open square of the world the lie of that modern historian, and people will see that I am not the Don Quixote he speaks of."

"You will do very well," said Don Jerónimo, "and there are other jousts at Barcelona where Señor Don Quixote can show his valour."

"That is what I mean to do," said Don Quixote; "and let your worships give me leave, for it is time for me to go to bed; and hold me and set me in the number of your greatest friends and servants."

"And me too," said Sancho: "perhaps I may be good for something."

With this they took their leave, and Don Quixote and Sancho withdrew to their room, leaving Don Juan and Don Jerónimo astonished at seeing the mixture he had made of his good sense and his madness; and they truly believed that these were the true Don Quixote and Sancho, and not the ones the Aragonese author described.

Don Quixote got up early and, knocking on the partition of the other room, took his leave of his fellow guests. Sancho paid the innkeeper magnificently, and advised him either to praise the provisions of his inn less or to keep it better provided.
