Chapter 62: Which Deals with the Adventure of the Enchanted Head, Along with Other Trifles That Cannot Be Left Untold

Don Antonio Moreno was the name of Don Quixote's host, a rich and judicious gentleman who was fond of amusing himself in a decent and agreeable way; and, seeing Don Quixote in his house, he went about looking for ways to bring his madnesses out into the open without harming him — because jokes that hurt are no jokes, and there are no entertainments worth anything if they are at a third party's expense.

The first thing he did was to have Don Quixote unarmed and to bring him out to be seen in that narrow chamois suit of his — as we have described and painted him at other times — on a balcony that looked out on one of the chief streets of the city, in view of the people and of the boys, who looked at him as at an ape. Once again the men in liveries rode past in front of him, as though they had put them on for him alone and not to make that festive day merry; and Sancho was extremely pleased, since it seemed to him that he had found, without knowing how or why, another wedding of Camacho's, another house like Don Diego de Miranda's and another castle like the duke's.

Some of Don Antonio's friends dined with him that day, all of them honouring Don Quixote and treating him as a knight errant; at which he, puffed up and pompous, could not contain himself for contentment. Sancho's drolleries were so many that all the servants of the house and everybody who heard him hung on his mouth. Sitting at table, Don Antonio said to Sancho:

"We have news here, good Sancho, that you are so fond of blancmange and little meatballs that if you have any left over you keep them in your bosom for the next day."

"No, sir, it is not so," answered Sancho, "because I have more of the clean about me than of the greedy; and my master Don Quixote here present knows very well that the two of us generally get by for a week on a handful of acorns or walnuts. It is true that if it sometimes happens that they give me the heifer, I run with the halter — I mean that I eat what is given me and use the times as I find them. And whoever has said that I am an outstanding eater and not clean may take it as said that he is wrong; and I should say this in another way if I were not looking at the honourable beards at this table."

"Certainly," said Don Quixote, "the sparingness and cleanness with which Sancho eats could be written and engraved on plates of bronze, to stay in the everlasting memory of the ages to come. It is true that when he is hungry he looks something of a glutton, because he eats fast and chews on both sides of his mouth; but he always keeps his cleanness at its height; and in the time when he was a governor he learnt to eat so fastidiously that he ate grapes, and even pomegranate seeds, with a fork."

"What!" said Don Antonio. "Has Sancho been a governor?"

"Yes," answered Sancho, "and of an isle called Barataria. Ten days I governed it exactly as I pleased; in them I lost my peace of mind and learnt to despise all the governments in the world. I ran away from it, I fell into a cave where I gave myself up for dead, and I came out of it alive by a miracle."

Don Quixote told in detail the whole business of Sancho's government, at which he gave the listeners great pleasure.

The cloth being taken away, and Don Antonio taking Don Quixote by the hand, he went with him into a room set apart, in which there was no other ornament but a table apparently of jasper, held up on a foot of the same, on which there stood — in the manner of the busts of the Roman emperors, from the chest up — one that seemed to be of bronze. Don Antonio walked about the whole room with Don Quixote, going round the table many times, after which he said:

"Now, Señor Don Quixote, that I have made certain that nobody hears or listens to us and the door is shut, I want to tell your worship about one of the rarest adventures, or, better said, novelties, that can be imagined — on condition that what I tell your worship you are to lay up in the deepest chambers of secrecy."

"So I swear," answered Don Quixote, "and I shall even put a tombstone on top of it, for greater security; because I want your worship to know, Señor Don Antonio" — for he already knew his name — "that you are speaking to a man who, although he has ears to hear, has no tongue to speak with. So your worship may safely transfer what you have in your breast into mine, and reckon that you have thrown it into the depths of silence."

"On the strength of that promise," answered Don Antonio, "I want to fill your worship with astonishment at what you shall see and hear, and to give myself some relief from the pain it causes me to have nobody to share my secrets with, since they are not to be trusted to everybody."

Don Quixote was bewildered, waiting to see where so many preparations were going to end. At this, Don Antonio, taking his hand, ran it over the bronze head and over the whole table and over the jasper foot that held it up, and then said:

"This head, Señor Don Quixote, has been made and manufactured by one of the greatest enchanters and sorcerers the world has ever had — a Pole, I believe, by nation, and a disciple of the famous Escotillo, of whom so many marvels are told. He was here in my house, and for the price of a thousand crowns that I gave him he wrought this head, which has the property and virtue of answering whatever anybody asks it in its ear. He kept the bearings, drew characters, observed the stars, watched the points, and finally brought it out with the perfection we shall see tomorrow — because on Fridays it is dumb, and today, being one, it will make us wait until tomorrow. In this time your worship may prepare what you will want to ask, for I know by experience that it tells the truth in everything it answers."

Don Quixote was amazed at the head's virtue and property, and was inclined not to believe Don Antonio; but, seeing how little time there was before the test, he did not want to say anything to him except that he thanked him for having revealed so great a secret to him. They came out of the room, Don Antonio locked the door, and they went off to the hall where the other gentlemen were. In this time Sancho had told them a good many of the adventures and events that had happened to his master.

That afternoon they took Don Quixote out for a ride — not armed but in walking dress, wearing a long gown of tawny cloth which in that season could have made the ice itself sweat. They arranged with their servants to keep Sancho occupied so that they should not let him leave the house. Don Quixote went, not on Rocinante, but on a great smooth-paced mule, very well harnessed. They put the gown on him; and on his back, without his seeing it, they sewed a parchment on which they wrote in large letters: This is Don Quixote of La Mancha.

As soon as the ride began, the placard drew the eyes of everybody who came to see him; and as they read This is Don Quixote of La Mancha, Don Quixote was astonished to see that everybody who looked at him named him and knew him; and, turning to Don Antonio, who was riding at his side, he said:

"Great is the prerogative that knight-errantry contains in itself, since it makes the man who professes it known and famous through all the bounds of the earth. If not, look, your worship, Señor Don Antonio, how even the boys of this city, who have never seen me, know me."

"That is so, Señor Don Quixote," answered Don Antonio; "for just as fire cannot be hidden and shut up, virtue cannot fail to be known — and the virtue that is attained by the profession of arms shines and shows itself above all the rest."

It happened, then, that as Don Quixote was going along with the applause that has been described, a Castilian who read the placard on his back raised his voice, saying:

"The devil take you for Don Quixote of La Mancha! How is it that you have got this far without the endless beatings you have on your back having killed you? You are mad; and if you were mad by yourself and inside the doors of your madness it would be less bad; but you have the property of turning everybody who deals with you and talks to you mad and idiotic — if not, let them look at these gentlemen who are with you. Go home, you idiot, and see to your property, to your wife and your children, and leave off these emptinesses that are gnawing away your brains and skimming the cream off your understanding."

"Brother," said Don Antonio, "go your own way and do not give advice to people who do not ask you for it. Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha is very sane, and we who go with him are not fools; virtue is to be honoured wherever it is found; and be off with you, and do not meddle where you are not called."

"By God, your worship is right," answered the Castilian; "for advising this good man is kicking against the pricks. But for all that, it gives me very great sorrow that the good wits this idiot is said to have in everything should be drained away down the gutter of his knight-errantry. And the bad luck your worship has wished me be on me and on all my descendants if from this day on, even if I lived more years than Methuselah, I ever give advice to anybody again, even if they ask me for it."

The adviser moved off; the ride went on. But such was the eagerness of the boys and all the people to read the placard that Don Antonio had to take it off, as though he were taking off something else.

Night came and they went back home; there was a ladies' evening party, because Don Antonio's wife, who was a lady of quality and cheerful, beautiful and judicious, invited other friends of hers to come and do honour to her guest and enjoy his never-before-seen madnesses. Some came; they had a splendid supper, and the party began at about ten at night.

Among the ladies there were two of a mischievous and joking humour; and, though they were very decent, they were rather free, so as to give room for the jokes to make merry without annoyance. These two were so eager in pulling Don Quixote out to dance that they wore out not only his body but his soul. It was a thing to see, Don Quixote's figure — long, stretched out, lean, yellow, tight in his clothes, awkward and, above all, not at all nimble. The young ladies made love to him as though on the sly, and he, likewise as though on the sly, disdained them; but, finding himself hard pressed with compliments, he raised his voice and said:

"Fugite, partes adversae! Leave me in my quiet, ill-come thoughts. Settle your desires elsewhere, ladies; for she who is queen of mine, the peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso, does not allow any but her own to enslave and conquer me."

And, saying this, he sat down in the middle of the hall on the floor, battered and broken by so much dancing exercise. Don Antonio had him carried bodily to his bed, and the first man to lay hold of him was Sancho, saying to him:

"In a bad hour, sir our master, you have danced it! Do you think all brave men are dancers and all knights errant ball-room performers? I say that if you do think so, you are mistaken; there are men who would sooner venture to kill a giant than cut a caper. If you had to do clog-dancing, I would make up for your shortcomings, for I clog-dance like a gerfalcon; but in this business of dancing I do not put a stitch in."

With these and other words Sancho gave the people of the party something to laugh at, and got his master into bed, wrapping him up so that he should sweat out the chill of his dancing.

The next day it seemed to Don Antonio a good idea to make the experiment of the enchanted head; and with Don Quixote, Sancho and two other friends, along with the two ladies who had worn Don Quixote out with dancing and who had stayed that night with Don Antonio's wife, he shut himself up in the room where the head was. He told them the property it had, charged them with the secret and told them that this was the first day on which the virtue of that enchanted head was to be tested; and apart from Don Antonio's two friends, nobody else knew the crux of the enchantment — and indeed if Don Antonio had not disclosed it first to his friends, they too would have fallen into the astonishment the rest fell into, and could not possibly have done otherwise: with such contrivance and such order was it made.

The first to come up to the head's ear was Don Antonio himself, and he said to it in a low voice, but not so low that everybody did not hear it:

"Tell me, head, by the virtue that is shut up in you: what thoughts have I now?"

And the head answered him, without moving its lips, in a clear and distinct voice, so that everybody heard it, these words:

"I do not judge of thoughts."

Hearing which, they were all astounded, and still more at seeing that in the whole room and round the table there was no human being who could have answered.

"How many of us are here?" Don Antonio asked again.

And he was answered in the same tenor, softly:

"There are you and your wife, with two friends of yours and two friends of hers, and a famous knight called Don Quixote of La Mancha, and a squire of his who has Sancho Panza for his name."

Here indeed was fresh astonishment; here indeed did everybody's hair stand on end with pure terror! And Don Antonio, moving away from the head, said:

"This is enough to give me to understand that I was not cheated by the man who sold you to me, O wise head, talking head, answering head and admirable head! Let somebody else come and ask it whatever they like."

And, as women are generally in a hurry and fond of knowing things, the first to come up was one of the two friends of Don Antonio's wife, and what she asked it was:

"Tell me, head: what shall I do to be very beautiful?"

And she was answered:

"Be very virtuous."

"I ask you no more," said the questioner.

Then her companion came and said:

"I should like to know, head, whether my husband loves me or not."

And they answered her:

"Look at what he does for you, and you will see it."

The married woman moved away, saying:

"That answer did not need a question, because in fact the deeds a man does declare the will of the man who does them."

Then one of Don Antonio's two friends came up and asked it:

"Who am I?"

And he was answered:

"You know."

"That is not what I am asking," answered the gentleman, "but that you should tell me whether you know me."

"I do know you," they answered him: "you are Don Pedro Noriz."

"I want to know no more, since this is enough to make me understand, O head, that you know everything."

And, moving away, the other friend came up and asked it:

"Tell me, head: what desires has my son the heir?"

"I have already said," they answered him, "that I do not judge of desires; but for all that, I can tell you that those your son has are of burying you."

"That is it," said the gentleman: "what I see with my eyes, I point at with my finger."

And he asked no more. Don Antonio's wife came up and said:

"I do not know what to ask you, head; I should only like to know from you whether I shall have my good husband for many years."

And they answered her:

"You shall, because his health and his temperance in his living promise many years of life, which many men shorten by their intemperance."

Then Don Quixote came up and said:

"Tell me, you who answer: was it truth or was it a dream, what I tell of what happened to me in the cave of Montesinos? Will Sancho my squire's lashes be certain? Will Dulcinea's disenchantment be carried out?"

"As to the cave," they answered, "there is a great deal to say: it has something of both. Sancho's lashes will go slowly; Dulcinea's disenchantment will come to its due execution."

"I want to know no more," said Don Quixote; "for so long as I see Dulcinea disenchanted, I shall reckon that all the good fortune I could wish for has come at one stroke."

The last questioner was Sancho, and what he asked was:

"By any chance, head, shall I have another government? Shall I get out of the tightness of being a squire? Shall I see my wife and my children again?"

To which they answered him:

"You shall govern in your own house; and if you go back to it, you shall see your wife and your children; and, leaving off service, you shall leave off being a squire."

"Good, by God!" said Sancho Panza. "I could have told myself that: the prophet Truism himself could have said no more."

"You beast," said Don Quixote, "what do you want them to answer you? Is it not enough that the answers this head has given match what it is asked?"

"Yes, it is enough," answered Sancho, "but I should have liked it to explain itself more and tell me more."

With this the questions and answers came to an end, but not the astonishment they were all left in — except Don Antonio's two friends, who knew the business.

Which Cide Hamete Benengeli decided to explain at once, so as not to keep the world in suspense, believing that some sorcerous and extraordinary mystery was shut up in that head. And so he says that Don Antonio Moreno, in imitation of another head he had seen in Madrid made by a print-seller, made this one in his house to entertain himself and to astonish the ignorant. And the making of it was in this way: the top of the table was of wood, painted and varnished like jasper, and the foot it stood on was of the same, with four eagle's claws coming out of it for greater firmness under the weight. The head, which looked like a medallion and a figure of a Roman emperor and was bronze in colour, was entirely hollow, and so was the top of the table, into which it fitted so exactly that no sign of a join showed. The foot of the table was likewise hollow and answered to the throat and chest of the head, and all of this came out into another room that lay below the room of the head. Through this whole hollow of foot, table, throat and chest of the said medallion and figure there ran a tube of tinplate, fitted very exactly, which nobody could see. In the room below, matching the one above, was placed the man who was to answer, his mouth glued to that same tube, so that, like a blowpipe, the voice went from above to below and from below to above in articulate and clear words; and in this way it was not possible to know the trick.

A nephew of Don Antonio's, a sharp and judicious student, was the answerer; and, having been told by his uncle who would be coming in with him that day into the room of the head, it was easy for him to answer the first question quickly and exactly; the rest he answered by conjecture, and, being judicious, judiciously.

And Cide Hamete says more: that this marvellous machine lasted some ten or twelve days; but that, it being noised about the city that Don Antonio had an enchanted head in his house that answered everybody who asked it, and fearing that it might come to the ears of the wakeful sentinels of our Faith, he explained the business to the lords inquisitors, who ordered him to take it apart and go no further with it, so that the ignorant crowd should not be scandalised. But in Don Quixote's and Sancho Panza's opinion the head remained enchanted and answering, more to Don Quixote's satisfaction than to Sancho's.

The gentlemen of the city, to please Don Antonio and to entertain Don Quixote and give him room to show his silliness, arranged to hold a ring-tilting six days later; which did not come off, for the reason that will be told further on.

Don Quixote took a fancy to walk about the city plainly and on foot, fearing that if he went on horseback the boys would chase him; and so he and Sancho, with two other servants Don Antonio gave him, went out for a walk.

It happened, then, that, going along a street, Don Quixote raised his eyes and saw written over a door in very large letters: Books printed here. At which he was much pleased, because until then he had never seen a printing house and wanted to know what one was like. He went inside with his whole retinue and saw them pulling in one place, correcting in another, setting up here and revising there — in short, all that machinery that shows itself in great printing houses. Don Quixote would go up to one case and ask what it was they were doing there; the workmen would give him an account of it; he would be astonished and pass on.

He came up to one of them and asked him what he was doing. The workman answered him:

"Sir, this gentleman here" — and he showed him a man of very good figure and appearance and of some gravity — "has translated a Tuscan book into our Castilian language, and I am setting it up to give it to the press."

"What title has the book?" asked Don Quixote.

To which the author answered:

"Sir, the book in Tuscan is called Le Bagatelle."

"And what does Le Bagatelle answer to in our Castilian?" asked Don Quixote.

"Le Bagatelle," said the author, "is as though in Castilian we said The Trifles; and although this book is humble in its name, it holds and shuts up in itself very good and substantial things."

"I," said Don Quixote, "know something of Tuscan, and I pride myself on singing some stanzas of Ariosto. But tell me, your worship, my dear sir — and I do not say this because I want to examine your worship's wit, but out of curiosity and no more: have you ever found the word pignatta in your writing?"

"Yes, many times," answered the author.

"And how does your worship translate it into Castilian?" asked Don Quixote.

"How should I translate it," replied the author, "except by saying pot?"

"Body of me," said Don Quixote, "how far advanced your worship is in the Tuscan tongue! I would lay a good wager that where the Tuscan says piace, your worship says in Castilian pleases; and where it says più, you say more; and su you set out as up and giù as down."

"I do set them out so, certainly," said the author, "because those are their proper equivalents."

"I would dare to swear," said Don Quixote, "that your worship is not known in the world, which is always an enemy to rewarding flowering wits and praiseworthy labours. What abilities are lost about the place! What wits are cornered! What virtues are despised!

"But for all that, it seems to me that translating from one language into another, unless it is from the queens of languages, Greek and Latin, is like looking at Flemish tapestries from the wrong side: for although the figures can be seen, they are full of threads that darken them, and they are not seen with the smoothness and colour of the right side. And translating from easy languages argues neither wit nor eloquence, any more than it is argued by the man who transcribes or copies one paper from another paper. And I do not want to infer by this that this exercise of translating is not praiseworthy; because a man could employ himself on worse things and ones that brought him less profit.

"Outside this reckoning stand the two famous translators: the one, Doctor Cristóbal de Figueroa in his Pastor Fido, and the other, Don Juan de Jáuregui in his Aminta, where they happily put it in doubt which is the translation and which the original. But tell me, your worship: is this book being printed at your own expense, or have you already sold the licence to some bookseller?"

"At my own expense I am printing it," answered the author, "and I expect to make a thousand ducats at least with this first printing, which is to be of two thousand copies, and they will go off at six reals each in a trice."

"Your worship is well up in your reckoning!" answered Don Quixote. "It is plain enough that you do not know the ins and outs of printers and the understandings there are between one and another. I promise you that when you find yourself loaded with two thousand copies of a book, you will find your own body so battered that it will frighten you — and the more so if the book is a little crooked and not at all spicy."

"Why, then," said the author, "does your worship want me to give it to a bookseller who will give me three maravedís for the licence and even thinks he is doing me a kindness in giving them me? I do not print my books to win fame in the world, since I am already known in it by my works: it is profit I want, for without it a good name is not worth a farthing."

"God give your worship good luck," answered Don Quixote.

And he went on to another case, where he saw that they were correcting a sheet of a book entitled The Light of the Soul; and, on seeing it, he said:

"Books like these — although there are a great many of the kind — are the ones that ought to be printed; because there are a great many sinners about, and infinite lights are needed for so many people in the dark."

He went on and saw that they were likewise correcting another book; and, asking its title, he was answered that it was called The Second Part of The Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha, composed by a certain man of Tordesillas.

"I already have news of this book," said Don Quixote, "and truly and in my conscience I thought it was burnt and turned to powder by now for its impertinence. But its Martinmas will come to it, as it does to every pig; for invented histories are good and delightful just so far as they come near the truth or the likeness of it, and true ones are the better the truer they are."

And, saying this, with signs of some indignation, he went out of the printing house. And that same day Don Antonio arranged to take him to see the galleys that were on the beach, at which Sancho was much delighted, since he had never seen any in his life. Don Antonio let the commander of the galleys know that he was to bring his guest, the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha, to see them that afternoon — of whom the commander and all the inhabitants of the city already had news; and what happened to him on board them will be told in the following chapter.
