Chapter 63: Of the Ill That Befell Sancho Panza on the Visit to the Galleys, and the Strange Adventure of the Beautiful Moorish Girl

Great were the arguments Don Quixote made about the enchanted head's answer, without any of them hitting on the trick, and they all ended in the promise — which he took for certain — of Dulcinea's disenchantment. There he went to and fro and was glad within himself, believing that he was soon to see it carried out. And Sancho, although he loathed being a governor, as has been said, still wanted to go back to giving orders and being obeyed; for this is the bad luck that command brings with it, even if it is only in jest.

In short, that afternoon Don Antonio Moreno his host and his two friends, with Don Quixote and Sancho, went to the galleys. The commander, who had been warned of their welcome coming so that he might see the two so famous men Quixote and Sancho, had hardly seen them reach the shore when all the galleys dropped their awnings and the shawms sounded. Then they threw the skiff into the water, covered with rich carpets and with cushions of crimson velvet; and, the moment Don Quixote set foot in it, the flagship fired her gangway cannon and the other galleys did the same; and, as Don Quixote came up the starboard ladder, the whole rowing crew saluted him as is the custom when a person of quality comes aboard a galley, saying "Hu, hu, hu!" three times.

The general — for by this name we shall call him — gave him his hand; he was a gentleman of quality from Valencia, and he embraced Don Quixote, saying to him:

"I shall mark this day with a white stone, for being one of the best I expect to have in my life, having seen Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha: a time and a token that shows us that in him is shut up and summed all the worth of knight-errantry."

With no less courteous words Don Quixote answered him, extremely glad to see himself treated so much like a great lord. They all went into the stern gallery, which was very well fitted out, and sat down along the benches; the boatswain passed along the gangway and gave the signal with his whistle for the crew to strip, which was done in an instant.

Sancho, seeing so many men naked, was thunderstruck, and still more when he saw them rig the awning so fast that it seemed to him that all the devils were at work there. But all this was cakes and fancy bread compared with what I shall now tell.

Sancho was sitting on the stern post next to the aftermost rower on the right-hand side, who, having been warned what he was to do, took hold of Sancho and, lifting him in his arms — the whole crew being on their feet and on the alert — beginning from the starboard side, went passing and rolling him along on the crew's arms from bench to bench with such speed that the poor Sancho lost the sight of his eyes and undoubtedly thought the very demons were carrying him off; and they did not stop with him until they had brought him back along the port side and set him down in the stern. The poor man was left battered and panting and sweating all over, unable to imagine what had happened to him.

Don Quixote, who saw Sancho's flight without wings, asked the general whether these were ceremonies used with those who came aboard galleys for the first time; because if by any chance they were, he, having no intention of taking his vows in them, did not want to perform exercises of the kind; and he swore to God that if anybody came to lay hold of him to roll him about, he would kick the soul out of him. And, saying this, he got to his feet and gripped his sword.

At this instant they dropped the awning, and with an enormous noise let the yard fall from top to bottom. Sancho thought the sky was coming off its hinges and about to fall on his head; and, bending it down, full of fear, he put it between his legs. Don Quixote was not altogether easy either, for he too shuddered and hunched his shoulders and lost the colour in his face.

The crew hoisted the yard with the same speed and noise with which they had lowered it, and all this in silence, as though they had neither voice nor breath. The boatswain gave the signal to weigh anchor and, leaping into the middle of the gangway with his lash, began to swat the backs of the crew and to stand out little by little to sea.

When Sancho saw so many red feet moving at once — for such he thought the oars were — he said to himself:

"These really are enchanted things, and not the ones my master talks about. What have these wretched men done to be whipped like this, and how does this one man who goes about here whistling dare to whip so many people? Now I say that this is hell — or at least purgatory."

Don Quixote, who saw the attention with which Sancho was watching what was going on, said to him:

"Ah, Sancho my friend, how quickly and at how little cost you could, if you wanted, strip yourself from the waist up and place yourself among these gentlemen and make an end of Dulcinea's disenchantment! For with the misery and the pain of so many, you would not feel your own much; and what is more, it might be that the wise Merlin would count each one of these lashes, for being given by a good hand, as ten of the ones you must in the end give yourself."

The general was about to ask what lashes these were, or what disenchantment of Dulcinea, when the seaman said:

"Montjuïc is signalling that there is an oared vessel on the coast on the western side."

Hearing this, the general leapt into the gangway and said:

"Come, my sons, do not let her get away from us! This must be some brigantine of Algerine corsairs that the lookout is signalling to us."

The other three galleys came up at once to the flagship to learn what they were ordered. The general ordered two of them to stand out to sea, and he with the other would go along close in to land, so that in this way the vessel should not escape them. The crew pulled hard at the oars, driving the galleys on with such fury that they seemed to fly.

The two that stood out to sea, at about two miles, made out a vessel which by eye they marked at some fourteen or fifteen benches — and so it was. This vessel, when she made out the galleys, made off, meaning and hoping to escape by her speed; but it went badly for her, because the flagship was one of the swiftest vessels that sailed the sea, and she gained on her so fast that those on the brigantine plainly knew they could not escape. And so the captain would have had them drop their oars and give themselves up, so as not to provoke the commander of our galleys into anger.

But fortune, which was guiding it another way, arranged that, just as the flagship came so close that those on the vessel could hear the voices from her calling on them to surrender, two toraquis — which is as much as to say two drunken Turks — who were on the brigantine among these twelve, fired two muskets and killed two soldiers who were on our forecastle. Seeing which, the general swore to leave nobody alive of all he took on that vessel; and, coming on to ram her at full fury, she slipped away under his oars.

The galley went on a good way ahead; those on the vessel saw themselves lost, made sail while the galley was coming round, and once more, under sail and oar, made off; but their diligence did not help them as much as their boldness harmed them, because the flagship caught them up at a little over half a mile, laid her oars over them and took them all alive.

At this the other two galleys came up, and all four with the prize went back to the beach, where an infinite number of people were waiting for them, eager to see what they had brought. The general anchored near land and saw that the viceroy of the city was on the shore. He ordered the skiff to be let down to bring him, and ordered the yard to be lowered so as to hang at once the captain and the rest of the Turks he had taken on the vessel, who would be about thirty-six persons, all of them fine-looking men and most of them Turkish musketeers.

The general asked who the captain of the brigantine was, and he was answered by one of the prisoners in the Castilian tongue, who afterwards proved to be a Spanish renegade:

"This young man you see here, sir, is our captain."

And he showed him one of the loveliest and most gallant young men that human imagination could paint. His age, to look at him, did not reach twenty. The general asked him:

"Tell me, you ill-advised dog, what moved you to kill my soldiers, when you saw that it was impossible for you to escape? Is this the respect that is kept for flagships? Do you not know that rashness is not valour? Doubtful hopes ought to make men bold, but not foolhardy."

The captain was about to answer, but the general could not hear the answer just then, having to go and receive the viceroy, who was already coming aboard the galley, and with whom there came some of his servants and some people of the town.

"The hunting has been good, my lord general!" said the viceroy.

"And so good," answered the general, "that Your Excellency shall see it hanging from this yard in a moment."

"How so?" replied the viceroy.

"Because they have killed me," answered the general, "against all law and against all reason and usage of war, two of the best soldiers in these galleys; and I have sworn to hang all those I have taken prisoner, and chiefly this young man, who is the captain of the brigantine."

And he showed him the young man, who already had his hands tied and the cord round his throat, waiting for death.

The viceroy looked at him; and, seeing him so beautiful and so gallant and so humble — his beauty giving him at that instant a letter of recommendation — he was seized with a desire to save him from death; and so he asked him:

"Tell me, captain: are you a Turk by nation, or a Moor, or a renegade?"

To which the young man answered, likewise in the Castilian tongue:

"I am neither a Turk by nation, nor a Moor, nor a renegade."

"Well, what are you?" replied the viceroy.

"A Christian woman," answered the young man.

"A woman and a Christian, and in such a dress and in such a pass? That is a thing more to be marvelled at than believed."

"Suspend, gentlemen," said the young man, "the carrying out of my death; for not much will be lost by your revenge being put off while I tell you my life."

Who could have had a heart so hard as not to be softened by these words — or at least to wait to hear what the sad and wounded young person wanted to say? The general told him to say whatever he liked, but not to expect to obtain any pardon for his known guilt. With this leave, the young man began to speak in this way:

"Of that nation more unfortunate than prudent, on whom a sea of misfortunes has rained down these last days, I was born, engendered by Morisco parents. In the current of their misfortune I was taken to Barbary by two uncles of mine, and it did me no good to say that I was a Christian, as in fact I am — and not one of the pretended or apparent ones but one of the true and Catholic ones. It did not help me, with those who had charge of our wretched exile, to tell this truth; nor would my uncles believe it; on the contrary, they took it for a lie and an invention for staying in the land where I had been born, and so, more by force than by good will, they brought me with them.

"I had a Christian mother and a judicious and Christian father, neither more nor less; I sucked in the Catholic faith with my milk; I was brought up with good habits; and neither in my speech nor in them did I ever, as I believe, give signs of being a Morisco. Alongside and in step with these virtues — for I believe they are virtues — my beauty grew, if I have any; and, although my reserve and my seclusion were great, they must not have been so great that a young gentleman called Don Gaspar Gregorio, the eldest son of a gentleman who has an estate of his own next to our village, did not have a chance to see me.

"How he saw me, how we spoke to each other, how he was lost for me and how I was not much won by him would be long to tell, and the more so at a time when I am afraid that between my tongue and my throat the harsh cord that threatens me is going to come across. And so I shall only say how Don Gregorio chose to go with me into our exile. He mixed with the Moriscos who came out of other places, because he knew the language very well, and on the journey he made friends with two uncles of mine who were bringing me with them.

"Because my father, prudent and provident, as soon as he heard the first edict of our exile, left the village and went to look for somewhere in foreign kingdoms to take us in. He left shut up and buried, in a place that only I know of, a great many pearls and stones of great value, along with some money in gold crusadoes and doubloons. He ordered me on no account to touch the treasure he was leaving, if we were exiled before he came back.

"I did so; and with my uncles, as I have said, and other relations and connections we crossed to Barbary; and the place where we settled was Algiers, as though we had settled in hell itself. The king got to hear of my beauty, and rumour told him of my riches — which in part was my good fortune. He called me before him, asked me what part of Spain I was from and what money and what jewels I had brought. I told him the place, and that the jewels and the money had been left buried in it, but that they could easily be got if I myself went back for them. All this I told him, fearing that it would not be my beauty that blinded him but his own greed.

"While he was in this talk with me, they came and told him that there was travelling with me one of the most gallant and beautiful young men that could be imagined. At once I understood that they were speaking of Don Gaspar Gregorio, whose beauty leaves behind the greatest that can be extolled. I was thrown into confusion, considering the danger Don Gregorio was running; because among those barbarous Turks a beautiful boy or youth is held and valued more than a woman, however lovely.

"The king ordered at once that he should be brought there in front of him so that he might see him, and asked me whether what they told him about that youth was true. Then I, almost as though warned by heaven, told him that it was; but that I would let him know that it was not a man but a woman like myself; and that I begged him to let me go and dress her in her natural clothes, so that she might show her beauty entirely and appear before him with less embarrassment. He told me to go and welcome, and that the next day we would talk about the way of arranging for me to go back to Spain to get out the hidden treasure.

"I spoke to Don Gaspar; I told him the danger he ran in showing himself to be a man; I dressed him as a Moorish woman, and that same afternoon brought him into the king's presence; who, on seeing him, was astonished and formed the design of keeping her to make a present of her to the Grand Turk. And, to escape the danger he might have in his own harem and to fear from himself, he ordered her to be put in the house of some Moorish ladies of quality to guard her and serve her, where they took her at once.

"What the two of us felt — for I cannot deny that I love him — let it be left to the thoughts of those who part when they love each other well. Then the king laid the plan for me to come back to Spain in this brigantine and for two Turks by nation to go with me, who were the ones who killed your soldiers. This Spanish renegade also came with me" — and she pointed at the man who had spoken first — "of whom I know very well that he is a Christian in secret and comes with more wish to stay in Spain than to go back to Barbary. The rest of the crew of the brigantine are Moors and Turks, who serve for nothing but to pull at the oar.

"The two Turks, greedy and insolent, without keeping to the orders we had that they should put me and this renegade ashore on the first part of Spain in Christian dress, which we came provided with, chose first to sweep this coast and make some prize if they could, fearing that if they put us ashore first, through some accident that might happen to the two of us we might reveal that the brigantine was at sea; and if there happened to be galleys along this coast, they might be caught.

"Last night we made out this beach and, without knowing about these four galleys, we were made out ourselves, and there has happened to us what you have seen. In short: Don Gregorio remains in woman's dress among women, in plain danger of being lost, and I see my hands tied, waiting — or, better said, fearing — to lose my life, which by now wearies me.

"This, gentlemen, is the end of my lamentable history, as true as it is unfortunate. What I beg of you is that you let me die as a Christian; for, as I have said, in nothing have I been guilty of the guilt into which those of my nation have fallen."

And then she fell silent, her eyes swollen with tender tears, which were joined by a great many from those who were present. The viceroy, tender and compassionate, without saying her a word, came up to her and with his own hands took off the cord that bound the beautiful hands of the Moorish girl.

While the Morisco Christian woman was telling her strange history, an old pilgrim who had come aboard the galley when the viceroy came had kept his eyes fixed on her; and the Morisco girl had hardly finished her speech when he threw himself at her feet and, embracing them, with words broken by a thousand sobs and sighs, said to her:

"O Ana Félix, my unfortunate daughter! I am your father Ricote, who was coming back to look for you, unable to live without you, since you are my soul."

At which words Sancho opened his eyes and raised his head, which he had been keeping bowed, thinking about the misfortune of his ride; and, looking at the pilgrim, he knew him to be the same Ricote he had met on the day he left his government, and he confirmed that this was his daughter — who, being untied by now, embraced her father, mixing her tears with his. And Ricote said to the general and the viceroy:

"This, gentlemen, is my daughter, more unfortunate in her doings than in her name. Ana Félix she is called, with the surname of Ricote, famous as much for her beauty as for my riches. I left my country to look in foreign kingdoms for somebody to shelter and take us in; and, having found it in Germany, I came back in this pilgrim's dress in the company of some Germans to look for my daughter and to dig up a great deal of wealth I had left hidden. I did not find my daughter; I found the treasure, which I carry with me; and now, by the strange roundabout you have seen, I have found the treasure that most enriches me, which is my beloved daughter.

"If our small guilt and her tears and mine can, by the integrity of your justice, open doors to mercy, use it with us; for we never had any thought of offending you, nor did we agree in any way with the intentions of our people, who have been justly exiled."

Then Sancho said:

"I know Ricote well, and I know that what he says is true as far as Ana Félix's being his daughter goes; as to these other odds and ends of coming and going and having good or bad intentions, I do not meddle."

Everybody present being amazed at the strange business, the general said:

"Come what may, your tears will not let me keep my oath: live, beautiful Ana Félix, the years of life that heaven has settled for you, and let the insolent, reckless men who committed the offence carry the penalty of their guilt."

And he ordered at once that the two Turks who had killed his two soldiers should be hanged from the yard; but the viceroy begged him earnestly not to hang them, since what they had done had been madness rather than valour. The general did what the viceroy asked, because revenge is not well carried out in cold blood.

Then they set about laying a plan for getting Don Gaspar Gregorio out of the danger he was left in. Ricote offered for it more than two thousand ducats that he had in pearls and jewels. A great many ways were suggested, but none was as good as the one given by the Spanish renegade already mentioned, who offered to go back to Algiers in some small boat of about six benches, manned by Christian rowers; because he knew where and how and when he could and should land, and likewise he was not ignorant of the house where Don Gaspar was left.

The general and the viceroy doubted about trusting the renegade, or trusting the Christians who were to pull at the oar; Ana Félix went surety for him, and Ricote her father said he would come forward to pay the ransom of the Christians if they should happen to be lost.

Being settled, then, in this opinion, the viceroy went ashore, and Don Antonio Moreno took the Morisco girl and her father home with him, the viceroy charging him to treat them well and make much of them as far as he could; and for his own part he offered whatever there was in his house for their entertainment. So great was the good will and charity that Ana Félix's beauty poured into his breast.
