Chapter 64: Which Deals with the Adventure That Gave Don Quixote More Distress Than Any That Had Happened to Him Until Then

Don Antonio Moreno's wife, the history tells, was extremely pleased to see Ana Félix in her house. She received her with a great deal of graciousness, being as taken with her beauty as with her good sense — for in both the one and the other the Morisco girl was outstanding; and all the people of the city came to see her as though a bell had been rung.

Don Quixote told Don Antonio that the plan they had settled on for Don Gregorio's freeing was not a good one, because it had more of the dangerous in it than of the convenient, and that it would be better to put him ashore in Barbary with his arms and his horse; for he would bring him out in spite of all the Moors, as Don Gaiferos had done with his wife Melisendra.

"Let your worship note," said Sancho, hearing this, "that Señor Don Gaiferos brought his wife out of dry land and took her to France over dry land; but here, if we do bring Don Gregorio out, we have no way of bringing him to Spain, since the sea lies between."

"There is a remedy for everything except death," answered Don Quixote; "for, the boat coming to the shore, we can embark on it though all the world should stop us."

"Your worship paints it and makes it easy very well," said Sancho, "but from saying to doing is a long way; and I hold by the renegade, who seems to me a very honest man with very good bowels in him."

Don Antonio said that if the renegade did not come well out of the business, the expedient would be taken of the great Don Quixote's crossing over to Barbary.

Two days later the renegade set off in a swift boat of six oars a side, manned by the most valiant of crews; and two days after that the galleys sailed for the Levant, the general having asked the viceroy to be so good as to let him know what happened in Don Gregorio's freeing and in Ana Félix's case; the viceroy undertook to do it as he asked.

And one morning, Don Quixote going out to ride along the beach armed in all his arms — because, as he often said, arms were his adornment and fighting his rest, and he never found himself without them for a moment — he saw coming towards him a knight likewise armed cap-a-pie, who carried a shining moon painted on his shield; who, coming within a distance at which he could be heard, addressed his words to Don Quixote and said in a loud voice:

"Distinguished knight and never-sufficiently-praised Don Quixote of La Mancha, I am the Knight of the White Moon, whose unheard-of exploits will perhaps have brought me back to your memory. I come to contend with you and to try the strength of your arms, so as to make you know and confess that my lady, be she who she may, is beyond comparison more beautiful than your Dulcinea of El Toboso. Which truth, if you confess it plainly and openly, you will save yourself from death and me from the labour I must take in giving it you.

"And if you fight and I conquer you, I want no other satisfaction than that, laying down your arms and holding off from looking for adventures, you should gather yourself in and withdraw to your village for the space of a year, where you are to live without laying hand to your sword, in quiet peace and profitable rest, since this is what best suits the increase of your property and the salvation of your soul. And if you conquer me, my head shall be at your discretion, and the spoils of my arms and my horse shall be yours, and the fame of my exploits shall pass to yours. Consider which is best for you, and answer me at once, because I have all today as my term for despatching this business."

Don Quixote was bewildered and astounded, as much by the Knight of the White Moon's arrogance as by the cause for which he was challenging him; and with composure and a severe air he answered him:

"Knight of the White Moon, whose exploits have not so far come to my notice, I would dare to swear that you have never seen the illustrious Dulcinea; for if you had seen her, I know you would have tried not to put yourself to this demand, because the sight of her would have undeceived you of there ever having been or ever being able to be any beauty that could be compared with hers.

"And so, not telling you that you lie but that you are wrong in what you propose, I accept your challenge with the conditions you have named, and at once, so that the day you have appointed may not go by; and I except from the conditions only that of the fame of your exploits passing to me, because I do not know what they are or of what kind: with my own I am content, such as they are. Take, then, whichever part of the field you like, for I shall do the same; and whoever God gives it to, Saint Peter bless it to him."

They had made out the Knight of the White Moon from the city and told the viceroy, who was talking with Don Quixote of La Mancha. The viceroy, believing it would be some new adventure got up by Don Antonio Moreno or by some other gentleman of the city, went out at once to the beach with Don Antonio and with a great many other gentlemen who accompanied him, just as Don Quixote was turning Rocinante's reins to take as much of the field as he needed.

The viceroy, then, seeing that the two of them were giving signs of turning to charge each other, placed himself between them, asking them what the cause was that moved them to give battle so suddenly. The Knight of the White Moon answered that it was precedence in beauty, and in a few words said him the same things he had said to Don Quixote, along with the acceptance of the conditions of the challenge made by both sides.

The viceroy came up to Don Antonio and asked him softly whether he knew who this Knight of the White Moon was, or whether it was some trick they meant to play on Don Quixote. Don Antonio answered him that he neither knew who he was nor whether the challenge was in jest or in earnest. This answer left the viceroy perplexed as to whether or not he should let them go on with the battle; but, being unable to persuade himself that it was anything but a joke, he stepped aside, saying:

"Gentlemen knights, if there is no remedy here but confessing or dying, and Señor Don Quixote sticks at his thirteen and your worship of the White Moon at your fourteen, then into the hand of God, and have at it."

The Knight of the White Moon thanked the viceroy in courteous and judicious words for the leave that was given them, and Don Quixote did the same; and he, commending himself to heaven with all his heart and to his Dulcinea — as was his custom at the beginning of the battles that offered themselves — went and took a little more of the field, because he saw that his opponent was doing the same. And, without a trumpet sounding or any other warlike instrument giving them the signal to charge, both of them at the same moment turned their horses' reins.

And, as the White Moon's horse was the swifter, he reached Don Quixote when two thirds of the course had been run, and there he met him with such mighty force, without touching him with his lance — which he raised, apparently on purpose — that he brought Rocinante and Don Quixote down in a dangerous fall. He was on top of him at once and, setting his lance on his visor, said to him:

"You are conquered, knight, and dead too, if you do not confess the conditions of our challenge."

Don Quixote, battered and stunned, without raising his visor, as though he were speaking from inside a tomb, said in a weakened and sickly voice:

"Dulcinea of El Toboso is the most beautiful woman in the world, and I the most unfortunate knight on earth; and it is not right that my weakness should defraud this truth. Press home the lance, knight, and take my life, since you have taken my honour."

"That I shall not do, certainly," said the Knight of the White Moon. "Let the fame of the lady Dulcinea of El Toboso's beauty live and live entire; I am content only that the great Don Quixote should withdraw to his village for a year, or for such time as I may order him, as we agreed before going into this battle."

All this the viceroy and Don Antonio heard, along with a great many others who were there; and they heard likewise that Don Quixote answered that, so long as he was not asked for anything that would be to Dulcinea's damage, he would carry out all the rest as an exact and truthful knight.

This confession made, the Knight of the White Moon turned his reins and, bowing his head to the viceroy, went at a half gallop into the city.

The viceroy ordered Don Antonio to go after him and by all means to find out who he was. They lifted Don Quixote up, uncovered his face and found him without colour and sweating all over. Rocinante, out of pure ill usage, could not stir for the moment.

Sancho, all sad, all grieved, did not know what to say or what to do: it seemed to him that this whole business was happening in a dream and that all that machinery was a matter of enchantment. He saw his master conquered and bound not to take up arms for a year; he imagined the light of the glory of his exploits darkened, the hopes of his fresh promises undone as smoke is undone by the wind. He was afraid that Rocinante might be left crippled, and his master's bones out of joint — though it would have been no small piece of luck if it had been his madness that came out of joint.

Finally, in a sedan chair the viceroy ordered to be brought, they carried him to the city; and the viceroy went back to it too, wanting to know who the Knight of the White Moon might be, who had left Don Quixote in such a bad way.
