Chapter 66: Which Deals with What Will Be Seen by Whoever Reads It, or Heard by Whoever Has It Read to Him

On leaving Barcelona, Don Quixote turned to look at the place where he had fallen, and said:

"Here Troy was! Here my ill luck, and not my cowardice, carried off the glories I had won; here fortune used her turns and returns on me; here my exploits were darkened; here, in short, my good fortune fell, never to rise again!"

Hearing which, Sancho said:

"It is as much the part of valiant hearts, my dear sir, to have patience in misfortunes as gladness in prosperity; and this I judge by myself, for if I was glad when I was a governor, now that I am a squire on foot I am not sad. Because I have heard it said that this thing they call Fortune about the place is a drunken, whimsical woman and, above all, blind, and so she does not see what she is doing, and does not know whom she is throwing down or whom she is raising up."

"You are very philosophical, Sancho," answered Don Quixote; "you speak very judiciously — I do not know who teaches you. What I can tell you is that there is no fortune in the world, and that the things that happen in it, good or bad as they may be, do not come by chance but by the particular providence of heaven; and from this comes what is generally said, that every man is the maker of his own fortune.

"I have been the maker of mine, but not with the necessary prudence, and so my presumptions have cost me dear; for I ought to have thought that the mighty bulk of the White Moon's horse could not be resisted by Rocinante's weakness. I ventured, in short; I did what I could; they knocked me down; and, although I lost my honour, I did not lose, and cannot lose, the virtue of keeping my word. When I was a knight errant, bold and valiant, with my deeds and my hands I gave credit to my doings; and now, when I am a squire on foot, I shall give credit to my words by keeping the one I gave in my promise. Walk on, then, Sancho my friend, and let us go and spend the year of our novitiate in our own country; in which seclusion we shall gain fresh strength for going back to the exercise of arms, which I never forget."

"Sir," answered Sancho, "travelling on foot is not such a delightful thing that it moves and stirs me to make long stages. Let us leave these arms hanging on some tree in place of a hanged man; and, with me astride the grey and my feet up off the ground, we shall make the stages as your worship asks and measures them; for to think that I am to travel on foot and make them long ones is to think the impossible."

"You have spoken well, Sancho," answered Don Quixote. "Let my arms be hung up for a trophy, and at the foot of them, or round about them, we shall carve on the trees what was written on the trophy of Roland's arms:

	Let nobody move these
	who cannot stand the test with Roland."

"That all seems to me of pearl," answered Sancho; "and if it were not for the want Rocinante would be to us on the road, it would be as well to leave him hanging too."

"Neither he nor the arms," replied Don Quixote, "do I want hanged, so that it may not be said that for good service, bad reward!"

"Your worship speaks very well," answered Sancho, "because, in the opinion of judicious men, the ass's fault is not to be laid on the pack-saddle; and, since your worship has the blame for this business, punish yourself and do not let your anger burst out on the already broken and bloody arms, or on Rocinante's gentleness, or on the softness of my feet, by wanting them to walk more than is fair."

In these arguments and this talk that whole day went by for them, and four more, without anything happening to hold up their road. And on the fifth day, at the entrance of a village, they found a great many people at the door of an inn who, it being a holiday, were amusing themselves there. As Don Quixote came up to them, a farm labourer raised his voice, saying:

"One of these two gentlemen coming here, who do not know the parties, shall say what is to be done about our wager."

"I shall say it, certainly," answered Don Quixote, "with all uprightness, if I can manage to understand it."

"The case is this, then, my good sir," said the labourer. "A neighbour of this village, so fat that he weighs eleven arrobas — an arroba being twenty-five pounds — challenged another neighbour of his, who weighs no more than five, to a race. It was the condition that they should run a course of a hundred paces with equal weights; and, the challenger having been asked how the weight was to be made equal, he said that the challenged man, who weighs five arrobas, should put six of iron on his back, and in this way the thin man's eleven arrobas would be equal to the fat man's eleven."

"Not that," said Sancho at this point, before Don Quixote could answer. "And it falls to me, who left off being a governor and a judge a few days ago, as all the world knows, to settle these doubts and give an opinion in every suit."

"Answer and welcome, Sancho my friend," said Don Quixote, "for I am not fit to give crumbs to a cat, my judgement being so disturbed and turned upside down."

With this leave, Sancho said to the labourers, a good many of whom stood round him with their mouths open, waiting for the sentence to come out of his:

"Brothers, what the fat man asks does not stand up, and it has not the shadow of any justice in it; because if it is true what is said, that the challenged man may choose the weapons, it is not right that this man should choose such as would hinder him and stop him from coming out the winner. And so it is my opinion that the fat challenger should prune, peel, thin out, polish and trim himself, and take six arrobas of his flesh off from here or there on his body, wherever seems best and suits him. And in this way, being left at five arrobas of weight, he will be even and level with his opponent's five, and so they will be able to run equally."

"I swear," said a labourer who had heard Sancho's sentence, "that this gentleman has spoken like a blessed saint and given sentence like a canon! But it is a safe bet that the fat man will not want to take an ounce off his flesh, let alone six arrobas."

"The best thing is for them not to run at all," answered another, "so that the thin man is not ground down by the weight and the fat man is not carved up. And let half the wager go on wine, and let us take these gentlemen to the tavern for the good stuff — and on my back be the cloak when it rains."

"I, gentlemen," answered Don Quixote, "am grateful to you, but I cannot stop for a moment, because sad thoughts and events make me look discourteous and travel faster than at a walk."

And so, giving Rocinante the spurs, he passed on, leaving them astonished at having seen and noted both his strange figure and his servant's good sense — for such they judged Sancho's. And another of the labourers said:

"If the servant is so judicious, what must the master be? I would wager that if they go and study at Salamanca, in no time at all they will come to be judges of the court; for it is all a joke but studying and more studying, and having favour and luck; and when a man least expects it, he finds himself with a magistrate's rod in his hand or a mitre on his head."

That night master and man spent in the middle of the fields under the bare, uncovered sky; and the next day, following their road, they saw coming towards them a man on foot with saddlebags round his neck and a javelin or pike in his hand, exactly the figure of a foot courier. Who, on coming up to Don Quixote, quickened his step and came at a half run and, embracing him round the right thigh, since he could reach no higher, said to him with signs of great gladness:

"O my lord Don Quixote of La Mancha, what great contentment must reach my lord the duke's heart when he learns that your worship is coming back to his castle — for he is still there with my lady the duchess!"

"I do not know you, my friend," answered Don Quixote, "and I do not know who you are, unless you tell me."

"I, Señor Don Quixote," answered the courier, "am Tosilos, the duke my lord's footman, who would not fight with your worship over the marriage of Doña Rodríguez's daughter."

"God bless me!" said Don Quixote. "Is it possible that you are the man whom my enemies the enchanters transformed into that footman you speak of, to cheat me of the honour of that battle?"

"Be quiet, my good sir," replied the letter-carrier, "for there was no enchantment at all and no change of face at all: I went into the lists as much Tosilos the footman as I came out of them Tosilos the footman. I thought I would get married without fighting, because the girl had taken my fancy; but my idea turned out backwards, for as soon as your worship left our castle the duke my lord had me given a hundred strokes for having gone against the orders he had given me before going into the battle. And it has all ended in the girl's being a nun by now, and Doña Rodríguez's having gone back to Castile, and my going now to Barcelona to take a packet of letters to the viceroy that my master is sending him. If your worship would like a little drop — warm, but neat — I have a gourd full of the good stuff here, with I do not know how many little slices of Tronchón cheese, which will serve as a call and an awakener to thirst, if by any chance it is asleep."

"I take up the invitation," said Sancho, "and let the rest of the courtesies go hang, and let good Tosilos pour out, in spite and defiance of all the enchanters there are in the Indies."

"In short," said Don Quixote, "you, Sancho, are the greatest glutton in the world and the greatest ignoramus on earth, since you cannot persuade yourself that this courier is enchanted and this Tosilos a counterfeit. Stay with him and fill yourself, and I shall go on ahead slowly, waiting for you to come."

The footman laughed, unsheathed his gourd, unbagged his slices, and, taking out a small loaf, he and Sancho sat down on the green grass and in good peace and fellowship polished off and struck bottom in the whole store of the saddlebags, with such good appetite that they licked the packet of letters simply because it smelt of cheese. Tosilos said to Sancho:

"Without any doubt this master of yours, Sancho my friend, must be a madman."

"Must he?" answered Sancho. "He is in no man's debt, for he pays for everything, and the more so when the coin is madness. I see it well enough, and I tell him so well enough; but what good does it do? And the more so now that he is finished off, because he has been beaten by the Knight of the White Moon."

Tosilos begged him to tell him what had happened, but Sancho answered him that it was discourteous to leave his master waiting for him; that another day, if they met, there would be room for it. And, getting up after shaking his coat and the crumbs out of his beard, he drove the grey on ahead and, saying goodbye, left Tosilos and caught up with his master, who was waiting for him in the shade of a tree.
