Chapter 67: Of the Resolution Don Quixote Took to Become a Shepherd and Follow the Life of the Fields During the Year of His Promise, with Other Events Truly Good and Entertaining

If a great many thoughts wore at Don Quixote before he was knocked down, a great many more wore at him after his fall. He was in the shade of the tree, as has been said, and there, like flies to honey, thoughts came at him and stung him: some went to Dulcinea's disenchantment and others to the life he would have to lead in his forced retirement. Sancho came up and praised the generous nature of Tosilos the footman.

"Is it possible," Don Quixote said to him, "that you still think, Sancho, that that man is a real footman? It seems to have gone out of your mind that you have seen Dulcinea turned and transformed into a country girl, and the Knight of the Mirrors into the bachelor Carrasco — all of them the works of the enchanters who persecute me. But tell me now: did you ask this Tosilos of yours what God has done with Altisidora? Whether she has wept for my absence, or whether she has already left in the hands of forgetfulness the loving thoughts that wore at her in my presence?"

"The thoughts I had," answered Sancho, "were not such as to give me room to ask foolish questions. Body of me, sir, is your worship now in a state to inquire into other people's thoughts, and especially loving ones?"

"Look, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "there is a great difference between the works that are done out of love and those that are done out of gratitude. It may very well be that a knight is unloving, but it cannot be, strictly speaking, that he is ungrateful. Altisidora loved me, apparently; she gave me the three headcloths you know about; she wept at my going; she cursed me, abused me, complained, in spite of shame, in public: all signs that she adored me, for lovers' angers generally end in curses.

"I had no hopes to give her and no treasures to offer her, because mine are made over to Dulcinea, and knights errant's treasures are, like goblins', apparent and false; and I can only give her these memories I have of her — without prejudice, though, to those I have of Dulcinea, whom you wrong by the slackness you show in whipping yourself and in punishing that flesh of yours, which I should like to see eaten by wolves, since it prefers to keep itself for the worms rather than for that poor lady's relief."

"Sir," answered Sancho, "if the truth is to be told, I cannot persuade myself that the lashes on my backside have anything to do with the disenchanting of the enchanted, which is as if we said: 'If your head aches, rub ointment on your knees.' At least I would dare to swear that in all the histories your worship has read that deal with knight-errantry you have never seen anybody disenchanted by lashes; but, one way or the other, I shall give them to myself when I feel like it and the time gives me a convenient chance to punish myself."

"God grant it," answered Don Quixote, "and may the heavens give you grace to grasp the obligation that lies on you to help my lady — who is yours too, since you are mine."

In this talk they were going along their road when they came to the very spot and place where they had been trampled by the bulls. Don Quixote recognised it and said to Sancho:

"This is the meadow where we came across those splendid shepherdesses and gallant shepherds who wanted to renew and imitate the pastoral Arcadia in it — an idea as new as it was judicious. In imitation of which, if it seems good to you, I should like us, Sancho, to turn ourselves into shepherds, at least for the time I have to be in retirement.

"I shall buy some sheep and all the other things necessary to the pastoral exercise; and, calling myself the shepherd Quixotize and you the shepherd Panzino, we shall go about the mountains, the woods and the meadows, singing here and lamenting there, drinking the liquid crystal of the springs, or of the clean little brooks, or of the great rivers. The oaks will give us with a most plentiful hand their sweetest fruit; the trunks of the hardest cork trees a seat; the willows shade; the roses scent; the wide meadows carpets tinted with a thousand colours; the clear, pure air breath; the moon and the stars light in spite of the darkness of the night; singing pleasure; weeping gladness; Apollo verses; love conceits — with which we shall be able to make ourselves everlasting and famous not only in the present but in the ages to come."

"By God," said Sancho, "that kind of life squares with me, and even corners with me. And what is more, the bachelor Sansón Carrasco and Master Nicolás the barber will hardly have got a good look at it before they will want to follow it and turn shepherds with us; and God grant the curate does not take it into his head to come into the fold too, being as cheerful as he is and as fond of a good time."

"You have spoken very well," said Don Quixote. "And the bachelor Sansón Carrasco, if he comes into the pastoral guild — as he undoubtedly will — can be called the shepherd Sansonino, or else the shepherd Carrascón; Nicolás the barber can call himself Miculoso, as the old Boscán called himself Nemoroso; for the curate I do not know what name to give, unless it is some derivative of his own, calling him the shepherd Curiambro. As for the shepherdesses whose lovers we are to be, we can pick their names as though out of a basket of pears; and, since my lady's suits a shepherdess as well as a princess, there is no call for me to wear myself out looking for another that would suit her better. You, Sancho, may give yours whatever name you like."

"I do not mean," answered Sancho, "to give her any but Teresona, which will suit her well with her fatness and with the name she has already, since she is called Teresa; and what is more, by celebrating her in my verses I come to reveal my chaste desires, since I do not go looking for better bread than wheaten in other people's houses. It will not be well for the curate to have a shepherdess, for the sake of good example; and if the bachelor wants to have one, his soul is in his own palm."

"God bless me," said Don Quixote, "what a life we shall lead, Sancho my friend! What pipes shall come to our ears, what Zamoran bagpipes, what little drums, and what jingles, and what rebecks! And then, what if among these different kinds of music the sound of the albogues rings out? There you will see almost all the pastoral instruments."

"What are albogues?" asked Sancho. "For I have never heard them named or seen them in all my life."

"Albogues," answered Don Quixote, "are certain brass plates in the shape of candlesticks which, being struck one against the other on the hollow side, make a sound that, if not very agreeable or harmonious, is not displeasing, and goes well with the rusticity of the bagpipe and the little drum. And this word albogues is Moorish, as are all those in our Castilian tongue that begin with al — that is to say, almohaza, a currycomb; almorzar, to take lunch; alhombra, a carpet; alguacil, a constable; alhucema, lavender; almacén, a storehouse; alcancía, a money-box; and others like them, which must be only a few more. And our language has only three that are Moorish and end in i, and they are borceguí, a buskin; zaquizamí, a garret; and maravedí, a coin. Alhelí, the gillyflower, and alfaquí, a Moorish doctor of the law, are known for Arabic both by the al they begin with and by the i they end in.

"This I have told you in passing, because the occasion of having named albogues brought it back to my memory. And what will help us a great deal to bring this exercise to look perfect is my being something of a poet, as you know, and the bachelor Sansón Carrasco's being one in the extreme. Of the curate I say nothing; but I would wager he must have his points and edgings of a poet; and that Master Nicolás has them too I do not doubt, because all of them, or most, are guitarists and versifiers. I shall complain of absence; you shall boast of being a constant lover; the shepherd Carrascón of being scorned; and the curate Curiambro of whatever he can best make use of — and so the thing will go along with nothing left to wish for."

To which Sancho answered:

"I am so unlucky, sir, that I am afraid the day will never come when I see myself in such an exercise. Oh, what neat spoons I shall make when I see myself a shepherd! What sops, what creams, what garlands and what pastoral odds and ends — which, if they do not earn me the name of a judicious man, will not fail to earn me the name of an ingenious one!

"Sanchica my daughter shall bring us our dinner out to the flock. But look out! For she is good-looking, and there are shepherds who are more malicious than simple, and I should not like her to go out for wool and come back shorn; and loves and unwholesome desires generally go about the fields as much as the cities, and about the shepherds' huts as much as the royal palaces; and take away the cause and you take away the sin; and eyes that do not see, a heart that does not break; and a leap over the hedge is worth more than good men's prayers."

"No more proverbs, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "since any one of those you have said is enough to give your idea to be understood. And many times I have advised you not to be so lavish with proverbs and to hold yourself back in saying them; but it seems to me it is preaching in the desert, and 'my mother beats me and I spin my top'."

"It seems to me," answered Sancho, "that your worship is like the saying: 'The frying pan said to the kettle, get away from here, black-face.' You are reproving me for saying proverbs, and your worship threads them two at a time."

"Look, Sancho," answered Don Quixote: "I bring in proverbs to the point, and when I say them they come like a ring on a finger; but you bring them in so much by the hair that you drag them rather than lead them. And if I do not remember wrongly, I have told you before that proverbs are short judgements drawn from the experience and the reflection of our wise men of old; and the proverb that does not come to the point is nonsense rather than a judgement. But let us leave this; and, since night is coming on, let us withdraw some way from the high road, where we shall spend the night — and God knows what tomorrow will be."

They withdrew, they supped late and badly, much against Sancho's will, to whom there presented themselves the hardships of knight-errantry practised in the woods and the mountains — although sometimes abundance had shown itself in castles and houses, both Don Diego de Miranda's and the wedding of the rich Camacho and Don Antonio Moreno's. But he considered that it was not possible for it to be always day or always night, and so he spent that night sleeping, and his master keeping watch.
