Chapter 68: Of the Bristly Adventure That Befell Don Quixote

The night was rather dark, though the moon was in the sky — but not in a part where it could be seen; for sometimes the lady Diana goes off to take a walk among the antipodes and leaves the mountains black and the valleys dark. Don Quixote satisfied nature by sleeping his first sleep, without giving room to a second — quite the other way from Sancho, who never had a second, because his sleep lasted him from the night until the morning, which showed his good constitution and his few cares.

Don Quixote's cares kept him awake in such a way that he woke Sancho and said to him:

"I am amazed, Sancho, at the freedom of your nature: I imagine you are made of marble or of hard bronze, in which there is no room for any movement or feeling. I keep watch while you sleep; I weep while you sing; I faint with fasting while you are lazy and out of breath from pure fullness. It is the part of good servants to share their masters' pains and to feel their feelings, if only for the look of it. Look at the serenity of this night, at the solitude we are in, which invites us to put some waking in among our sleep.

"Get up, on your life, and go some way off from here, and with good courage and a grateful boldness give yourself three or four hundred lashes on account of the ones for Dulcinea's disenchantment. And I beg and entreat you to do it, for I do not want to come to grips with you as I did the other time, because I know your arms are heavy. After you have given them to yourself, we shall spend what is left of the night singing, I of my absence and you of your constancy, making a beginning from now on the pastoral exercise we are to have in our village."

"Sir," answered Sancho, "I am no monk, that I should get up in the middle of my sleep and flog myself; nor does it seem to me that a man can pass from the extreme of the pain of lashes to that of music. Let your worship let me sleep and not press me about the whipping; for you will make me take an oath never to touch a hair of my coat, let alone of my flesh."

"O hardened soul! O squire without pity! O bread badly bestowed and ill-considered favours that I have done you and mean to do you! Through me you have seen yourself a governor, and through me you see yourself with hopes close at hand of being a count, or of having some equivalent title; and the fulfilling of them will take no longer than it takes for this year to go by — for I, post tenebras spero lucem."

"I do not understand that," replied Sancho. "I only understand that while I am asleep I have neither fear nor hope, neither labour nor glory. And blessings on the man who invented sleep — the cloak that covers all human thoughts, the food that takes away hunger, the water that drives off thirst, the fire that warms the cold, the cold that tempers the heat, and, in short, the general coin with which all things are bought, the balance and the weight that makes the shepherd equal to the king and the simple man to the judicious. Sleep has only one bad thing about it, so I have heard it said, and that is that it is like death, since between a sleeping man and a dead one there is very little difference."

"I have never heard you speak, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "as elegantly as now; from which I come to see that the proverb you sometimes say is true: 'Not who you are born with, but who you graze with.'"

"Ah, confound it, sir our master," replied Sancho, "I am not the one who is threading proverbs now; for they fall out of your worship's mouth two at a time better than they do out of mine. Only there must be this difference between mine and yours: that your worship's come in season and mine out of season — but in fact they are all proverbs."

They were at this when they heard a dull uproar and a harsh noise that spread over all those valleys. Don Quixote got to his feet and laid hand to his sword, and Sancho crouched under the grey, putting the bundle of arms on one side of him and his donkey's pack-saddle on the other, shaking with fear as much as Don Quixote was startled. From moment to moment the noise kept growing and coming nearer to the two frightened men — or at least to the one, for the other's valour is well known by now.

The case is that some men were taking more than six hundred pigs to sell at a fair, and were travelling with them at that hour; and such was the noise they made and the grunting and the snorting that they deafened the ears of Don Quixote and of Sancho, who could not make out what it could be.

The spread-out, grunting herd came up in a troop and, with no respect for Don Quixote's authority or for Sancho's, went right over the two of them, undoing Sancho's trenches and knocking down not only Don Quixote but carrying off Rocinante into the bargain. The rush, the grunting, the speed with which the filthy animals arrived, threw into confusion and onto the ground the pack-saddle, the arms, the grey, Rocinante, Sancho and Don Quixote.

Sancho got up as best he could and asked his master for his sword, telling him that he wanted to kill half a dozen of those gentlemanly and ill-mannered pigs, for by now he had made out that that was what they were. Don Quixote said to him:

"Let them alone, my friend; for this affront is the punishment of my sin, and it is heaven's just chastisement that a beaten knight errant should be eaten by jackals and stung by wasps and trampled by pigs."

"It must also be heaven's punishment," answered Sancho, "that the squires of beaten knights should be pricked by flies and eaten by lice and set on by hunger. If we squires were the sons of the knights we serve, or very near relations of theirs, it would be no great matter that the penalty of their sins should reach us to the fourth generation; but what have the Panzas to do with the Quixotes? Well now: let us settle ourselves again and sleep the little that is left of the night, and God will send the morning and we shall get on."

"Sleep, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "for you were born to sleep; and I, who was born to keep watch, in the time that is left from now until daybreak shall give rein to my thoughts and vent them in a little madrigal that, without your knowing it, I composed in my memory last night."

"It seems to me," answered Sancho, "that thoughts that leave room for making verses cannot be very many. Let your worship versify as much as you like, and I shall sleep as much as I can."

And then, taking as much ground as he wanted, he curled up and slept a loose sleep, without sureties or debts or any pain hindering him. Don Quixote, leaning against the trunk of a beech or a cork tree — for Cide Hamete Benengeli does not distinguish which tree it was — to the sound of his own sighs, sang in this way:

	Love, when I think
	on the ill you give me, terrible and strong,
	I go running to death,
	thinking so to end my immense ill;
	but, on reaching that pass
	which is the harbour in this sea of my torment,
	I feel such gladness
	that life gathers strength and I do not pass through.
	So living kills me,
	since death gives me back my life again.
	O unheard-of condition,
	that death and life should deal with me like this!

Each of these lines he accompanied with a great many sighs and not a few tears, exactly like a man whose heart was pierced through with the pain of his defeat and with Dulcinea's absence.

At this daylight came, the sun struck Sancho's eyes with its rays, he woke and stretched, shaking and pulling out his lazy limbs; he looked at the havoc the pigs had made of his stores and cursed the herd and something beyond it.

Finally the two of them went back to the road they had begun; and as the afternoon was drawing in they saw coming towards them some ten men on horseback and four or five on foot. Don Quixote's heart gave a jump and Sancho's was startled, because the people who were coming up to them carried lances and shields and came very much ready for war. Don Quixote turned to Sancho and said to him:

"If I could, Sancho, use my arms, and if my promise had not tied my hands, I should count this machine that is coming at us for cakes and fancy bread; but it might be something other than what we fear."

At this the men on horseback came up and, levelling their lances, without saying a word surrounded Don Quixote and set them at his back and his chest, threatening him with death. One of the men on foot, with a finger on his lips as a sign for him to be quiet, took hold of Rocinante's bridle and drew him off the road; and the rest of those on foot, driving Sancho and the grey ahead of them, all of them keeping a marvellous silence, followed the steps of the man who was leading Don Quixote.

Two or three times Don Quixote tried to ask where they were taking him or what they wanted; but he had hardly begun to move his lips when they came to close them with the heads of the lances. And the same thing happened to Sancho, because he had hardly given signs of speaking when one of the men on foot pricked him with a goad, and the grey neither more nor less, as though he too had wanted to speak.

Night closed in, they quickened their pace, and the fear grew in the two prisoners, and the more so when they heard them saying from time to time:

"Walk on, troglodytes!"

"Be quiet, barbarians!"

"Pay up, anthropophagi!"

"Do not complain, Scythians, and do not open your eyes, you murdering Polyphemuses, you butchering lions!"

And other names like these, with which they tormented the ears of the wretched master and man. Sancho went along saying to himself:

"Us, turtle-doves? Us, barbers, or pot-scourers? Us, little dogs that they call 'sic 'em, sic 'em' to? These names do not please me at all: this heap is being winnowed in a bad wind; all the trouble comes on us at once, as the beatings do to the dog — and I only hope what this most unfortunate adventure threatens stops at that!"

Don Quixote went along dumbfounded, unable, for all the reasonings he made, to hit on what those names full of abuse might be that they were putting on them, out of which he gathered plainly that they were to expect no good and to fear a great deal of harm. At this, almost an hour into the night, they came to a castle which Don Quixote knew very well to be the duke's, where they had been not long before.

"God bless me!" he said as soon as he recognised the place. "And what will this be? Why, in this house everything is courtesy and good civility; but for the conquered, good turns into bad and bad into worse."

They came into the chief courtyard of the castle and saw it fitted out and arranged in a way that increased their astonishment and doubled their fear, as will be seen in the following chapter.
