Chapter 69: Of the Rarest and Newest Event That Befell Don Quixote in the Whole Course of This Great History

The men on horseback dismounted; and, along with those on foot, taking Sancho and Don Quixote up bodily and in a rush, they carried them into the courtyard, round which nearly a hundred torches were burning in their sconces, and along the galleries of the courtyard more than five hundred lamps; so that, in spite of the night, which showed itself rather dark, the lack of daylight was not noticed.

In the middle of the courtyard rose a catafalque some two yards from the ground, covered all over with an enormous canopy of black velvet, round which, on its steps, white wax candles were burning on more than a hundred silver candlesticks. On top of this catafalque was displayed the dead body of a maiden so beautiful that her beauty made death itself look beautiful. She had her head on a brocade cushion, crowned with a garland woven of various sweet-smelling flowers, her hands crossed on her breast and, between them, a branch of yellow, conquering palm.

At one side of the courtyard a stage was set up, and on it, seated in two chairs, two personages who, by having crowns on their heads and sceptres in their hands, gave signs of being some kings, either real or pretended. At the side of this stage, which was reached by some steps, were two other chairs, on which the men who had brought the prisoners set Don Quixote and Sancho — all this in silence and giving the two of them to understand by signs that they should be silent too. But without being signed to, they were silent themselves, because astonishment at what they were looking at had their tongues tied.

At this there came up onto the stage, with a great retinue, two chief personages, whom Don Quixote at once recognised to be the duke and duchess, his hosts, and who sat down in two very rich chairs next to the two who looked like kings. Who would not have been astonished at this, with the addition that Don Quixote recognised that the dead body on the catafalque was that of the beautiful Altisidora?

As the duke and duchess came up onto the stage, Don Quixote and Sancho got to their feet and made them a deep bow, and the duke and duchess did the same, inclining their heads a little.

At this an officer came out from the side and, coming up to Sancho, threw over him a gown of black buckram, all painted with flames of fire; and, taking off his cap, put on his head a mitre like those the Holy Office puts on penitents; and he told him in his ear not to unstitch his lips, because they would clap a gag on him or take his life.

Sancho looked himself up and down; he saw himself burning in flames; but, as they did not burn him, he did not value them at two farthings. He took off the mitre, saw it painted with devils, and put it back on, saying to himself:

"Well and good — the flames do not burn me and the devils do not carry me off."

Don Quixote was looking at him too; and, although fear had his senses in suspense, he could not help laughing to see Sancho's figure.

At this there began to come, apparently from under the catafalque, a soft and agreeable sound of flutes which, not being interrupted by any human voice — because in that place silence itself kept silence to itself — showed itself gentle and loving. Then there suddenly showed himself, next to the pillow of the apparent corpse, a beautiful young man dressed in the Roman fashion who, to the sound of a harp that he played himself, sang in a most sweet and clear voice these two stanzas:

	While Altisidora comes back to herself,
	dead through Don Quixote's cruelty,
	and while in this enchanted court
	the ladies dress themselves in haircloth,
	and while my lady clothes her duennas
	in baize and in serge,
	I shall sing her beauty and her misfortune
	with a better quill than the singer of Thrace.
	And I do not think that this office falls to me
	in life alone;
	but, with my tongue dead and cold in my mouth,
	I mean to move my voice as is your due.
	My soul, freed from its narrow rock
	and carried over the Stygian lake,
	shall go on celebrating you, and that sound
	shall make the waters of oblivion stand still.

"No more," said one of the two who looked like kings at this point; "no more, divine singer; for it would be to go on for ever to set out for us now the death and the graces of the peerless Altisidora — not dead, as the ignorant world thinks, but alive on the tongues of Fame and in the penance that Sancho Panza, who is here present, must go through to bring her back to the light she has lost.

"And so, O Rhadamanthus, who judge with me in the gloomy caverns of Dis: since you know everything that is settled in the inscrutable fates about this maiden's coming back to herself, say it and declare it at once, so that the good we hope for from her fresh return may not be put off for us."

Minos, judge and companion of Rhadamanthus, had hardly said this when Rhadamanthus, getting to his feet, said:

"Come, you officers of this house, high and low, great and small, come one after another and seal Sancho's face with twenty-four chucks under the chin, and twelve pinches and six pinprickings on his arms and his back; for in this ceremony lies Altisidora's health!"

Hearing which, Sancho Panza broke his silence and said:

"I swear I shall let my face be sealed or my cheeks be handled about as soon as I shall turn Turk! Body of me! What has handling my face got to do with this maiden's resurrection? The old woman got a taste for the greens. They enchant Dulcinea and they whip me so that she may be disenchanted; Altisidora dies of ills God chose to give her, and to bring her back to life they must give me twenty-four chucks under the chin and riddle my body with pinpricks and bruise my arms with pinches. Try those jokes on your brother-in-law, for I am an old dog and there is no 'here, boy' with me!"

"You shall die!" said Rhadamanthus in a loud voice. "Soften, you tiger; humble yourself, proud Nimrod; and suffer and be quiet, since they are not asking you for impossibilities. And do not go into establishing the difficulties of this business: chucked you must be, riddled you must find yourself, pinched you must groan. Come, I say, officers, carry out my order; if not, by the faith of an honest man, you shall see what you were born for!"

At this there appeared to be coming across the courtyard some six duennas in procession, one after another, four of them with spectacles, and all of them with their right hands raised high, with four fingers of wrist showing to make their hands look longer, as is now the fashion. Sancho had no sooner seen them than, bellowing like a bull, he said:

"I might well let myself be handled by everybody in the world; but to consent to being touched by duennas — that, no! Let them claw my face as they did my master's in this same castle; let them run my body through with the points of sharpened daggers; let them grip my arms with red-hot pincers, and I shall bear it patiently, or serve these gentlefolk; but that duennas should touch me I shall not consent to, if the devil carries me off for it."

Don Quixote broke his silence too, saying to Sancho:

"Have patience, my son, and give these lords and ladies pleasure, and give many thanks to heaven for having put such a virtue in your person that by the martyrdom of it you disenchant the enchanted and raise the dead."

The duennas were close to Sancho by now, when he, softened and more persuaded, settling himself well in his chair, gave his face and his beard to the first of them, who gave him a chuck under the chin very well sealed, and then a great curtsey.

"Less courtesy, and fewer face-washes, madam duenna," said Sancho; "for by God your hands smell of vinegar-water!"

Finally all the duennas sealed him, and a great many other people of the house pinched him; but what he could not put up with was the pricking of the pins. And so he got up out of his chair, apparently vexed, and, seizing a lighted torch that was next to him, went at the duennas and at all his executioners, saying:

"Away, you infernal ministers, for I am not made of bronze, that I should not feel such extraordinary martyrdoms!"

At this Altisidora, who must have been tired from having lain so long on her back, turned on her side; seeing which, the bystanders almost all said with one voice:

"Altisidora is alive! Altisidora lives!"

Rhadamanthus ordered Sancho to lay aside his anger, since the purpose they were after had been achieved.

As soon as Don Quixote saw Altisidora stir, he went and knelt down in front of Sancho, saying to him:

"Now is the time, son of my entrails — not merely my squire — for you to give yourself some of the lashes you are bound to give for Dulcinea's disenchantment. Now, I say, is the time when your virtue is ripened, and effectual for working the good that is hoped from you."

To which Sancho answered:

"This seems to me trick on top of trick, and not honey on pancakes. It would be a fine thing if after pinches and chucks and pinpricks the lashes came now. They have nothing else to do but take a great stone and tie it round my neck and pitch me into a well — which would not grieve me much, if to cure other people's ills I have to be the cow at the wedding. Leave me alone; if not, by God I shall throw it all up and let everything go at thirteen even if it does not sell."

By this time Altisidora had sat up on the catafalque, and at the same instant the shawms sounded, joined by the flutes and by everybody's voices, all calling out:

"Long live Altisidora! Altisidora lives!"

The duke and duchess and the kings Minos and Rhadamanthus got up, and all of them together with Don Quixote and Sancho went to receive Altisidora and to bring her down from the catafalque; and she, playing the woman recovering from a faint, bowed to the duke and duchess and to the kings, and, looking sideways at Don Quixote, said to him:

"God forgive you, unloving knight, for through your cruelty I have been in the other world, as it seemed to me, for more than a thousand years. And you, O most compassionate squire the globe contains, I thank for the life I have. From today on, Sancho my friend, dispose of six shifts of mine that I make over to you, to make yourself six shirts of them; and if they are not all sound, at least they are all clean."

Sancho kissed her hands for it, with the mitre in his hand and his knees on the ground. The duke ordered them to take it off him and give him back his cap and put on his coat and take off the gown of flames. Sancho begged the duke to let him keep the gown and the mitre, for he wanted to take them back to his own country as a sign and a memorial of that never-before-seen business. The duchess answered that they would let him keep them, since he knew what a great friend of his she was. The duke ordered the courtyard cleared, and that everybody should withdraw to their rooms, and that Don Quixote and Sancho should be taken to the ones they already knew.
