Chapter 70: Which Follows the Sixty-Ninth and Deals with Matters Not to Be Left Out for the Clearness of This History

Sancho slept that night on a truckle bed in Don Quixote's own room — a thing he would have excused himself from if he could, because he knew very well that his master would not let him sleep for questions and answers, and he was in no condition to talk much, since the pains of his past martyrdoms were still with him and did not leave his tongue free; and it would have suited him better to sleep alone in a hut than in that rich chamber in company.

His fear turned out so true and his suspicion so certain that his master had hardly got into bed when he said:

"What do you think, Sancho, of tonight's business? Great and mighty is the force of unloving scorn, since with your own eyes you have seen Altisidora dead — not by any arrows, or by any sword, or by any other warlike instrument, or by deadly poisons, but by the thought of the severity and the scorn with which I have always treated her."

"She might have died in her own good time as much and how she liked," answered Sancho, "and left me at home; for I never made her fall in love or scorned her in my life. I do not know and cannot think how the health of Altisidora, a maiden more whimsical than judicious, has anything to do — as I have said before — with the martyrdoms of Sancho Panza. Now indeed I come to know clearly and distinctly that there are enchanters and enchantments in the world, from whom may God deliver me, since I cannot deliver myself. And with all this, I beg your worship to let me sleep and not to ask me any more, unless you want me to throw myself out of a window."

"Sleep, Sancho my friend," answered Don Quixote, "if the pinpricks and the pinches you have received and the chucks under the chin that have been given you leave you room for it."

"No pain," replied Sancho, "came up to the affront of the chucks — for no other reason than their having been given me by duennas, confound them. And I beg your worship again to let me sleep, because sleep is a relief from the miseries of those who suffer them awake."

"Be it so," said Don Quixote, "and God be with you."

The two of them fell asleep; and in this time Cide Hamete, the author of this great history, chose to write and give an account of what moved the duke and duchess to raise the structure of the machinery just described.

And he says that the bachelor Sansón Carrasco had not forgotten how the Knight of the Mirrors was conquered and knocked down by Don Quixote, which conquest and fall rubbed out and undid all his designs; and he wanted to try his hand again, hoping for a better outcome than the last. And so, learning from the page who took the letter and present to Teresa Panza, Sancho's wife, where Don Quixote was, he looked for fresh arms and a horse and put the white moon on his shield, carrying it all on a mule led by a farm labourer, and not by Tomé Cecial his old squire, so that he should not be recognised by Sancho or by Don Quixote.

He came, then, to the duke's castle, and the duke told him the road and the course Don Quixote was taking, meaning to be present at the jousts at Saragossa. He told him likewise the tricks he had played on him with the contrivance of Dulcinea's disenchantment, which was to be at the expense of Sancho's backside. In short, he gave him an account of the trick Sancho had played on his master, giving him to understand that Dulcinea was enchanted and transformed into a country girl, and how the duchess his wife had given Sancho to understand that he was the one who was deceived, because Dulcinea really was enchanted; at which the bachelor laughed and marvelled not a little, considering Sancho's sharpness and simplicity as much as the extreme of Don Quixote's madness.

The duke asked him that if he found him, and whether he conquered him or not, he should come back that way and give him an account of what happened. The bachelor did so; he set off in search of him; he did not find him at Saragossa; he went on and there happened to him what has already been related.

He came back by the duke's castle and told him it all, along with the conditions of the battle, and that Don Quixote was already on his way back to keep, like a good knight errant, his word to withdraw to his village for a year — in which time it might be, said the bachelor, that he would be cured of his madness; for this was the intention that had moved him to make those transformations, since it was a thing to be pitied that a gentleman of such good understanding as Don Quixote should be mad. With this he took his leave of the duke and went back to his village, waiting there for Don Quixote, who was coming after him.

From this the duke took the occasion for playing him that trick — so great was the pleasure he took in Sancho's and Don Quixote's doings. And, having the roads near and far from the castle watched on every side by which he imagined Don Quixote might come back, with a great many of his servants on foot and on horseback, so that by force or by good will they might bring him to the castle if they found him. They did find him and sent word to the duke, who, being already prepared with everything he had to do, as soon as he had news of his coming ordered the torches and the lamps of the courtyard to be lit and Altisidora laid on the catafalque, with all the apparatus that has been told, so much to the life and so well done that between the truth and it there was very little difference.

And Cide Hamete says more: that he holds for himself that the jokers are as mad as the joked-with, and that the duke and duchess were not two fingers away from looking like fools, since they took such pains to make fools of two fools.

Of whom, one sleeping a loose sleep and the other lying awake with unleashed thoughts, the day and the wish to get up caught both — for idle feather beds, whether beaten or victorious, never gave Don Quixote any pleasure.

Altisidora — in Don Quixote's opinion, brought back from death to life — following her master and mistress's humour, crowned with the same garland she had worn on the catafalque and dressed in a tunic of white taffeta sown with golden flowers, her hair loose over her shoulders, leaning on a staff of black and very fine ebony, came into Don Quixote's room. At whose presence he, troubled and confused, shrank down and covered himself almost entirely with the sheets and coverlets of the bed, his tongue dumb, unable to manage any courtesy to her.

Altisidora sat down in a chair next to his pillow, and, after giving a great sigh, said to him in a tender and weakened voice:

"When women of quality and modest maidens trample on their honour and give their tongues leave to break through every obstacle, publicly giving notice of the secrets their hearts hold, they are in a narrow strait. I, Señor Don Quixote of La Mancha, am one of these — pressed, conquered and in love; but for all that, patient and modest, so much so that, by being so much so, my soul burst through my silence and I lost my life. Two days ago, with the thought of the severity with which you have treated me,

	O harder than marble to my complaints,
	you stony-hearted knight! —

I have been dead, or at least judged so by those who have seen me; and if it had not been that Love, taking pity on me, laid up my remedy in the martyrdoms of this good squire, I should have stayed over there in the other world."

"Love could very well," said Sancho, "have laid it up in my donkey's, and I should have been grateful to him for it. But tell me, madam — and so may heaven fit you out with a softer lover than my master — what did you see in the other world? What is there in hell? For whoever dies in despair must of necessity have that for his lodging."

"To tell you the truth," answered Altisidora, "I cannot have died altogether, since I did not go into hell; for if I had gone in there, once I was in I could not have come out again even if I had wanted to. The truth is that I got to the gate, where about a dozen devils were playing at tennis, all of them in hose and doublet, with falling bands trimmed with Flemish lace edging and with cuffs of the same, with four fingers of arm showing so that their hands should look longer, and in them they had rackets of fire.

"And what astonished me most was that instead of balls they were using books, apparently full of wind and flock — a marvellous and new thing. But this did not astonish me as much as seeing that, whereas it is natural for gamblers that the winners are glad and the losers sad, there in that game they were all growling, all snarling and all cursing one another."

"That is no wonder," answered Sancho, "because devils, whether they play or do not play, can never be contented, whether they win or do not win."

"That must be so," answered Altisidora; "but there is another thing that also astonishes me — I mean that astonished me then — and it was that at the first volley there was not a ball left standing or fit to be used a second time. And so they went through new books and old ones one after another, which was a marvel. To one of them, new and shining and well bound, they gave such a stroke that they knocked its guts out and scattered its leaves. One devil said to another: 'Look what book that is.' And the devil answered him: 'This is the Second Part of the History of Don Quixote of La Mancha — not composed by Cide Hamete, its first author, but by an Aragonese who says he is a native of Tordesillas.' 'Take it away from there,' answered the other devil, 'and put it in the depths of hell: let my eyes never see it again.' 'Is it as bad as that?' answered the other. 'So bad,' replied the first, 'that if I set myself on purpose to make it worse, I should not manage it.'

"They went on with their game, batting other books about; and I, from having heard the name of Don Quixote, whom I love and am so fond of, took care to keep this vision in my memory."

"A vision it must undoubtedly have been," said Don Quixote, "because there is no other me in the world; and that history goes about here from hand to hand, but it stops in nobody's, because everybody gives it a kick. I have not been upset at hearing that I walk like a fanciful body through the darkness of the abyss, or through the brightness of the earth, because I am not the man that history deals with. If it is good, faithful and true, it will have centuries of life; but if it is bad, from its birth to its grave the road will not be very long."

Altisidora was going to go on complaining of Don Quixote when Don Quixote said to her:

"Many times I have told you, madam, that it grieves me that you should have placed your thoughts on me, since from mine they can sooner be thanked than remedied. I was born to be Dulcinea of El Toboso's, and the fates, if there are any, dedicated me to her; and to think that any other beauty is to take the place she has in my soul is to think the impossible. This is disillusionment enough for you to withdraw within the limits of your modesty, since nobody can be bound to the impossible."

Hearing which, Altisidora, showing herself angry and upset, said to him:

"By the Lord, Sir Codfish, soul of a mortar, date-stone, more stubborn and hard than a peasant who has been begged and has his own way — if I come at you, I shall tear your eyes out! Do you think, by any chance, Sir Beaten and Sir Cudgelled, that I died for you? Everything you have seen tonight has been pretended; for I am not the woman to let a black speck of a fingernail ache for camels of that sort, let alone to die."

"That I believe very well," said Sancho; "for this business of lovers dying is a laughing matter: they may well say it, but as for doing it — let Judas believe it."

While they were in this talk, the musician, singer and poet came in who had sung the two stanzas already given; and, making Don Quixote a great bow, he said:

"Let your worship, sir knight, count me and hold me in the number of your greatest servants, for it is many days now that I have been very fond of you, both for your fame and for your exploits."

Don Quixote answered him:

"Let your worship tell me who you are, so that my courtesy may answer to your deserts."

The young man answered that he was the musician and panegyrist of the night before.

"Certainly," replied Don Quixote, "your worship has an outstanding voice; but what you sang did not seem to me very much to the point — for what have the stanzas of Garcilaso to do with this lady's death?"

"Let your worship not marvel at that," answered the musician; "for among the unshorn poets of our age it is now the custom for everybody to write as he likes and steal from whoever he likes, whether or not it comes to the point of what he means; and by now there is no foolishness they sing or write that is not put down to poetic licence."

Don Quixote would have liked to answer, but he was prevented by the duke and duchess, who came in to see him; among whom there passed a long and pleasant talk, in which Sancho said so many droll and so many malicious things that he left the duke and duchess astonished afresh, both at his simplicity and at his sharpness.

Don Quixote begged them to give him leave to set off that same day, since for beaten knights like himself it was more fitting to live in a pigsty than in royal palaces. They gave it him very willingly, and the duchess asked him whether Altisidora was still in his good graces. He answered her:

"My lady, let Your Ladyship know that all this maiden's trouble comes from idleness, whose remedy is decent and continual occupation. She has told me here that they use lace in hell; and, since she must know how to make it, let her not let it out of her hands, for while she is busy working the bobbins, the image or images of what she loves will not be working in her imagination. And this is the truth, and this is my opinion and this is my advice."

"And mine," added Sancho; "for I have never in my life seen a lacemaker die of love; girls who are busy set their thoughts more on finishing their tasks than on thinking about their loves. I speak from my own case; for while I am digging I do not remember my missus — I mean my Teresa Panza, whom I love more than the lashes of my eyes."

"You speak very well, Sancho," said the duchess, "and I shall see that my Altisidora busies herself from now on with some white work, which she knows how to do outstandingly well."

"There is no need, my lady," answered Altisidora, "to use that remedy, since the thought of the cruelties this stray villain has used on me will rub him out of my memory without any other contrivance. And, with your greatness's leave, I want to get away from here, so as not to see before my eyes any longer his sorrowful countenance — no, his ugly and abominable face."

"That seems to me," said the duke, "like what is generally said:

	For the man who speaks abuse
	is not far off from forgiving."

Altisidora made a show of drying her tears with a handkerchief, and, curtseying to her master and mistress, went out of the room.

"I wish you," said Sancho, "poor maiden — I wish you, I say, bad luck, since you have had to do with a soul of esparto grass and a heart of oak. Upon my word, if you had had to do with me, another cock would have crowed for you!"

The talk came to an end, Don Quixote dressed, dined with the duke and duchess, and set off that afternoon.
