Chapter 71: Of What Happened to Don Quixote with His Squire Sancho on the Way to Their Village

The beaten and worn-out Don Quixote went along extremely thoughtful on the one hand and very glad on the other. His sadness was caused by his defeat, and his gladness by considering the virtue that was in Sancho, as he had shown it in Altisidora's resurrection — although with some scruple he persuaded himself that the enamoured maiden had really been dead.

Sancho went along not at all glad, because it saddened him to see that Altisidora had not kept her word about giving him the shifts; and, coming and going over this, he said to his master:

"Truly, sir, I am the unluckiest doctor to be found in the world, in which there are physicians who, after killing the patient they are treating, want to be paid for their labour — which is nothing but signing a little slip for some medicines that they do not make themselves but the apothecary makes, and there is the trick done. And to me, whose other people's health costs me drops of blood, chucks under the chin, pinches, pinpricks and lashes, they do not give a farthing.

"Well, I swear that if they bring me another patient into my hands, they will have to grease mine before I cure him; for the abbot dines on what he sings, and I do not want to believe that heaven has given me the virtue I have so that I should pass it on to other people for nothing."

"You are right, Sancho my friend," answered Don Quixote, "and Altisidora has done very badly in not giving you the promised shifts. And, granting that your virtue is gratis data — since it has cost you no study — it is more than study to receive martyrdoms in your own person. For myself I can tell you that if you wanted payment for the lashes of Dulcinea's disenchantment, I should have given it you already and a good one; but I do not know whether payment will go well with the cure, and I should not like the reward to hinder the medicine. For all that, it seems to me that nothing will be lost by trying it. Look, Sancho, what you want, and whip yourself at once, and pay yourself in cash and with your own hand, since you have money of mine."

At these offers Sancho opened his eyes and his ears a hand's breadth, and in his heart consented to whip himself willingly; and he said to his master:

"Well now, sir, I am willing to get myself ready to give your worship the pleasure you want, with profit to myself; for the love of my children and my wife makes me show myself grasping. Tell me, your worship: how much will you give me for every lash I give myself?"

"If I had to pay you, Sancho," answered Don Quixote, "according to what the greatness and the quality of this remedy deserves, the treasure of Venice and the mines of Potosí would be too little to pay you. Take the measure of what you have of mine, and set the price on each lash."

"They are," answered Sancho, "three thousand three hundred and so many; of them I have given myself about five: the rest are still to come. Let these five come in among the 'so many', and let us come to the three thousand three hundred — which at a quarter-real each, and I shall not take less if the whole world ordered me to, come to three thousand three hundred quarter-reals; which is, for the three thousand, one thousand five hundred half-reals, making seven hundred and fifty reals; and the three hundred make one hundred and fifty half-reals, which come to seventy-five reals; which, added to the seven hundred and fifty, make eight hundred and twenty-five reals in all. These I shall deduct from what I have of your worship's, and I shall go into my house rich and contented, though well whipped; because you do not catch trout... and I say no more."

"O blessed Sancho! O lovable Sancho!" answered Don Quixote. "How bound Dulcinea and I shall be to serve you all the days heaven gives us of life! If she comes back to the being she has lost — as it is not possible but that she will — her misfortune will have been good fortune, and my defeat a most happy triumph. And see, Sancho, when you want to begin the discipline; for I shall add a hundred reals so that you may cut it short."

"When?" replied Sancho. "Tonight, without fail. Let your worship arrange for us to have it out in the fields, under the open sky, and I shall open up my flesh."

Night came, waited for by Don Quixote with the greatest anxiety in the world, since it seemed to him that the wheels of Apollo's chariot had broken and that the day was drawing itself out longer than usual — exactly as happens to lovers, who never make the reckoning of their desires come out.

Finally they went in among some pleasant trees that stood a little way off the road, where, leaving Rocinante's saddle and the grey's pack-saddle empty, they stretched themselves out on the green grass and supped from Sancho's store. And he, making a mighty and flexible whip out of the grey's halter and headstall, withdrew some twenty paces from his master among some beeches. Don Quixote, who saw him go with boldness and spirit, said to him:

"Look, my friend, do not smash yourself to pieces; give room for one lash to wait for another; do not try to hurry so much in the race that in the middle of it your breath fails you. I mean, do not lay it on so hard that your life fails you before you reach the desired number. And, so that you may not lose by a card too many or too few, I shall stand aside counting on this rosary of mine the lashes you give yourself. May heaven favour you as your good intention deserves."

"A good payer does not mind pledges," answered Sancho. "I mean to lay it on in such a way that, without killing me, it hurts; for in this the substance of this miracle must consist."

He at once stripped himself from the waist up and, snatching up the cord, began to lay on, and Don Quixote began to count the lashes.

Sancho would have given himself six or eight when the joke began to seem to him a heavy one and the price of it very cheap; and, stopping a little, he told his master that he cried off, because each of those lashes deserved to be paid at half a real and not at a quarter.

"Go on, Sancho my friend, and do not lose heart," Don Quixote said to him, "for I double the stake on the price."

"In that case," said Sancho, "into the hand of God, and let lashes rain!"

But the sly fellow left off laying them on his back and laid them on the trees, with a sigh from time to time such that it seemed as if with every one of them his soul was being torn out. Don Quixote's soul being tender and afraid that his life would come to an end and that he would not get his wish through Sancho's imprudence, he said to him:

"On your life, my friend, let this business rest at this point; for this medicine seems to me a very harsh one, and it will be as well to give time to time; for Zamora was not won in an hour. More than a thousand lashes, if I have not counted wrong, you have given yourself: they are enough for now; for the ass, to speak coarsely, bears the load but not the overload."

"No, no, sir," answered Sancho, "it shall not be said of me: 'money paid, arms broken'. Let your worship stand aside a little more and let me give myself another thousand lashes at least; for at two goes like this we shall have finished this instalment, and there will even be cloth to spare."

"Since you find yourself in such a good disposition," said Don Quixote, "may heaven help you; lay on, and I shall stand aside."

Sancho went back to his task with such boldness that he had already taken the bark off a good many trees: such was the severity with which he whipped himself. And, raising his voice once and giving a monstrous lash to a beech, he said:

"Here shall you die, Samson, and all who are with him!"

Don Quixote ran up at once at the sound of the pained voice and of the blow of that harsh lash; and, taking hold of the twisted halter that served Sancho for a scourge, he said to him:

"Fate forbid, Sancho my friend, that for my pleasure you should lose your life, which is to serve for keeping your wife and your children. Let Dulcinea wait for a better conjunction, and I shall hold myself within the limits of a hope close at hand and wait for you to gather fresh strength, so that this business may be concluded to everybody's satisfaction."

"Since your worship wants it so, my dear sir," answered Sancho, "so be it and welcome; and throw your cloak over these shoulders of mine, for I am sweating and I should not like to catch a chill — for new penitents run that risk."

Don Quixote did so, and, staying in his shirt, he wrapped up Sancho, who slept until the sun woke him; and then they went on with their road, which they brought to an end for the time being at a place three leagues from there.

They dismounted at an inn, which Don Quixote recognised for such, and not for a castle with a deep moat, towers, portcullises and a drawbridge; for since he had been beaten he reasoned more soundly in everything, as will now be told. They lodged him in a low room, whose gilt leather hangings were some old painted serges, as they use in the villages. On one of them there was painted by a very bad hand the rape of Helen, when the bold guest carried her off from Menelaus, and on another was the history of Dido and Aeneas — she on a high tower, as though she were making signals with half a sheet to the fugitive guest, who was fleeing over the sea in a frigate or brigantine.

He noticed in the two stories that Helen did not go very unwillingly, because she was laughing on the sly and slyly; but the beautiful Dido showed herself shedding tears the size of walnuts out of her eyes. Which Don Quixote seeing, he said:

"These two ladies were extremely unfortunate in not having been born in this age, and I above all unfortunate in not having been born in theirs. If I had met these gentlemen, Troy would not have been burnt nor Carthage destroyed, since merely by my killing Paris so many misfortunes would have been avoided."

"I would wager," said Sancho, "that before long there will not be a tavern or an inn or a lodging house or a barber's shop where the history of our exploits is not painted up. But I should like it painted by the hands of a better painter than the one who painted these."

"You are right, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "because this painter is like Orbaneja, a painter who lived at Úbeda; who, when they asked him what he was painting, would answer: 'Whatever comes out.' And if by any chance he painted a cock, he would write under it, 'This is a cock,' so that people should not think it was a fox. In this way, it seems to me, Sancho, must be the painter or the writer — for it is all one — who brought out into the light the history of this new Don Quixote that has appeared: he painted or wrote whatever came out.

"Or else he must have been like a poet who went about the court in years past called Mauleón, who answered on the spot whatever he was asked; and, somebody asking him what Deum de Deo meant, he answered: 'Let it strike where it may' — for that is what the Latin sounds like in our Castilian. But, leaving this aside, tell me whether you mean, Sancho, to give yourself another round tonight, and whether you want it to be under a roof or under the open sky."

"By God, sir," answered Sancho, "for what I mean to give myself, it is all one to me indoors or in the fields; but for all that, I should like it to be among trees, for they seem to keep me company and to help me carry my labour marvellously."

"Then it must not be so, Sancho my friend," answered Don Quixote; "for so that you may gather your strength, we shall keep it for our village, where we shall arrive at the latest the day after tomorrow."

Sancho answered that he should do as he pleased, but that he himself would like to finish that business quickly in hot blood and while the mill was freshly dressed, because in delay there is often danger; and pray to God and keep hammering; and one 'here you are' is worth more than two 'I'll give you'; and the bird in the hand is worth more than the vulture on the wing.

"No more proverbs, Sancho, for the one God's sake," said Don Quixote, "for it seems that you are going back to your sicut erat. Speak plainly, smoothly, without tangles, as I have told you many times, and you will see how it is worth a hundredfold to you."

"I do not know what bad luck this is of mine," answered Sancho, "that I cannot say a sensible thing without a proverb, or a proverb that does not seem to me a sensible thing; but I shall mend my ways, if I can."

And with this their talk stopped for the time being.
