Chapter 72: Of How Don Quixote and Sancho Reached Their Village

Don Quixote and Sancho spent that whole day in that village and that inn, waiting for the night: the one to finish the round of his discipline out in the open country, and the other to see the end of it, in which the end of his desire lay.

At this there came to the inn a traveller on horseback with three or four servants, one of whom said to the man who seemed to be their master:

"Here your worship, Señor Don Álvaro Tarfe, may spend today's siesta: the lodging looks clean and cool."

Hearing this, Don Quixote said to Sancho:

"Look, Sancho: when I leafed through that book of the second part of my history, it seems to me that in passing I came across this name of Don Álvaro Tarfe there."

"It may very well be," answered Sancho. "Let us let him dismount, and afterwards we shall ask him."

The gentleman dismounted, and, opposite Don Quixote's room, the hostess gave him a low room hung with other painted serges like those in Don Quixote's chamber. The newly arrived gentleman put on summer clothes; and, coming out into the porch of the inn, which was spacious and cool, along which Don Quixote was walking, he asked him:

"Where away are you travelling, sir gentleman?"

And Don Quixote answered him:

"To a village near here that I come from. And your worship, where are you travelling?"

"I, sir," answered the gentleman, "am going to Granada, which is my own country."

"And a good country!" replied Don Quixote. "But tell me, your worship, out of courtesy, your name; for it seems to me it will matter to me to know it more than I can readily say."

"My name is Don Álvaro Tarfe," answered the guest.

To which Don Quixote replied:

"Without any doubt I think your worship must be that Don Álvaro Tarfe who goes about in print in the Second Part of the History of Don Quixote of La Mancha, lately printed and given to the light of the world by a modern author."

"The very man," answered the gentleman; "and that Don Quixote, the chief subject of that history, was a very great friend of mine, and I was the man who took him out of his own country — or at least moved him to come to some jousts that were being held at Saragossa, where I was going. And truly and truly I did him a great many friendly services, and I kept the hangman from combing his shoulders for him, for being excessively bold."

"And tell me, your worship, Señor Don Álvaro: do I look at all like that Don Quixote your worship speaks of?"

"Certainly not," answered the guest: "in no way at all."

"And that Don Quixote," said ours, "did he have with him a squire called Sancho Panza?"

"He did," answered Don Álvaro; "and, although he had a name for being very amusing, I never heard him say a droll thing that had any drollery in it."

"That I believe very well," said Sancho at this, "because saying droll things is not for everybody; and that Sancho your worship speaks of, sir gentleman, must be some very great rogue, dull and a thief into the bargain. For the true Sancho Panza is me, and I have more drolleries than raindrops; and if you doubt it, let your worship make the experiment and go about after me for at least a year, and you will see that they fall out of me at every step, and such and so many that, without my knowing most of the time what I am saying, I make everybody who hears me laugh.

"And the true Don Quixote of La Mancha — the famous, the valiant and the judicious, the lover, the undoer of wrongs, the guardian of wards and orphans, the protection of widows, the slayer of maidens, the man who has for his one lady the peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso — is this gentleman here present, who is my master. Any other Don Quixote and any other Sancho Panza is a joke and a thing of dreams."

"By God, I believe it!" answered Don Álvaro; "because you have said more droll things, my friend, in four sentences you have spoken than the other Sancho Panza in all I ever heard him say, and that was a great deal. He had more of the great eater about him than of the good talker, and more of the fool than of the wit; and I hold it for certain that the enchanters who persecute Don Quixote the good have chosen to persecute me with Don Quixote the bad.

"But I do not know what to say; for I would dare to swear that I left him shut up in the madhouse at Toledo to be cured — and now here another Don Quixote turns up, though a very different one from mine."

"I," said Don Quixote, "do not know whether I am the good one; but I can say that I am not the bad one. As proof of which I want your worship, my lord Don Álvaro Tarfe, to know that in all the days of my life I have never been in Saragossa; on the contrary, because I was told that this fanciful Don Quixote had been present at the jousts of that city, I chose not to go into it, so as to bring out his lie in the face of the world.

"And so I passed straight on to Barcelona: the storehouse of courtesy, the shelter of strangers, the hospital of the poor, the country of the valiant, the avenger of the injured, the pleasant correspondence of firm friendships, and, in its situation and in its beauty, unique. And, although the things that have happened to me in it are not much to my pleasure but much to my grief, I carry them without grief simply for having seen the place.

"Finally, Señor Don Álvaro Tarfe, I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, the very man fame speaks of, and not that unfortunate creature who has tried to usurp my name and honour himself with my thoughts. I beg your worship, by what you owe to being a gentleman, to be so good as to make a declaration before the magistrate of this place that your worship has never in all the days of your life seen me until now, and that I am not the Don Quixote printed in the second part, and that this Sancho Panza my squire is not the one your worship knew."

"I shall do that very willingly," answered Don Álvaro, "although it causes astonishment to see two Don Quixotes and two Sanchos at one and the same time, as alike in their names as they are different in their actions; and I say again and affirm that I have not seen what I have seen, and that what has happened to me has not happened."

"Without a doubt," said Sancho, "your worship must be enchanted, like my lady Dulcinea of El Toboso; and would to heaven that your worship's disenchantment lay in giving me another three thousand and so many lashes like the ones I am giving myself for her, for I would give them to myself without any interest at all."

"I do not understand this about lashes," said Don Álvaro.

And Sancho answered him that it was long to tell, but that he would tell him if by any chance they were going the same road.

At this the dinner hour came round; Don Quixote and Don Álvaro dined together. The magistrate of the village happened to come into the inn with a clerk, before which magistrate Don Quixote put in a petition that it was to his right's advantage that Don Álvaro Tarfe, that gentleman who was there present, should declare before his worship that he did not know Don Quixote of La Mancha, who was likewise there present, and that he was not the one who went about in print in a history entitled The Second Part of Don Quixote of La Mancha, composed by one Avellaneda, a native of Tordesillas.

Finally the magistrate gave his ruling in due form; the declaration was made with all the force that ought to be used in such cases; with which Don Quixote and Sancho were left very glad, as though such a declaration mattered a great deal to them and their deeds and their words did not plainly show the difference between the two Don Quixotes and the two Sanchos.

A great many courtesies and offers of service passed between Don Álvaro and Don Quixote, in which the great Manchegan showed his good sense, so that he undeceived Don Álvaro Tarfe of the error he was in; who gave himself to understand that he must be enchanted, since he had touched with his hand two such opposite Don Quixotes.

Evening came, they set out from that place, and about half a league on two different roads parted, one leading to Don Quixote's village and the other the one Don Álvaro was to take. In this short space Don Quixote told him the misfortune of his defeat and Dulcinea's enchantment and its remedy — all of which put Don Álvaro into fresh astonishment; and, embracing Don Quixote and Sancho, he went his road and Don Quixote his.

That night he spent among some more trees, so as to give Sancho room to carry out his penance, which he carried out in the same way as the night before, at the expense of the beeches' bark far more than of his own shoulders — which he guarded so well that the lashes could not have knocked a fly off them if there had been one on top.

The deceived Don Quixote did not lose a single stroke of the count, and found that with those of the night before they came to three thousand and twenty-nine. It seems that the sun had got up early to see the sacrifice, by whose light they went on with their road, the two of them talking about Don Álvaro's mistake and how well advised it had been to take his declaration before the law, and so authentically.

That day and that night they travelled without anything happening to them worth telling, except that in the night Sancho finished his task — at which Don Quixote was contented beyond measure; and he waited for the day, to see whether on the road he would come across his lady Dulcinea already disenchanted. And, going along his road, he did not come across a single woman without going to see whether she was Dulcinea of El Toboso, holding it for infallible that Merlin's promises could not lie.

With these thoughts and these desires they climbed up a hill from which they made out their village; which, on seeing, Sancho went down on his knees and said:

"Open your eyes, longed-for country, and see that Sancho Panza your son is coming back to you — if not very rich, then very well whipped. Open your arms and receive your son Don Quixote too, who, if he comes beaten by another man's arms, comes the conqueror of himself; which, as he has told me, is the greatest conquest that can be desired. I am bringing money, for if they gave me good lashes, I was riding well mounted."

"Leave off this foolishness," said Don Quixote, "and let us go in with the right foot to enter our village, where we shall give vent to our imaginings and to the plan we mean to carry out for the pastoral life."

With this they came down the hill and went to their village.
