Chapter 73: Of the Omens Don Quixote Had on Entering His Village, with Other Events That Adorn and Give Credit to This Great History

At the entrance of it, according to Cide Hamete, Don Quixote saw that on the threshing floors of the village two boys were quarrelling, and one said to the other:

"Do not wear yourself out, Periquillo, for you shall not see her in all the days of your life."

Don Quixote heard him and said to Sancho:

"Do you not notice, my friend, what that boy said: 'You shall not see her in all the days of your life'?"

"Well then, what does it matter," answered Sancho, "that the boy said that?"

"What?" replied Don Quixote. "Do you not see that, applying those words to my own purpose, it means that I am not to see Dulcinea any more?"

Sancho was about to answer him when he was prevented by seeing a hare come running across that field in flight, followed by a good many greyhounds and hunters; and the hare, terrified, came and took shelter and crouched down under the grey's feet. Sancho caught it with his bare hand and presented it to Don Quixote, who was saying:

"Malum signum! Malum signum! A hare flees, greyhounds follow her: Dulcinea does not appear!"

"Your worship is a strange man," said Sancho. "Let us suppose that this hare is Dulcinea of El Toboso and these greyhounds that are chasing her are the villainous enchanters who turned her into a country girl: she flees, I catch her and put her into your worship's power, and you have her in your arms and make much of her. What bad sign is this, and what ill omen can be taken from it?"

The two boys who had been quarrelling came up to see the hare, and Sancho asked one of them why they were quarrelling. And he was answered by the one who had said "you shall not see her again in all your life" that he had taken a cricket cage from the other boy and did not mean to give it back to him in all his life. Sancho took four coppers out of his pocket and gave them to the boy for the cage, and put it into Don Quixote's hands, saying:

"Here, sir, these omens are broken and undone, and they have no more to do with our affairs — as I imagine, fool though I am — than with last year's clouds. And if I do not remember wrongly, I have heard our village curate say that it is not the part of Christian or judicious people to stick at these childish things; and your worship yourself told me so a few days ago, giving me to understand that all those Christians who stuck at omens were fools. And there is no need to press the point: let us go on and go into our village."

The hunters came up, asked for their hare, and Don Quixote gave it them; they went on and, at the entrance of the village, came across the curate and the bachelor Carrasco saying their prayers in a little meadow.

And it is to be known that Sancho Panza had thrown over the grey and over the bundle of arms, to serve as a saddlecloth, the buckram gown painted with flames of fire that they had put on him at the duke's castle on the night when Altisidora came round. He had also fitted the mitre on the donkey's head, which was the newest transformation and adornment that any donkey in the world was ever seen in.

The two of them were at once recognised by the curate and the bachelor, who came to them with open arms. Don Quixote dismounted and embraced them tightly; and the boys, who are lynxes there is no escaping, made out the mitre on the donkey and came running to see him, saying to one another:

"Come along, boys, and you shall see Sancho Panza's ass finer than Mingo, and Don Quixote's beast thinner today than on the first day."

Finally, surrounded by boys and accompanied by the curate and the bachelor, they went into the village and made their way to Don Quixote's house, and found the housekeeper and his niece at the door, for the news of his coming had already reached them.

News of it had likewise reached Teresa Panza, Sancho's wife, who, tousled and half undressed, leading Sanchica her daughter by the hand, came running to see her husband; and, seeing him not so well got up as she thought a governor ought to be, she said to him:

"How is it you come like this, my husband? For it seems to me that you come on foot and footsore, and you have more the look of an un-governor than of a governor."

"Be quiet, Teresa," answered Sancho, "for many times where there are hooks there is no bacon; and let us go to our house, and there you shall hear marvels. I am bringing money, which is what matters, earned by my own industry and without harm to anybody."

"Bring the money, my good husband," said Teresa, "and let it be earned here or there; for however you have earned it, you will not have brought in a new custom into the world."

Sanchica embraced her father and asked him whether he was bringing anything, for she had been waiting for him like the rain in May; and, holding on to one side of his belt, with his wife on his hand and her daughter pulling the grey, they went off to their house, leaving Don Quixote at his, in the power of his niece and his housekeeper and in the company of the curate and the bachelor.

Don Quixote, without keeping to terms or hours, at that very moment drew the bachelor and the curate aside on their own, and in a few words told them of his defeat and of the obligation he was left under not to leave his village for a year — which he meant to keep to the letter, without going a hair's breadth beyond it, exactly like a knight errant bound by the exactness and the order of knight-errantry; and that he had thought of becoming a shepherd for that year and entertaining himself in the solitude of the fields, where at a loose rein he could give vent to his loving thoughts, exercising himself in the pastoral and virtuous exercise.

And he begged them, if they had not a great deal to do and were not held up by more important business, to be so good as to be his companions; for he would buy sheep and stock enough to give them the name of shepherds. And he let them know that the chief part of that business was done, because he had given them their names, which would fit them as though cast in the mould. The curate asked him to say them. Don Quixote answered that he himself was to be called the shepherd Quixotize; and the bachelor the shepherd Carrascón; and the curate the shepherd Curiambro; and Sancho Panza the shepherd Panzino.

They were all thunderstruck at seeing Don Quixote's new madness; but, so that he should not get away from the village again to his chivalries, and hoping that in that year he might be cured, they agreed to his new intention and approved his madness as judicious, offering themselves as his companions in his exercise.

"And what is more," said Sansón Carrasco, "as everybody already knows, I am a most celebrated poet, and at every turn I shall compose pastoral verses, or courtly ones, or whatever comes best to the point, so that we may entertain ourselves along those out-of-the-way places where we are to go. And what is most needed, my dear sirs, is that each of us should choose the name of the shepherdess he means to celebrate in his verses, and that we should not leave a tree, however hard it may be, without labelling it and carving her name on it, as is the use and custom of shepherds in love."

"That is exactly right," answered Don Quixote, "although I am free of having to look for the name of a pretended shepherdess, since there stands the peerless Dulcinea of El Toboso, the glory of these banks, the adornment of these meadows, the mainstay of beauty, the cream of all charms, and, in short, a subject on whom every praise can well be settled, however hyperbolical."

"That is true," said the curate; "but we shall look about for some handy shepherdesses, who if they do not square with us will corner us."

To which Sansón Carrasco added:

"And when they run short, we shall give them the names of the stamped and printed ones that the world is full of: Phyllises, Amaryllises, Dianas, Fléridas, Galateas and Belisardas; for, since they sell them in the market squares, we can very well buy them and hold them for our own. If my lady — or, better said, my shepherdess — happens to be called Ana, I shall celebrate her under the name of Anarda; and if Francisca, I shall call her Francenia; and if Lucía, Lucinda, for it all comes out the same way. And Sancho Panza, if he is to come into this brotherhood, can celebrate his wife Teresa Panza under the name of Teresaina."

Don Quixote laughed at the fitting of the name, and the curate praised his decent and honourable resolution infinitely and offered himself again to keep him company all the time he had free from attending to his necessary obligations. With this they took their leave of him, and begged and advised him to look after his health with anything that might be good for him.

Fortune willed that his niece and the housekeeper had heard the talk of the three of them; and, as soon as they had gone, both of them went in to Don Quixote, and his niece said to him:

"What is this, my lord uncle? Now that we thought your worship was coming back to settle down in his house and to live a quiet and honourable life in it, do you want to get yourself into new labyrinths, turning yourself into

	Little shepherd, you who come,
	little shepherd, you who go?

Why, truly, the green barley is too tough now for making pipes."

To which the housekeeper added:

"And will your worship be able to bear out in the fields the summer noons, the winter night airs and the howling of wolves? Certainly not; for that is an exercise and an office for robust men, tanned and bred for such a ministry almost from their swaddling clothes. Even taking one evil with another, it is better to be a knight errant than a shepherd.

"Look, sir, take my advice — and I do not give it you on a full belly of bread and wine but fasting, and on the strength of the fifty years of age I have: stay in your house, attend to your property, confess often, favour the poor; and on my soul be it if any harm comes to you."

"Be quiet, my daughters," Don Quixote answered them, "for I know very well what suits me. Take me to bed, for I do not think I am very well; and hold it for certain that, whether I am a knight errant now or a shepherd yet to set out, I shall never leave off seeing to whatever you may need, as you shall see by the deed."

And the good daughters — for such the housekeeper and the niece undoubtedly were — took him to bed, where they gave him something to eat and looked after him as well as they could.
