Chapter 74: Of How Don Quixote Fell Ill, and of the Will He Made, and of His Death

Since human things are not everlasting, always going downhill from their beginnings until they reach their last end — and especially the lives of men — and since Don Quixote's had no privilege from heaven to hold up the course of its own, his end and finish came when he least expected it. Because, whether it was from the melancholy caused him by seeing himself beaten, or by the disposition of heaven that ordered it so, a fever settled on him that kept him six days in bed, in which he was visited many times by the curate, the bachelor and the barber, his friends, and Sancho Panza his good squire never left his pillow.

These, believing that the grief of seeing himself beaten and of not seeing his desire fulfilled in Dulcinea's freedom and disenchantment kept him in that state, tried by every possible means to cheer him up, the bachelor telling him to take heart and get up so as to begin their pastoral exercise, for which he had already composed an eclogue that would put in the shade all those Sannazaro ever composed; and that he had already bought with his own money two famous dogs to guard the flock, one called Barcino and the other Butrón, which a stockman of Quintanar had sold him. But for all that Don Quixote did not leave off his sadness.

His friends called the doctor; he felt his pulse and was not much pleased with it, and said that, one way or the other, he should see to the health of his soul, because his body's was in danger. Don Quixote heard it with a quiet mind; but his housekeeper, his niece and his squire did not hear it so, and they began to weep tenderly, as though they already had him dead in front of them. The doctor's opinion was that melancholy and low spirits were making an end of him.

Don Quixote begged them to leave him alone, because he wanted to sleep a little. They did so, and he slept at a stretch, as they say, for more than six hours — so much so that the housekeeper and the niece thought he would stay in that sleep. He woke at the end of the said time, and, letting out a great cry, said:

"Blessed be almighty God, who has done me so much good! In short, his mercies have no limit, and the sins of men do not shorten them or hinder them."

The niece listened attentively to her uncle's words, and they seemed to her better ordered than he usually said them — at least in that illness — and she asked him:

"What is your worship saying, sir? Have we something new? What mercies are these, or what sins of men?"

"The mercies, niece," answered Don Quixote, "are those God has used with me at this moment; whom, as I said, my sins do not hinder. I have my judgement now, free and clear, without the murky shadows of ignorance that my bitter and constant reading of those detestable books of chivalry cast over it. Now I know their absurdities and their deceptions, and the only thing that grieves me is that this coming to my senses has arrived so late that it leaves me no time to make any amends by reading others that might be a light to my soul.

"I feel myself, niece, at the point of death; I should like to make it in such a way as to give it to be understood that my life had not been so bad as to leave me the name of a madman; for although I have been one, I should not like to confirm that truth in my death. Call me, my dear, my good friends: the curate, the bachelor Sansón Carrasco and Master Nicolás the barber, for I want to make my confession and to make my will."

But the niece was spared this labour by the coming in of the three. Don Quixote had hardly seen them when he said:

"Give me joy, good gentlemen, that I am no longer Don Quixote of La Mancha but Alonso Quixano, whom my habits gave the name of the Good. Now I am an enemy of Amadís of Gaul and of the whole infinite herd of his line; now all the profane histories of knight-errantry are hateful to me; now I know my own foolishness and the danger that reading them put me in; now, by God's mercy, having learnt at my own cost, I abominate them."

When the three heard him say this, they undoubtedly believed that some new madness had taken hold of him. And Sansón said to him:

"Now, Señor Don Quixote, when we have news that the lady Dulcinea is disenchanted, does your worship come out with this? And now that we are so near to being shepherds and passing our lives singing like so many princes, does your worship want to turn hermit? Be quiet, on your life; come to yourself and leave off these tales."

"Those I have told until now," replied Don Quixote, "which have been true to my own harm, my death shall turn, with heaven's help, to my profit. I, gentlemen, feel myself dying in great haste; let all jokes be set aside, and bring me a confessor to confess me and a notary to make my will; for at such passes as this a man must not play games with his soul. And so I beg that, while the curate confesses me, you should go for the notary."

They looked at one another, astonished at Don Quixote's words; and, although in doubt, they chose to believe him. And one of the signs by which they guessed that he was dying was his having come back so easily from mad to sane, because to the words already spoken he added a great many others so well said, so Christian and so orderly that they finally took away their doubt and made them believe that he was sane.

The curate had everybody sent out and stayed alone with him and confessed him.

The bachelor went for the notary and came back a little later with him and with Sancho Panza; which Sancho, who already knew from the bachelor's news what state his master was in, finding the housekeeper and the niece in tears, began to pull faces and to shed tears himself. The confession was finished, and the curate came out, saying:

"Truly he is dying, and truly Alonso Quixano the Good is sane; we may well go in for him to make his will."

This news gave a terrible push to the swollen eyes of the housekeeper, the niece and Sancho Panza his good squire, in such a way that it burst the tears out of their eyes and a thousand deep sighs out of their breasts. Because truly, as has been said at some point, all the time Don Quixote was Alonso Quixano the Good, plain and simple, and all the time he was Don Quixote of La Mancha, he was always of a gentle nature and agreeable in his dealings; and for this reason he was well loved not only by the people of his house but by everybody who knew him.

The notary came in with the rest; and, having drawn up the head of the will and Don Quixote having settled his soul with all those Christian circumstances that are required, coming to the bequests, he said:

"Item, it is my will that of certain moneys Sancho Panza has, whom in my madness I made my squire — since there have been between him and me certain accounts and givings and takings — he shall not be charged with them and no account shall be asked of him. But if anything should be left over after he has paid himself what I owe him, the remainder shall be his, and it will be very little, and much good may it do him. And if, when I was mad, I had a part in giving him the government of the isle, now that I am sane I would give him that of a kingdom if I could, because the plainness of his nature and the faithfulness of his dealings deserve it."

And, turning to Sancho, he said to him:

"Forgive me, my friend, for the occasion I have given you of seeming as mad as I was, by making you fall into the error I fell into, that there have been and are knights errant in the world."

"Ah," answered Sancho, weeping, "do not die, your worship, my dear sir; take my advice and live many years, because the greatest madness a man can commit in this life is to let himself die without any more ado, without anybody killing him and with no other hands making an end of him but melancholy's.

"Look, do not be lazy; get up out of that bed and let us go out into the fields dressed as shepherds, as we have arranged: perhaps behind some bush we shall find the lady Doña Dulcinea disenchanted, and there will be nothing more to see. If it is that you are dying of grief at being beaten, put the blame on me and say that they knocked you down because I had girthed Rocinante badly; and what is more, your worship will have seen in his books of chivalry that it is an ordinary thing for one knight to knock down another, and for the man who is beaten today to be the winner tomorrow."

"That is so," said Sansón, "and good Sancho Panza is very much in the right of these cases."

"Gentlemen," said Don Quixote, "let us go gently, for in last year's nests there are no birds this year. I was mad and now I am sane; I was Don Quixote of La Mancha and I am now, as I have said, Alonso Quixano the Good. May my repentance and my truthfulness bring me back with your worships to the esteem I was held in; and let the notary go on.

"Item, I bequeath my whole estate, behind closed doors, to Antonia Quixana my niece, who is here present, having first taken out of the soundest part of it what is needed to carry out the bequests I have made. And the first satisfaction I want made is the paying of the wages I owe for the time my housekeeper has served me, and twenty ducats besides for a dress. I leave as my executors the curate and the bachelor Sansón Carrasco, who are here present.

"Item, it is my will that if Antonia Quixana my niece wants to marry, she should marry a man of whom it has first been established that he does not know what books of chivalry are; and in case it should be found that he does know, and my niece should still want to marry him and should marry him, she shall lose everything I have left her, which my executors may distribute in works of charity as they please.

"Item, I beg the said gentlemen my executors that if good fortune should bring them to know the author who they say composed a history that goes about with the title of The Second Part of the Exploits of Don Quixote of La Mancha, they should on my behalf beg him, as earnestly as may be, to forgive the occasion I gave him, without thinking of it, of having written so many and such great absurdities as he writes in it; because I depart this life with a scruple at having given him a motive for writing them."

With this he closed the will; and, a fainting fit taking him, he stretched himself out at full length on the bed. Everybody was thrown into an uproar and ran to help him; and in the three days he lived after the one on which he made his will, he fainted very often. The house was in an uproar; but for all that, the niece ate, the housekeeper drank healths and Sancho Panza was merry — for this business of inheriting something rubs out or tempers in the heir the memory of the grief that it is right the dead man should leave.

In the end Don Quixote's last day came, after he had received all the sacraments and after he had abominated the books of chivalry with many and forcible arguments. The notary was present, and said that he had never read in any book of chivalry of a knight errant dying in his bed so quietly and so like a Christian as Don Quixote; who, among the compassion and the tears of those who were there, gave up his spirit — I mean that he died.

Seeing which, the curate asked the notary to give him a certificate that Alonso Quixano the Good, commonly called Don Quixote of La Mancha, had passed out of this present life and had died naturally; and he asked for such a certificate so as to take away the chance of any author other than Cide Hamete Benengeli falsely raising him from the dead and making endless histories of his exploits.

This was the end of the Ingenious Gentleman of La Mancha, whose village Cide Hamete would not name exactly, so as to leave all the towns and villages of La Mancha to contend among themselves to adopt him and claim him for their own, as the seven cities of Greece contended over Homer.

The weeping of Sancho and of Don Quixote's niece and housekeeper is left out here, and the fresh epitaphs on his tomb — although Sansón Carrasco set this one on it:

	Here lies the mighty gentleman
	who came to such an extreme
	of valour that it may be noted
	that death did not triumph
	over his life by his death.
	He held the whole world cheap;
	he was the scarecrow and the bogey
	of the world, at such a juncture
	that his good fortune was made good
	by dying sane and living mad.

And the most prudent Cide Hamete said to his pen:

"Here you shall stay, hung on this rack and this brass wire, my quill — I do not know whether well cut or badly trimmed — where you shall live for long ages, if presumptuous and villainous historians do not take you down to profane you. But before they reach you, you can warn them and say to them in the best way you can:

	Softly, softly, little poltroons!
	Let her be touched by nobody;
	for this enterprise, good king,
	was kept for me alone.

"For me alone Don Quixote was born, and I for him: he knew how to act and I to write; the two of us alone are made for one another, in spite and in defiance of that pretended writer of Tordesillas who dared, or shall dare, to write with a coarse and badly trimmed ostrich quill the exploits of my valorous knight — for it is no load for his shoulders and no subject for his frozen wit.

"And you shall warn him, if by any chance you come to know him, to let the weary and by now rotted bones of Don Quixote rest in the grave, and not to try to carry him off, against all the laws of death, to Old Castile, making him come out of the tomb where he really and truly lies stretched at full length, unable to make a third expedition and a new sally. For, to make a mock of all the many that so many knights errant made, the two he did make are enough — so much to the taste and good pleasure of the people whose notice they came to, in this kingdom as in foreign ones.

"And with this you will fulfil your Christian profession by giving good advice to the man who wishes you ill; and I shall be left satisfied and proud at having been the first to enjoy the fruit of his writings entirely, as I wished — since my desire has been no other than to make men loathe the invented and preposterous histories of the books of chivalry, which, thanks to those of my true Don Quixote, are already stumbling and will beyond any doubt fall altogether. Vale."

The End
