TEXT ANALYSIS — Michael Faraday, On the Various Forces of Nature (1860)
Source: Project Gutenberg #52293 (Crookes's edition), plates in the same zip

READ candle/text_analysis.txt FIRST. This is the same lecturer, the same
hall, the same audience, the same editor, and the Christmas course of the
year BEFORE. Everything there about voice, stage directions, nomenclature
policy, figures and Crookes's notes carries over unchanged. What follows
is only what is different.

WHAT THIS IS

Six lectures to a juvenile audience at the Royal Institution over
Christmas 1859–60, taken down and edited by William Crookes, plus the
address on "Light-house Illumination: the Electric Light" delivered on
9 March 1860, which the edition appends.

Where the Candle takes ONE object and derives all of chemistry from it,
this course takes ALL the forces and drives them toward ONE conclusion:
gravitation, cohesion, chemical affinity, heat, magnetism and electricity
are not six powers but one, convertible each into the others. The last
lecture is titled "The Correlation of the Physical Forces" and that is
the payoff the whole course is built toward. Keep that architecture
visible — every lecture ends by handing something to the next.

THE ILLNESS

Lecture One opens with Faraday apologising: the course had been twice
postponed because he was ill, and he says he may manage only "a few
words" and will substitute demonstrations for talk. Crookes's first note
records the postponements. He is fifty-eight, four years from the Candle
and seven from the end of his life.

DO NOT SOFTEN OR TRIM THIS. It is the first thing in the book, it is
said plainly and without self-pity, and it sets the tone for a man who
lectured anyway. The same holds for the closing of Lecture Six, where he
thanks the audience for bearing "the inconvenience that I at first
subjected you to."

WHAT IS DIFFERENT FROM THE CANDLE, PRACTICALLY

  - MORE PHYSICS, LESS CHEMISTRY. The vocabulary to lock is mechanical
    and electrical rather than chemical:
        gravitation      -> keep (not "gravity" — he distinguishes the
                            force from the everyday word)
        cohesion, adhesion, chemical affinity -> keep; these are the
                            chapter titles and the argument
        specific gravity -> keep
        the correlation of the physical forces -> keep, exactly; it is
                            the title of the last lecture and the thesis
        voltaic battery / voltaic pile -> keep, gloss once
        magneto-electric -> keep (the lighthouse address turns on it)
        galvanometer, electro-magnet, armature -> keep
        caloric          -> if it appears, keep and gloss; he does not
                            believe in it, and says so
    Units and figures as printed, exactly, as in the Candle.
  - SHAKESPEARE. Lecture Six ends by quoting As You Like It — "tongues
    in trees, books in the running brooks, / Sermons in stones, and good
    in everything." Set as verse (an indented block), verbatim, keeping
    Faraday's leading dashes as an ellipsis of the missing half-line.
    This is the last thing in the lecture course and is in
    must_contain.txt.
  - THE LIGHTHOUSE ADDRESS is not a juvenile lecture. It is a report to
    adults on putting the electric light into lighthouses, given as a
    Trinity House scientific adviser, and its register is plainer and
    more official — proud, practical, concerned with fog and with the
    safety of mariners. Do not import the Christmas-lecture warmth into
    it. It opens "There is no part of my life which gives me more
    delight than my connection with the Trinity House," and that sober
    affection is its whole tone.

FIGURES

50 plates carrying 59 numbered figures, because Victorian printers put
several figures on one block. Markers therefore carry compound ids:

    [Figure 3-4]        -> renders "Figures 3 and 4"
    [Figure 15-16-17]   -> renders "Figures 15, 16 and 17"

A compound plate needs a caption that covers EVERY figure on it, in
order, and says which is which ("left", "right", "above", "below") — the
prose refers to them separately, so the reader must be able to tell them
apart within the single image. Look at the plate before writing it.
Otherwise the caption rules are the Candle's: one descriptive sentence,
new writing, present tense, no editorialising.

Note that the text's own illustration grouping does not match the
plates'; prep.py has already reconciled this, so translate the markers as
they appear and do not try to split or merge them.

CROOKES'S NOTES

24 of them, all anchored, all inlined by prep.py as "Editor's note: ..."
paragraphs. Same rule as the Candle: keep them in Crookes's dry
third-person register, never the lecturer's. Several are practical
recipes (note 24 tells you how to grow a lead tree in a bottle) — keep
the instructions complete.

FAMOUS PASSAGES (also in must_contain.txt)

  1. The opening apology for the postponed lectures.
  2. The Shakespeare close of Lecture Six.
  3. The opening of the lighthouse address on the Trinity House.

RATIO

Same as candle/ (landed 0.99) and soap-bubbles/ (1.02). Run:

  python3 verify.py forces --min-ratio 0.85 --max-ratio 1.3
