Introductory

There are several matters, too hard to discuss with Learners, which
nevertheless need to be explained to any Teachers, into whose hands
this book may fall, in order that they may thoroughly understand what my
Symbolic Method is, and in what respects it differs from the many
other Methods already published.

These matters are as follows:—

The “Existential Import” of Propositions. 
 The use of “is-not” (or “are-not”) as a Copula. 
 The theory “two Negative Premisses prove nothing.” 
 Euler’s Method of Diagrams. 
 Venn’s Method of Diagrams. 
 My Method of Diagrams. 
 The Solution of a Syllogism by various Methods. 
 My Method of treating Syllogisms and Sorites. 
 Some account of Parts II, III.

§ 2

The “Existential Import” of Propositions

The writers, and editors, of the Logical text-books which run in the
ordinary grooves——to whom I shall hereafter refer by the (I hope
inoffensive) title “The Logicians”——take, on this subject, what seems
to me to be a more humble position than is at all necessary. They speak
of the Copula of a Proposition “with bated breath”, almost as if it were
a living, conscious Entity, capable of declaring for itself what it
chose to mean, and that we, poor human creatures, had nothing to do but
to ascertain what was its sovereign will and pleasure, and submit to
it.

pg166In opposition to this view, I maintain that any writer of a book is
fully authorised in attaching any meaning he likes to any word or phrase
he intends to use. If I find an author saying, at the beginning of his
book, “Let it be understood that by the word ‘black’ I shall always
mean ‘white’, and that by the word ‘white’ I shall always mean
‘black’,” I meekly accept his ruling, however injudicious I may think
it.

And so, with regard to the question whether a Proposition is or is not
to be understood as asserting the existence of its Subject, I maintain
that every writer may adopt his own rule, provided of course that it is
consistent with itself and with the accepted facts of Logic.

Let us consider certain views that may logically be held, and thus
settle which of them may conveniently be held; after which I shall
hold myself free to declare which of them I intend to hold.

The kinds of Propositions, to be considered, are those that begin with
“some”, with “no”, and with “all”. These are usually called Propositions
“in I”, “in E”, and “in A”.

First, then, a Proposition in I may be understood as asserting, or
else as not asserting, the existence of its Subject. (By “existence” I
mean of course whatever kind of existence suits its nature. The two
Propositions, “dreams exist” and “drums exist”, denote two totally
different kinds of “existence”. A dream is an aggregate of ideas, and
exists only in the mind of a dreamer: whereas a drum is an aggregate
of wood and parchment, and exists in the hands of a drummer.)

First, let us suppose that I “asserts” (i.e. “asserts the existence of
its Subject”).

Here, of course, we must regard a Proposition in A as making the
same assertion, since it necessarily contains a Proposition in I.

We now have I and A “asserting”. Does this leave us free to make
what supposition we choose as to E? My answer is “No. We are tied down
to the supposition that E does not assert.” This can be proved as
follows:—

If possible, let E “assert”. Then (taking x, y, and z to represent
Attributes) we see that, if the Proposition “No xy are z” be true, some
things exist with the Attributes x and y: i.e. “Some x are y.”

pg167Also we know that, if the Proposition “Some xy are z” be true, the same
result follows.

But these two Propositions are Contradictories, so that one or other of
them must be true. Hence this result is always true: i.e. the
Proposition “Some x are y” is always true!

Quod est absurdum. (See Note (A), p. 195).

We see, then, that the supposition “I asserts” necessarily leads to
“A asserts, but E does not”. And this is the first of the various
views that may conceivably be held.

Next, let us suppose that I does not “assert.” And, along with this,
let us take the supposition that E does “assert.”

Hence the Proposition “No x are y” means “Some x exist, and none of them
are y”: i.e. “all of them are not-y,” which is a Proposition in A.
We also know, of course, that the Proposition “All x are not-y” proves
“No x are y.” Now two Propositions, each of which proves the other, are
equivalent. Hence every Proposition in A is equivalent to one in
E, and therefore “asserts”.

Hence our second conceivable view is “E and A assert, but I does
not.”

This view does not seen to involve any necessary contradiction with
itself or with the accepted facts of Logic. But, when we come to test
it, as applied to the actual facts of life, we shall find I think,
that it fits in with them so badly that its adoption would be, to say
the least of it, singularly inconvenient for ordinary folk.

Let me record a little dialogue I have just held with my friend Jones,
who is trying to form a new Club, to be regulated on strictly Logical
principles.

Author. “Well, Jones! Have you got your new Club started yet?”

Jones (rubbing his hands). “You’ll be glad to hear that some of the
Members (mind, I only say ‘some’) are millionaires! Rolling in gold,
my boy!”

Author. “That sounds well. And how many Members have entered?”

Jones (staring). “None at all. We haven’t got it started yet. What
makes you think we have?”

Author. “Why, I thought you said that some of the Members——”

pg168Jones (contemptuously). “You don’t seem to be aware that we’re
working on strictly Logical principles. A Particular Proposition
does not assert the existence of its Subject. I merely meant to say
that we’ve made a Rule not to admit any Members till we have at least
three Candidates whose incomes are over ten thousand a year!”

Author. “Oh, that’s what you meant, is it? Let’s hear some more of
your Rules.”

Jones. “Another is, that no one, who has been convicted seven times of
forgery, is admissible.”

Author. “And here, again, I suppose you don’t mean to assert there
are any such convicts in existence?”

Jones. “Why, that’s exactly what I do mean to assert! Don’t you know
that a Universal Negative asserts the existence of its Subject? Of
course we didn’t make that Rule till we had satisfied ourselves that
there are several such convicts now living.”

The Reader can now decide for himself how far this second conceivable
view would fit in with the facts of life. He will, I think, agree with
me that Jones’ view, of the ‘Existential Import’ of Propositions, would
lead to some inconvenience.

Thirdly, let us suppose that neither I nor E “asserts”.

Now the supposition that the two Propositions, “Some x are y” and “No x
are not-y”, do not “assert”, necessarily involves the supposition that
“All x are y” does not “assert”, since it would be absurd to suppose
that they assert, when combined, more than they do when taken
separately.

Hence the third (and last) of the conceivable views is that neither
I, nor E, nor A, “asserts”.

The advocates of this third view would interpret the Proposition “Some x
are y” to mean “If there were any x in existence, some of them would
be y”; and so with E and A.

It admits of proof that this view, as regards A, conflicts with the
accepted facts of Logic.

Let us take the Syllogism Darapti, which is universally accepted as
valid. Its form is

“All m are x; 
   All m are y. 
           ∴ Some y are x”.

pg169This they would interpret as follows:—

”If there were any m in existence, all of them would be x; 
   If there were any m in existence, all of them would be y. 
           ∴ If there were any y in existence, some of them
 would be x”.

That this Conclusion does not follow has been so briefly and clearly
explained by Mr. Keynes (in his “Formal Logic”, dated 1894, pp. 356,
357), that I prefer to quote his words:—

“Let no proposition imply the existence either of its subject or of its
predicate.

“Take, as an example, a syllogism in Darapti:—

‘All M is P, 
   All M is S, 
           ∴ Some S is P.’

“Taking S, M, P, as the minor, middle, and major terms respectively, the
conclusion will imply that, if there is an S, there is some P. Will the
premisses also imply this? If so, then the syllogism is valid; but not
otherwise.

“The conclusion implies that if S exists P exists; but, consistently
with the premisses, S may be existent while M and P are both
non-existent. An implication is, therefore, contained in the conclusion,
which is not justified by the premisses.”

This seems to me entirely clear and convincing. Still, “to make
sicker”, I may as well throw the above (soi-disant) Syllogism into a
concrete form, which will be within the grasp of even a non-logical
Reader.

Let us suppose that a Boys’ School has been set up, with the following
system of Rules:—

“All boys in the First (the highest) Class are to do French, Greek, and
Latin. All in the Second Class are to do Greek only. All in the Third
Class are to do Latin only.”

Suppose also that there are boys in the Third Class, and in the
Second; but that no boy has yet risen into the First.

It is evident that there are no boys in the School doing French: still
we know, by the Rules, what would happen if there were any.

pg170We are authorised, then, by the Data, to assert the following two
Propositions:—

“If there were any boys doing French, all of them would
 be doing Greek; 
   If there were any boys doing French, all of them would
 be doing Latin.”

And the Conclusion, according to “The Logicians” would
be

“If there were any boys doing Latin, some of them would
 be doing Greek.”

Here, then, we have two true Premisses and a false Conclusion (since
we know that there are boys doing Latin, and that none of them are
doing Greek). Hence the argument is invalid.

Similarly it may be shown that this “non-existential” interpretation
destroys the validity of Disamis, Datisi, Felapton, and
Fresison.

Some of “The Logicians” will, no doubt, be ready to reply “But we are
not Aldrichians! Why should we be responsible for the validity of
the Syllogisms of so antiquated an author as Aldrich?”

Very good. Then, for the special benefit of these “friends” of mine
(with what ominous emphasis that name is sometimes used! “I must have a
private interview with you, my young friend,” says the bland Dr.
Birch, “in my library, at 9 a.m. tomorrow. And you will please to be
punctual!”), for their special benefit, I say, I will produce
another charge against this “non-existential” interpretation.

It actually invalidates the ordinary Process of “Conversion”, as applied
to Proposition in ‘I’.

Every logician, Aldrichian or otherwise, accepts it as an established
fact that “Some x are y” may be legitimately converted into “Some y are
x.”

But is it equally clear that the Proposition “If there were any x,
some of them would be y” may be legitimately converted into “If there
were any y, some of them would be x”? I trow not.

The example I have already used——of a Boys’ School pg171with a non-existent
First Class——will serve admirably to illustrate this new flaw in the
theory of “The Logicians.”

Let us suppose that there is yet another Rule in this School, viz. “In
each Class, at the end of the Term, the head boy and the second boy
shall receive prizes.”

This Rule entirely authorises us to assert (in the sense in which “The
Logicians” would use the words) “Some boys in the First Class will
receive prizes”, for this simply means (according to them) “If there
were any boys in the First Class, some of them would receive
prizes.”

Now the Converse of this Proposition is, of course, “Some boys, who will
receive prizes, are in the First Class”, which means (according to “The
Logicians”) “If there were any boys about to receive prizes, some of
them would be in the First Class” (which Class we know to be empty).

Of this Pair of Converse Propositions, the first is undoubtedly true:
the second, as undoubtedly, false.

It is always sad to see a batsman knock down his own wicket: one pities
him, as a man and a brother, but, as a cricketer, one can but
pronounce him “Out!”

We see, then, that, among all the conceivable views we have here
considered, there are only two which can logically be held, viz.

I and A “assert”, but E does not. 
E and A “assert”, but I does not.

The second of these I have shown to involve great practical
inconvenience.

The first is the one adopted in this book. (See Chapter Iii.)

Some further remarks on this subject will be found in Note (B), at p.
196.

§ 3

The use of “is-not” (or “are-not”) as a Copula

Is it better to say “John is-not in-the-house” or “John is
not-in-the-house”? “Some of my acquaintances are-not
men-I-should-like-to-be-seen-with” or “Some of my acquaintances are
men-I-should-not-like-to-be-seen-with”? That is the sort of question
we have now to discuss.

pg172This is no question of Logical Right and Wrong: it is merely a matter of
taste, since the two forms mean exactly the same thing. And here,
again, “The Logicians” seem to me to take much too humble a position.
When they are putting the final touches to the grouping of their
Proposition, just before the curtain goes up, and when the
Copula——always a rather fussy ‘heavy father’, asks them “Am I to
have the ‘not’, or will you tack it on to the Predicate?” they are much
too ready to answer, like the subtle cab-driver, “Leave it to you,
Sir!” The result seems to be, that the grasping Copula constantly gets a
“not” that had better have been merged in the Predicate, and that
Propositions are differentiated which had better have been recognised as
precisely similar. Surely it is simpler to treat “Some men are Jews” and
“Some men are Gentiles” as being both of them, affirmative
Propositions, instead of translating the latter into “Some men are-not
Jews”, and regarding it as a negative Propositions?

The fact is, “The Logicians” have somehow acquired a perfectly morbid
dread of negative Attributes, which makes them shut their eyes, like
frightened children, when they come across such terrible Propositions as
“All not-x are y”; and thus they exclude from their system many very
useful forms of Syllogisms.

Under the influence of this unreasoning terror, they plead that, in
Dichotomy by Contradiction, the negative part is too large to deal
with, so that it is better to regard each Thing as either included in,
or excluded from, the positive part. I see no force in this plea: and
the facts often go the other way. As a personal question, dear Reader,
if you were to group your acquaintances into the two Classes, men that
you would like to be seen with, and men that you would not like to
be seen with, do you think the latter group would be so very much the
larger of the two?

For the purposes of Symbolic Logic, it is so much the most convenient
plan to regard the two sub-divisions, produced by Dichotomy, on the
same footing, and to say, of any Thing, either that it “is” in the
one, or that it “is” in the other, that I do not think any Reader of
this book is likely to demur to my adopting that course.

§ 4

The theory that “two Negative Premisses prove nothing”

This I consider to be another craze of “The Logicians”, fully as
morbid as their dread of a negative Attribute.

It is, perhaps, best refuted by the method of Instantia Contraria.

Take the following Pairs of Premisses:—

“None of my boys are conceited; 
   None of my girls are greedy”.

“None of my boys are clever; 
   None but a clever boy could solve this problem”.

“None of my boys are learned; 
   Some of my boys are not choristers”.

(This last Proposition is, in my system, an affirmative one, since I
should read it “are not-choristers”; but, in dealing with “The
Logicians,” I may fairly treat it as a negative one, since they
would read it “are-not choristers”.)

If you, dear Reader, declare, after full consideration of these Pairs of
Premisses, that you cannot deduce a Conclusion from any of
them——why, all I can say is that, like the Duke in Patience, you “will
have to be contented with our heart-felt sympathy”! [See Note (C), p.
196.]

§ 5

Euler’s Method of Diagrams

Diagrams seem to have been used, at first, to represent Propositions
only. In Euler’s well-known Circles, each was supposed to contain a
class, and the Diagram consisted of two circles, which exhibited the
relations, as to inclusion and exclusion, existing between the two
Classes.

[Figure 278: Diagram of circle x inside circle y]

Thus, the Diagram, here given, exhibits the two Classes, whose
respective Attributes are x and y, as so related to each other that the
following Propositions are all simultaneously true:—“All x are y”, “No
x are not-y”, “Some x are y”, “Some y are not-x”, “Some not-y are
not-x”, and, of course, the Converses of the last four.

[Figure 279: Diagram of circle y inside circle x]

pg174

Similarly, with this Diagram, the following Propositions are true:—“All
y are x”, “No y are not-x”, “Some y are x”, “Some x are not-y”, “Some
not-x are not-y”, and, of course, the Converses of the last four.

[Figure 280: Diagram of two separate circles x and y]

Similarly, with this Diagram, the following are true:—“All x are
not-y”, “All y are not-x”, “No x are y”, “Some x are not-y”, “Some y are
not-x”, “Some not-x are not-y”, and the Converses of the last four.

[Figure 281: Diagram of two intersecting circles x and y]

Similarly, with this Diagram, the following are true:—“Some x are y”,
“Some x are not-y”, “Some not-x are y”, “Some not-x are not-y”, and of
course, their four Converses.

Note that all Euler’s Diagrams assert “Some not-x are not-y.”
Apparently it never occured to him that it might sometimes fail to be
true!

Now, to represent “All x are y”, the first of these Diagrams would
suffice. Similarly, to represent “No x are y”, the third would
suffice. But to represent any Particular Proposition, at least three
Diagrams would be needed (in order to include all the possible cases),
and, for “Some not-x are not-y”, all the four.

§ 6

Venn’s Method of Diagrams

Let us represent “not-x” by “x′”.

Mr. Venn’s Method of Diagrams is a great advance on the above Method.

He uses the last of the above Diagrams to represent any desired
relation between x and y, by simply shading a Compartment known to be
empty, and placing a + in one known to be occupied.

Thus, he would represent the three Propositions “Some x are y”, “No x
are y”, and “All x are y”, as follows:—

[Figure 282: Venn diagram representing x y exists]

[Figure 283: Venn diagram representing x y does not exist]

[Figure 284: Venn diagram representing all x are y]

pg175It will be seen that, of the four Classes, whose peculiar Sets of
Attributes are xy, xy′, x′y, and x′y′, only three are here provided
with closed Compartments, while the fourth is allowed the rest of the
Infinite Plane to range about in!

This arrangement would involve us in very serious trouble, if we ever
attempted to represent “No x′ are y′.” Mr. Venn once (at p. 281)
encounters this awful task; but evades it, in a quite masterly fashion,
by the simple foot-note “We have not troubled to shade the outside of
this diagram”!

To represent two Propositions (containing a common Term) together, a
three-letter Diagram is needed. This is the one used by Mr. Venn.

[Figure 285: Venn diagram of three intersecting circles x y and z]

Here, again, we have only seven closed Compartments, to accommodate
the eight Classes whose peculiar Sets of Attributes are xym, xym′, &c.

“With four terms in request,” Mr. Venn says, “the most simple and
symmetrical diagram seems to me that produced by making four ellipses
intersect one another in the desired manner”. This, however, provides
only fifteen closed compartments.

[Figure 286: Venn diagram of four intersecting ellipses a b c and d]

For five letters, “the simplest diagram I can suggest,” Mr. Venn says,
“is one like this (the small ellipse in the centre is to be regarded as
a portion of the outside of c; i.e. its four component portions are
inside b and d but are no part of c). It must be admitted that such a
diagram is not quite so simple to draw as one might wish it to be; but
then consider what the alternative is of one undertakes to deal with
five terms and all their combinations—nothing short of the disagreeable
task of writing out, or in some way putting before us, all the 32
combinations involved.”

[Figure 287: Venn diagram of five intersecting ellipses a b c d and e and an interior ellipse]

pg176This Diagram gives us 31 closed compartments.

For six letters, Mr. Venn suggests that we might use two Diagrams,
like the above, one for the f-part, and the other for the not-f-part, of
all the other combinations. “This”, he says, “would give the desired 64
subdivisions.” This, however, would only give 62 closed Compartments,
and one infinite area, which the two Classes, a′b′c′d′e′f and
a′b′c′d′e′f′, would have to share between them.

Beyond six letters Mr. Venn does not go.

§ 7

My Method of Diagrams

My Method of Diagrams resembles Mr. Venn’s, in having separate
Compartments assigned to the various Classes, and in marking these
Compartments as occupied or as empty; but it differs from his
Method, in assigning a closed area to the Universe of Discourse, so
that the Class which, under Mr. Venn’s liberal sway, has been ranging at
will through Infinite Space, is suddenly dismayed to find itself
“cabin’d, cribb’d, confined”, in a limited Cell like any other Class!
Also I use rectilinear, instead of curvilinear, Figures; and I mark
an occupied Cell with a ‘I’ (meaning that there is at least one
Thing in it), and an empty Cell with a ‘O’ (meaning that there is no
Thing in it).

For two letters, I use this Diagram, in which the North Half is
assigned to ‘x’, the South to ‘not-x’ (or ‘x′’), the West to y, and the
East to y′. Thus the N.W. Cell contains the xy-Class, the N.E. Cell the
xy′-Class, and so on.

[Figure 288: Empty biliteral diagram]

For three letters, I subdivide these four Cells, by drawing an Inner
Square, which I assign to m, the Outer Border being assigned to m′. I
thus get eight Cells that are needed to accommodate the eight Classes,
whose peculiar Sets of Attributes are xym, xym′, &c.

[Figure 289: Empty triliteral diagram]

This last Diagram is the most complex that I use in the Elementary
Part of my ‘Symbolic Logic.’ But I may as well take this opportunity of
describing the more complex ones which will appear in Part II.

pg177For four letters (which I call a, b, c, d) I use this Diagram;
assigning the North Half to a (and of course the rest of the Diagram
to a′), the West Half to b, the Horizontal Oblong to c, and the Upright
Oblong to d. We have now got 16 Cells.

[Figure 290: Empty quadriliteral diagram]

For five letters (adding e) I subdivide the 16 Cells of the previous
Diagram by oblique partitions, assigning all the upper portions to
e, and all the lower portions to e′. Here, I admit, we lose the
advantage of having the e-Class all together, “in a ring-fence”, like
the other 4 Classes. Still, it is very easy to find; and the operation,
of erasing it, is nearly as easy as that of erasing any other Class. We
have now got 32 Cells.

[Figure 291: Empty pentaliteral diagram]

For six letters (adding h, as I avoid tailed letters) I substitute
upright crosses for the oblique partitions, assigning the 4 portions,
into which each of the 16 Cells is thus divided, to the four Classes eh,
eh′, e′h, e′h′. We have now got 64 Cells.

[Figure 292: Empty hexaliteral diagram]

pg178For seven letters (adding k) I add, to each upright cross, a little
inner square. All these 16 little squares are assigned to the k-Class,
and all outside them to the k′-Class; so that 8 little Cells (into which
each of the 16 Cells is divided) are respectively assigned to the 8
Classes ehk, ehk′, &c. We have now got 128 Cells.

[Figure 293: Empty heptaliteral diagram]

For eight letters (adding l) I place, in each of the 16 Cells, a
lattice, which is a reduced copy of the whole Diagram; and, just as
the 16 large Cells of the whole Diagram are assigned to the 16 Classes
abcd, abcd′, &c., so the 16 little Cells of each lattice are assigned to
the 16 Classes ehkl, ehkl′, &c. Thus, the lattice in the N.W. corner
serves to accommodate the 16 Classes abc′d′ehkl, abc′d′eh′kl′, &c. This
Octoliteral Diagram (see next page) contains 256 Cells.

For nine letters, I place 2 Octoliteral Diagrams side by side,
assigning one of them to m, and the other to m′. We have now got 512
Cells.

[Figure 294: Empty octoliteral diagram]

pg179

Finally, for ten letters, I arrange 4 Octoliteral Diagrams, like the
above, in a square, assigning them to the 4 Classes mn, mn′, m′n, m′n′.
We have now got 1024 Cells.

§ 8

Solution of a Syllogism by various Methods

The best way, I think, to exhibit the differences between these various
Methods of solving Syllogisms, will be to take a concrete example, and
solve it by each Method in turn. Let us take, as our example, No. 29
(see Chapter I).
