“No philosophers are conceited; 
   Some conceited persons are not gamblers. 
   ∴ Some persons, who are not gamblers, are not philosophers.”

(1) Solution by ordinary Method.

These Premisses, as they stand, will give no Conclusion, as they are
both negative.

If by ‘Permutation’ or ‘Obversion’, we write the Minor Premiss thus,

‘Some conceited persons are not-gamblers,’

we can get a Conclusion in Fresison, viz.

“No philosophers are conceited; 
   Some conceited persons are not-gamblers. 
   ∴ Some not-gamblers are not philosophers”

This can be proved by reduction to Ferio, thus:—

“No conceited persons are philosophers; 
   Some not-gamblers are conceited. 
   ∴ Some not-gamblers are not philosophers”.

The validity of Ferio follows directly from the Axiom ‘De Omni et
Nullo’.

(2) Symbolic Representation.

Before proceeding to discuss other Methods of Solution, it is necessary
to translate our Syllogism into an abstract form.

Let us take “persons” as our ‘Universe of Discourse’; and let
x = “philosophers”, m = “conceited”, and y = “gamblers.”

Then the Syllogism may be written thus:—

“No x are m; 
   Some m are y′. 
   ∴ Some y′ are x′.”

(3) Solution by Euler’s Method of Diagrams.

The Major Premiss requires only one Diagram, viz.

[Figure 295: Diagram representing x m does not exist]

	1

The Minor requires three, viz.

[Figure 296: Diagram representing y m does not exist]

[Figure 297: Diagram representing y m exists]

[Figure 298: Diagram representing all y are m]

	2
	3
	4

The combination of Major and Minor, in every possible way requires
nine, viz.

Figs. 1 and 2 give

[Figure 299: Diagram representing no x y or x m or y m exist]

[Figure 300: Diagram representing x m and y m do not exist and x y exists]

[Figure 301: Diagram representing x and y are identical and x m does not exist]

[Figure 302: Diagram representing x m does not exist and all y are x]

[Figure 303: Diagram representing y m does not exist and all x are y]

	5
	6
	7
	8
	9

Figs. 1 and 3 give

[Figure 304: Diagram representing no x y or x m exist and y m exists]

[Figure 305: Diagram representing no x are m and x y and y m exist]

[Figure 306: Diagram representing all x are y and y m exists and x m does not exist]

	10
	11
	12

Figs. 1 and 4 give

[Figure 307: Diagram representing no x are y and all m are y]

	13

From this group (Figs. 5 to 13) we have, by disregarding m, to find the
relation of x and y. On examination we find that Figs. 5, 10, 13 express
the relation of entire mutual exclusion; that Figs. 6, 11 express
partial inclusion and partial exclusion; that Fig. 7 expresses
coincidence; that Figs. 8, 12 express entire inclusion of x in y; and
that Fig. 9 expresses entire inclusion of y in x.

We thus get five Biliteral Diagrams for x and y, viz.

[Figure 308: Diagram representing x y does not exist]

[Figure 309: Diagram representing x y exists]

[Figure 310: Diagram representing x and y are identical]

[Figure 311: Diagram representing all x are y]

[Figure 312: Diagram representing all y are x]

	14
	15
	16
	17
	18

where the only Proposition, represented by them all, is “Some not-y are
not-x,” i.e. “Some persons, who are not gamblers, are not
philosophers”——a result which Euler would hardly have regarded as a
valuable one, since he seems to have assumed that a Proposition of
this form is always true!

(4) Solution by Venn’s Method of Diagrams.

The following Solution has been kindly supplied to me Mr. Venn himself.

”The Minor Premiss declares that some of the constituents in my′ must be
saved: mark these constituents with a cross.

[Figure 313: Venn diagram of three intersecting circles]

The Major declares that all xm must be destroyed; erase it.

Then, as some my′ is to be saved, it must clearly be my′x′. That is,
there must exist my′x′; or eliminating m, y′x′. In common phraseology,

‘Some y′ are x′,’ or, ‘Some not-gamblers are not-philosophers.’”

(5) Solution by my Method of Diagrams.

The first Premiss asserts that no xm exist: so we mark the
xm-Compartment as empty, by placing a ‘O’ in each of its Cells.

The second asserts that some my′ exist: so we mark the my′-Compartment
as occupied, by placing a ‘I’ in its only available Cell.

[Figure 314: Diagram representing x m does not exist and y prime m exists]

The only information, that this gives us as to x and y, is that the
x′y′-Compartment is occupied, i.e. that some x′y′ exist.

Hence “Some x′ are y′”: i.e. “Some persons, who are not philosophers,
are not gamblers”.

(6) Solution by my Method of Subscripts.

xm0 † my′1 ¶ x′y′1

i.e. “Some persons, who are not philosophers, are not gamblers.”

§ 9

My Method of treating Syllogisms and Sorites

Of all the strange things, that are to be met with in the ordinary
text-books of Formal Logic, perhaps the strangest is the violent
contrast one finds to exist between their ways of dealing with these two
subjects. While they have elaborately discussed no less than nineteen
different forms of Syllogisms——each with its own special and
exasperating Rules, while the whole constitute an almost useless
machine, for practical purposes, many of the Conclusions being
incomplete, and many quite legitimate forms being ignored——they have
limited Sorites to two forms only, of childish simplicity; and these
they have dignified with special names, apparently under the
impression that no other possible forms existed!

As to Syllogisms, I find that their nineteen forms, with about a score
of others which they have ignored, can all be arranged under three
forms, each with a very simple Rule of its own; and the only question
the Reader has to settle, in working any one of the 101 Examples given
at Chapter I of this book, is “Does it belong to Fig. I., II., or III.?”

As to Sorites, the only two forms, recognised by the text-books, are
the Aristotelian, whose Premisses are a series of Propositions in A,
so arranged that the Predicate of each is the Subject of the next, and
the Goclenian, whose Premisses are the very same series, written
backwards. Goclenius, it seems, was the first who noticed the startling
fact that it does not affect the force of a Syllogism to invert the
order of its Premisses, and who applied this discovery to a Sorites. If
we assume (as surely we may?) that he is the same man as that
transcendent genius who first noticed that 4 times 5 is the same thing
as 5 times 4, we may apply to him what somebody (Edmund Yates, I think
it was) has said of Tupper, viz., “here is a man who, beyond all others
of his generation, has been favoured with Glimpses of the Obvious!”

These puerile——not to say infantine——forms of a Sorites I have, in
this book, ignored from the very first, and have not only admitted
freely Propositions in E, but have purposely stated the Premisses in
random order, leaving to the Reader the useful task of arranging them,
for himself, in an order which can be worked as a series of regular
Syllogisms. In doing this, he can begin with any one of them he likes.

I have tabulated, for curiosity, the various orders in which the
Premisses of the Aristotelian Sorites

1. All a are b; 
2. All b are c; 
3. All c are d; 
4. All d are e; 
5. All e are h. 
   ∴ All a are h.

may be syllogistically arranged, and I find there are no less than
sixteen such orders, viz., 12345, 21345, 23145, 23415, 23451, 32145,
32415, 32451, 34215, 34251, 34521, 43215, 43251, 43521, 45321, 54321. Of
these the first and the last have been dignified with names; but the
other fourteen——first enumerated by an obscure Writer on Logic,
towards the end of the Nineteenth Century——remain without a name!

§ 10

Some account of Parts II, III

In Part II. will be found some of the matters mentioned in this
Appendix, viz., the “Existential Import” of Propositions, the use of a
negative Copula, and the theory that “two negative Premisses prove
nothing.” I shall also extend the range of Syllogisms, by introducing
Propositions containing alternatives (such as “Not-all x are y”),
Propositions containing 3 or more Terms (such as “All ab are c”, which,
taken along with “Some bc′ are d”, would prove “Some d are a′”), &c. I
shall also discuss Sorites containing Entities, and the very puzzling
subjects of Hypotheticals and Dilemmas. I hope, in the course of Part
II., to go over all the ground usually traversed in the text-books used
in our Schools and Universities, and to enable my Readers to solve
Problems of the same kind as, and far harder than, those that are at
present set in their Examinations.

In Part III. I hope to deal with many curious and out-of-the-way
subjects, some of which are not even alluded to in any of the treatises
I have met with. In this Part will be found such matters as the Analysis
of Propositions into their Elements (let the Reader, who has never gone
into this branch of the subject, try to make out for himself what
additional Proposition would be needed to convert “Some a are b” into
“Some a are bc”), the treatment of Numerical and Geometrical Problems,
the construction of Problems, and the solution of Syllogisms and Sorites
containing Propositions more complex than any that I have used in Part
II.

I will conclude with eight Problems, as a taste of what is coming in
Part II. I shall be very glad to receive, from any Reader, who thinks he
has solved any one of them (more especially if he has done so without
using any Method of Symbols), what he conceives to be its complete
Conclusion.

It may be well to explain what I mean by the complete Conclusion of a
Syllogism or a Sorites. I distinguish their Terms as being of two
kinds——those which can be eliminated (e.g. the Middle Term of a
Syllogism), which I call the “Eliminands,” and those which cannot,
which I call the “Retinends”; and I do not call the Conclusion
complete, unless it states all the relations among the Retinends
only, which can be deduced from the Premisses.

1

All the boys, in a certain School, sit together in one large room every
evening. They are of no less than five nationalities——English,
Scotch, Welsh, Irish, and German. One of the Monitors (who is a great
reader of Wilkie Collins’ novels) is very observant, and takes MS. notes
of almost everything that happens, with the view of being a good
sensational witness, in case any conspiracy to commit a murder should be
on foot. The following are some of his notes:—

(1) Whenever some of the English boys are singing “Rule Britannia”, and
some not, some of the Monitors are wide-awake;

(2) Whenever some of the Scotch are dancing reels, and some of the Irish
fighting, some of the Welsh are eating toasted cheese;

(3) Whenever all the Germans are playing chess, some of the Eleven are
not oiling their bats;

(4) Whenever some of the Monitors are asleep, and some not, some of the
Irish are fighting;

(5) Whenever some of the Germans are playing chess, and none of the
Scotch are dancing reels, some of the Welsh are not eating toasted
cheese;

(6) Whenever some of the Scotch are not dancing reels, and some of the
Irish not fighting, some of the Germans are playing chess;

(7) Whenever some of the Monitors are awake, and some of the Welsh are
eating toasted cheese, none of the Scotch are dancing reels;

(8) Whenever some of the Germans are not playing chess, and some of
the Welsh are not eating toasted cheese, none of the Irish are
fighting;

(9) Whenever all the English are singing “Rule Britannia,” and some of
the Scotch are not dancing reels, none of the Germans are playing
chess;

(10) Whenever some of the English are singing “Rule Britannia”, and some
of the Monitors are asleep, some of the Irish are not fighting;

(11) Whenever some of the Monitors are awake, and some of the Eleven are
not oiling their bats, some of the Scotch are dancing reels;

(12) Whenever some of the English are singing “Rule Britannia”, and some
of the Scotch are not dancing reels, * * * *

Here the MS. breaks off suddenly. The Problem is to complete the
sentence, if possible.

[N.B. In solving this Problem, it is necessary to remember that
the Proposition “All x are y” is a Double Proposition, and is
equivalent to “Some x are y, and none are y′.” See Chapter Iii.]

2

(1) A logician, who eats pork-chops for supper, will probably lose
money;

(2) A gambler, whose appetite is not ravenous, will probably lose money;

(3) A man who is depressed, having lost money and being likely to lose
more, always rises at 5 a.m.;

(4) A man, who neither gambles nor eats pork-chops for supper, is sure
to have a ravenous appetite;

(5) A lively man, who goes to bed before 4 a.m., had better take to
cab-driving;

(6) A man with a ravenous appetite, who has not lost money and does not
rise at 5 a.m., always eats pork-chops for supper;

(7) A logician, who is in danger of losing money, had better take to
cab-driving;

(8) An earnest gambler, who is depressed though he has not lost money,
is in no danger of losing any;

(9) A man, who does not gamble, and whose appetite is not ravenous, is
always lively;

(10) A lively logician, who is really in earnest, is in no danger of
losing money;

(11) A man with a ravenous appetite has no need to take to cab-driving,
if he is really in earnest;

(12) A gambler, who is depressed though in no danger of losing money,
sits up till 4 a.m.

(13) A man, who has lost money and does not eat pork-chops for supper,
had better take to cab-driving, unless he gets up at 5 a.m.

(14) A gambler, who goes to bed before 4 a.m., need not take to
cab-driving, unless he has a ravenous appetite;

(15) A man with a ravenous appetite, who is depressed though in no
danger of losing, is a gambler.

Univ. “men”; a = earnest; b = eating pork-chops for supper;
c = gamblers; d = getting up at 5; e = having lost money; h = having a
ravenous appetite; k = likely to lose money; l = lively; m = logicians;
n = men who had better take to cab-driving; r = sitting up till 4.

[N.B. In this Problem, clauses, beginning with “though”, are
intended to be treated as essential parts of the Propositions
in which they occur, just as if they had begun with “and”.]

3

(1) When the day is fine, I tell Froggy “You’re quite the dandy, old
chap!”;

(2) Whenever I let Froggy forget that £10 he owes me, and he begins to
strut about like a peacock, his mother declares “He shall not go out
a-wooing!”;

(3) Now that Froggy’s hair is out of curl, he has put away his gorgeous
waistcoat;

(4) Whenever I go out on the roof to enjoy a quiet cigar, I’m sure to
discover that my purse is empty;

(5) When my tailor calls with his little bill, and I remind Froggy of
that £10 he owes me, he does not grin like a hyæna;

(6) When it is very hot, the thermometer is high;

(7) When the day is fine, and I’m not in the humour for a cigar, and
Froggy is grinning like a hyæna, I never venture to hint that he’s quite
the dandy;

(8) When my tailor calls with his little bill and finds me with an empty
purse, I remind Froggy of that £10 he owes me;

(9) My railway-shares are going up like anything!

(10) When my purse is empty, and when, noticing that Froggy has got his
gorgeous waistcoat on, I venture to remind him of that £10 he owes me,
things are apt to get rather warm;

(11) Now that it looks like rain, and Froggy is grinning like a hyæna, I
can do without my cigar;

(12) When the thermometer is high, you need not trouble yourself to take
an umbrella;

(13) When Froggy has his gorgeous waistcoat on, but is not strutting
about like a peacock, I betake myself to a quiet cigar;

(14) When I tell Froggy that he’s quite the dandy, he grins like a hyæna;

(15) When my purse is tolerably full, and Froggy’s hair is one mass of
curls, and when he is not strutting about like a peacock, I go out on
the roof;

(16) When my railway-shares are going up, and when it is chilly and
looks like rain, I have a quiet cigar;

(17) When Froggy’s mother lets him go a-wooing, he seems nearly mad with
joy, and puts on a waistcoat that is gorgeous beyond words;

(18) When it is going to rain, and I am having a quiet cigar, and Froggy
is not intending to go a-wooing, you had better take an umbrella;

(19) When my railway-shares are going up, and Froggy seems nearly mad
with joy, that is the time my tailor always chooses for calling with
his little bill;

(20) When the day is cool and the thermometer low, and I say nothing to
Froggy about his being quite the dandy, and there’s not the ghost of a
grin on his face, I haven’t the heart for my cigar!

(1) Any one, fit to be an M.P., who is not always speaking, is a public
benefactor;

(2) Clear-headed people, who express themselves well, have had a good
education;

(3) A woman, who deserves praise, is one who can keep a secret;

(4) People, who benefit the public, but do not use their influence for
good purpose, are not fit to go into Parliament;

(5) People, who are worth their weight in gold and who deserve praise,
are always unassuming;

(6) Public benefactors, who use their influence for good objects,
deserve praise;

(7) People, who are unpopular and not worth their weight in gold, never
can keep a secret;

(8) People, who can talk for ever and are fit to be Members of
Parliament, deserve praise;

(9) Any one, who can keep a secret and who is unassuming, is a
never-to-be-forgotten public benefactor;

(10) A woman, who benefits the public, is always popular;

(11) People, who are worth their weight in gold, who never leave off
talking, and whom it is impossible to forget, are just the people whose
photographs are in all the shop-windows;

(12) An ill-educated woman, who is not clear-headed, is not fit to go
into Parliament;

(13) Any one, who can keep a secret and is not for ever talking, is sure
to be unpopular;

(14) A clear-headed person, who has influence and uses it for good
objects, is a public benefactor;

(15) A public benefactor, who is unassuming, is not the sort of person
whose photograph is in every shop-window;

(16) People, who can keep a secret and who use their influence for good
purposes, are worth their weight in gold;

(17) A person, who has no power of expression and who cannot influence
others, is certainly not a woman;

(18) People, who are popular and worthy of praise, either are public
benefactors or else are unassuming.

Univ. “persons”; a = able to keep a secret; b = clear-headed;
c = constantly talking; d = deserving praise; e = exhibited in
shop-windows; h = expressing oneself well; k = fit to be an M.P.;
l = influential; m = never-to-be-forgotten; n = popular; r = public
benefactors; s = unassuming; t = using one’s influence for good objects;
v = well-educated; w = women; z = worth one’s weight in gold.

5

Six friends, and their six wives, are staying in the same hotel; and
they all walk out daily, in parties of various size and composition. To
ensure variety in these daily walks, they have agree to observe the
following Rules:—

(1) If Acres is with (i.e. is in the same party with) his wife, and
Barry with his, and Eden with Mrs. Hall, Cole must be with Mrs. Dix;

(2) If Acres is with his wife, and Hall with his, and Barry with Mrs.
Cole, Dix must not be with Mrs. Eden;

(3) If Cole and Dix and their wives are all in the same party, and Acres
not with Mrs. Barry, Eden must not be with Mrs. Hall;

(4) If Acres is with his wife, and Dix with his, and Barry not with
Mrs. Cole, Eden must be with Mrs. Hall;

(5) If Eden is with his wife, and Hall with his, and Cole with Mrs. Dix,
Acres must not be with Mrs. Barry;

(6) If Barry and Cole and their wives are all in the same party, and
Eden not with Mrs. Hall, Dix must be with Mrs. Eden.

The Problem is to prove that there must be, every day, at least one
married couple who are not in the same party.

After the six friends, named in Problem 5, had returned from their tour,
three of them, Barry, Cole, and Dix, agreed, with two other friends of
theirs, Lang and Mill, that the five should meet, every day, at a
certain table d’hôte. Remembering how much amusement they had derived
from their code of rules for walking-parties, they devised the following
rules to be observed whenever beef appeared on the table:—

(1) If Barry takes salt, then either Cole or Lang takes one only of
the two condiments, salt and mustard: if he takes mustard, then either
Dix takes neither condiment, or Mill takes both.

(2) If Cole takes salt, then either Barry takes only one condiment, or
Mill takes neither: if he takes mustard, then either Dix or Lang takes
both.

(3) If Dix takes salt, then either Barry takes neither condiment or Cole
take both: if he takes mustard, then either Lang or Mill takes neither.

(4) If Lang takes salt, then Barry or Dix takes only one condiment: if
he takes mustard, then either Cole or Mill takes neither.

(5) If Mill takes salt, then either Barry or Lang takes both condiments:
if he takes mustard, then either Cole or Dix takes only one.

The Problem is to discover whether these rules are compatible; and, if
so, what arrangements are possible.

[N.B. In this Problem, it is assumed that the phrase “if Barry
takes salt” allows of two possible cases, viz. (1) “he takes
salt only”; (2) “he takes both condiments”. And so with all
similar phrases.

[It is also assumed that the phrase “either Cole or Lang takes
one only of the two condiments” allows three possible cases,
viz. (1) “Cole takes one only, Lang takes both or neither”;
(2) “Cole takes both or neither, Lang takes one only”; (3)
“Cole takes one only, Lang takes one only”. And so with all
similar phrases.]

[It is also assumed that every rule is to be understood as
implying the words “and vice versâ.” Thus the first rule would
imply the addition “and, if either Cole or Lang takes only one
condiment, then Barry takes salt.”]]

(1) Brothers, who are much admired, are apt to be self-conscious;

(2) When two men of the same height are on opposite sides in Politics,
if one of them has his admirers, so also has the other;

(3) Brothers, who avoid general Society, look well when walking
together;

(4) Whenever you find two men, who differ in Politics and in their views
of Society, and who are not both of them ugly, you may be sure that they
look well when walking together;

(5) Ugly men, who look well when walking together, are not both of them
free from self-consciousness;

(6) Brothers, who differs in Politics, and are not both of them
handsome, never give themselves airs;

(7) John declines to go into Society, but never gives himself airs;

(8) Brothers, who are apt to be self-conscious, though not both of
them handsome, usually dislike Society;

(9) Men of the same height, who do not give themselves airs, are free
from self-consciousness;

(10) Men, who agree on questions of Art, though they differ in Politics,
and who are not both of them ugly, are always admired;

(11) Men, who hold opposite views about Art and are not admired, always
give themselves airs;

(12) Brothers of the same height always differ in Politics;

(13) Two handsome men, who are neither both of them admired nor both of
them self-conscious, are no doubt of different heights;

(14) Brothers, who are self-conscious, and do not both of them like
Society, never look well when walking together.

[N.B. See Note at end of Problem 2.]

(1) A man can always master his father;

(2) An inferior of a man’s uncle owes that man money;

(3) The father of an enemy of a friend of a man owes that man nothing;

(4) A man is always persecuted by his son’s creditors;

(5) An inferior of the master of a man’s son is senior to that man;

(6) A grandson of a man’s junior is not his nephew;

(7) A servant of an inferior of a friend of a man’s enemy is never
persecuted by that man;

(8) A friend of a superior of the master of a man’s victim is that man’s
enemy;

(9) An enemy of a persecutor of a servant of a man’s father is that
man’s friend.

The Problem is to deduce some fact about great-grandsons.

[N.B. In this Problem, it is assumed that all the men, here
referred to, live in the same town, and that every pair of them
are either “friends” or “enemies,” that every pair are related
as “senior and junior”, “superior and inferior”, and that
certain pairs are related as “creditor and debtor”, “father and
son”, “master and servant”, “persecutor and victim”, “uncle and
nephew”.]

9

“Jack Sprat could eat no fat: 
       His wife could eat no lean: 
   And so, between them both, 
       They licked the platter clean.”

Solve this as a Sorites-Problem, taking lines 3 and 4 as the Conclusion
to be proved. It is permitted to use, as Premisses, not only all that is
here asserted, but also all that we may reasonably understand to be
implied.
