Lecture One: The Sun

(Part 1 of 7)

We can all feel that the sun is very hot, and we know that it is very big and a long way off. Let us talk about the heat first.

On a cold day it is pleasant to come into a room with a good fire, and everybody knows that the nearer you get to the fire the more strongly you feel the heat. The boy at the far end of the room may be shivering while those close to the fire are as warm as they care to be. If we could come much nearer to the sun than we actually are, we should find the heat greatly increased. Indeed, if we went close enough the temperature would rise beyond anything we could bear; we should be roasted. On the other hand we should certainly be frozen to death if we were carried much further from the sun than we are now. We are able to live comfortably because our bodies are exactly suited to the warmth the sun sends to the distance at which the earth happens to stand.

Suppose you could endure any degree of heat, and had some way of setting out on a voyage to the sun. Take with you a wax candle, a lead bullet, a penny, a poker and a flint.

Soon after you start you find the warmth from the sun increasing, and the candle begins to soften and melt away. Still you go on, and you notice the lead bullet getting hotter and hotter until it is too hot to touch, and at last the lead melts as the wax did before it. You are still a very long way from the sun, and you have the penny, the poker and the flint left.

As you draw closer to that great light the heat keeps increasing, and at last you notice the penny beginning to glow red-hot. Go nearer still and it melts away and follows the bullet and the candle. Press on, and you find the iron poker — which was red-hot when the penny melted — growing brighter and brighter, until it is a brilliant white, so dazzling that you can hardly bear to look at it. Then it too begins to melt, and the poker turns to liquid like the penny, the lead and the wax before it. A little nearer yet you may carry the flint, now glowing with the same fierce heat that melted the poker; but even the flint must yield at last, and become not merely a liquid like water but a vapour like steam.

You will ask how we know all this. Since nobody could ever make such a journey, how can we feel certain the sun is so tremendously hot? I know what I say is true for several reasons, but I will give only one, and it comes from an experiment with the burning-glass that most boys have tried.

[Figure 1: How to use the burning-glass. One of you holds the lens, the other holds the paper, and the bright spot does the rest.]

[Figure 2: The noonday gun. The lens is set so that when — and only when — noon arrives, the moving spot of light reaches the touch-hole and fires the cannon.]

We may use one of those large lenses meant for magnifying photographs; but almost any lens will do, so long as it is not too flat, as the lenses in spectacles generally are. On a fine sunny day in summer you turn the burning-glass to the sun, and by holding a piece of paper at the right distance you get a bright spot (Figure 1). At that spot there is intense heat: you can light a match with it, explode gunpowder, or set the paper itself on fire.

The broad lens gathers up the rays that fall on it from the sun and concentrates them at one spot, which therefore becomes hot and bright. If we merely used a flat piece of glass, the sunbeams would go straight through; they would not be gathered together, and they would not be strong enough to burn the paper. The lens, you see, is not flat: its faces are curved, and this gives them the power of bending rays of light and heat inwards, so as to unite their effect at the one point we call the focus. When a great many rays are collected on the same spot, each of them adds its own little share of warmth.

[Figure 3: A tell-tale for the sun. A glass globe serves as the burning-glass, and the moving spot of light chars its own track along a card ruled with the hours — so the card is a record of exactly when the sun was out.]

Some ingenious person turned this principle to an odd use by arranging a burning-glass over a cannon in such a way that, just as noon arrived, the spot of light would reach the touch-hole and fire it off. The sun is thus made to announce the middle of the day itself (Figure 2).

Another application of the burning-glass is to keep a record of how many hours of sunshine there are each day. You will understand the apparatus from Figure 3; here the lens is replaced by a glass globe, which acts as a burning-glass. As the sun moves across the sky the bright spot of light moves too, and burns its track along a sheet of paper ruled with lines corresponding to the hours. When the sun is hidden by cloud the burning stops. So by keeping each day's piece of paper we have an unerring tell-tale, which shows us during which hours the sun was shining brightly and during which he was hidden. You see that the burning-glass is not merely a toy; it can be made useful in teaching us something about the weather.

Another experiment with the burning-glass will teach us something more. Take a candle, and from its flame you can get a bright point at the focus. It may fall on your hand and you can hardly feel it, and you will readily believe that the focus is nothing like as hot as the candle. Even when a burning-glass is held in front of a bright fire there is comparatively little heat at the focus. By using a lens to concentrate the beams of an electric lamp, Professor Tyndall has shown how to set light to a piece of paper and produce many other effects; but even so, the focus is nothing like as hot as the arc between the two glowing carbons. You might move your finger through that focus without much inconvenience, but I would not advise you to trust your finger between the poles of the electric light itself.

The temperature obtained at the focus of a burning-glass seems always, then, to be lower than the temperature of the source of heat itself. This will be equally true when we turn a burning-glass on the sun; and so we know that the sun must be hotter than any heat that can be got with the biggest burning-glass on the brightest of summer days. But burning-glasses a yard wide have been made, and astonishing heat effects have been produced with them. Steel has been melted by the sunbeams, and so have other substances that even our greatest furnaces cannot fuse. The sun must therefore have a higher temperature than molten steel — higher, indeed, than any temperature we can produce on the earth.

I have tried to prove to you that the sun is very hot; but it would be as well to see what might be said on the other side. It is often by considering objections that we learn. So I shall tell you of a difficulty that was once raised when I was trying to explain the heat of the sun to an intelligent man.

"I am sure," said my friend, "that you must be quite wrong. You said that the nearer you got to the sun the hotter it would be; but I know this to be a mistake. When tourists go to Switzerland they sometimes climb very high mountains. The top of a mountain, of course, is nearer the sun than the bottom; so if the sun were really hot, the climber ought to find it much warmer on the summit than at the base. But everyone knows there is abundant ice and snow on the lofty Alpine summits, while down below in the valleys the weather may at that very moment be exceedingly warm. Does it not seem, then, that the nearer we get to the sun the colder it is, and the further off we are the warmer?"

But my friend was quite wrong in his argument. The coldness of the mountain tops depends on something he had not taken into account. There is something besides the sun that helps to make us warm and comfortable, and that something is more or less lacking at great heights.

You know that we live by breathing air, and that we find air wherever we go, over land and sea, all round the earth. People who go up in balloons are carried up by the air, which shows that the air extends for miles and miles over our heads — though it grows lighter and thinner the higher you go.

We do not only use the air for breathing; it does us another indispensable service. It acts as a blanket to keep the earth warm. Indeed, we ought rather to describe the air as a pile of blankets, one laid over another. These air blankets let the earth keep the heat it receives from the sunbeams, by preventing it escaping back into space. So the warmth is held in, and our globe is made fit to live on.

You see, then, that for our comfort we need not only the sun to give us the heat but the set of blankets to keep it once we have got it. If we threw off the blankets we should be uncomfortable, though the sun shone just as brightly as before.

A man who climbs to the top of a mountain at midday does get somewhat nearer the sun, and so far as that goes he ought no doubt to feel warmer — but the gain is far too small to be worth thinking about. Even at the top of Mont Blanc the increase of heat due to the approach to the sun would be only one ten-millionth part of the whole. That would be utterly imperceptible; not even a thermometer would be delicate enough to show it.

On the other hand, by climbing the mountain he has got above the lower regions of the air. He has not, it is true, reached even halfway to the upper surface of it — that is still very far over his head — but the higher layers of the atmosphere are so very thin that they make most indifferent blankets. The Alpine climber on the summit has therefore thrown off the best part of his blankets and taken a chill, while the heat he gains by his closer approach to the sun is imperceptible. Perhaps you will now be able to understand why perpetual snow lies on the tops of the great mountains. They are chilled because they have not so many air blankets as the snug valleys beneath.

The brightness of the sun is among the most wonderful things in nature, and there are three points I want you to remember; then you will indeed agree with Milton that the sun is "with surpassing glory crowned."

First, think of the beauty and brilliance of a lovely day in June. Then remember that all this flood of light comes from a single lamp at a most tremendous distance. And thirdly, recollect that the sun is not like a bull's-eye lantern concentrating all its light for our particular benefit: he spreads it equally in every direction, and we on this earth do not receive the two-thousand-millionth part of what he pours out so lavishly. When we think of the brightness of daylight, and of the distance the light has come, and that nature has fitted no vast lenses to aim it in our direction, we begin to understand the sun's true magnificence.

Further Benefits We Receive from the Sun

I want to show you how great our gratitude to the sun ought to be. On a bright summer's day, when we are revelling in the warmth and enjoying the gladness of the sunshine, no words are needed to convince us of the usefulness and the kindness of sunbeams. So we will not take midsummer. Let us take midwinter.

Take this very Christmas season, when the days are short and cheerless and the nights are long and dark and cold. We might be tempted to think the sun had nearly forgotten us. It is true that he seems to pay us only occasional visits, and that between fog and cloud we in England see little enough of him. But visible or invisible, the sun tends us without ceasing, and provides for our welfare in ways we do not always remember.

Let me give you an illustration of what I mean. You will go back this dull cold afternoon to the happy home where your Christmas holidays are being enjoyed. It will be quite dark before you get there, for the sun sets so very early on these wintry days. You will gather round a cheerful fire. The curtains will be drawn, the lamps lit, and the disagreeable weather outside forgotten in the warmth and light within. Five o'clock has come, the pretty wicker table has been set beside your mother's chair, and on it are the cups and saucers and the fancy teapot. Under the table is a little shelf with some tempting cakes and a tender muffin. Two or three welcome friends have joined the little group, and a delightful half-hour is certain to follow.

But you may say: "What have tea and muffins, lamps and fireplaces, to do with the sun? Are they not all artificial contrivances, as far removed as possible from sunbeams and the natural beauties sunbeams create?" Well — not so far, perhaps, as you may think. Let us see.

Poke up the fire; and while it is throwing out that delicious warmth and that charming flickering light, let us try to find out where the light and the heat have come from. No doubt they have come from the coal. But then, where did the coal come from?

It came from the mine, where brave colliers hewed it out deep underground, and then it was hoisted to the surface by steam engines. Our inquiry must not stop there, for another question arises at once: how did this wonderful fuel get into the earth in the first place?

When we examine coal carefully, using the microscope to see its structure, we find that it is not like a stone. It is made of trees and other plants, whose leaves and stems can sometimes still be recognised. Indeed, the fossil trunks and roots of great trees are occasionally conspicuous in a coal-pit. It is quite plain that these are the remains of a vegetation that was once growing and flourishing; and on further inquiry we learn that coal must have been produced in the following way.

Once upon a time a great forest flourished. The sun shone down on it, and kindly showers watered it, and insects and other creatures sported in its shade. The trees and plants were not like those we see about us now; they were more like ferns and mare's-tails and gigantic club-mosses. In the fullness of time they died, and fell, and decayed, and others sprang up to meet the same end. So it came about that over the ages the remains of leaves and fruits and trunks piled up over the soil.

The forest stood near the seashore; and then a remarkable change took place — the land began slowly to sink. You need not think this impossible. Land has often been known to change its level gradually. In fact, a sinking is going on slowly at this moment in many places on the earth, while in other places the land is rising.

As the forest sank lower and lower the sea-water began to flood it, and all the trees perished, until at last deep water covered the surface where a fine forest had stood. At the bottom of that sea lay the decaying vegetation.

And what had destroyed the growing forest turned out to be the means of preserving its remains. Then as now, the rivers ran into the sea, and the river water — especially in times of flood — carried clay and mud down with it, held in suspension. This material was slowly laid down on the floor of the ocean, and so a coating of mud came to overlie the remains of the forest. In the course of ages these layers grew thick and heavy and hardened into a great flat rock, while the trunks and leaves underneath were squeezed together by the weight and packed into a solid mass, which turned black and in time was transformed into coal.
