Lecture One: The Sun

(Part 2 of 7)

After ages and ages had gone by, the bed of the sea stopped sinking and began slowly to rise. The water over the newly made layers of stone grew shallower, and at last the floor was lifted until it came up out of the sea. Of course it was not the original ground that formed the surface of this newly uncovered land: the sheets of hardened clay lay on top. Over that fresh surface life gradually spread, until at length man himself came to live there — while far beneath his feet the remains of the ancient vegetation lay buried.

When we now dig down through the rocks we come upon the pieces of trees and other plants which time and pressure have turned from leaves and wood into our familiar coal.

That ancient forest grew because sunbeams were plentiful in those early times and nourished a luxuriant vegetation. The heat and light the sun spent so freely then were caught by the leaves of those flourishing plants and stored away in their stems and foliage. And so the ancient sunbeams have been kept in our coal-beds for uncounted thousands of years. When we put a lump of coal on the fire this evening, and it gives out its welcome warmth and cheerful light, it is only giving back to us some of that store of preserved sunshine of which our earth holds so great a treasure. The sun has therefore contributed very materially to our comfort: it has provided the fire that keeps us warm.

The orb of day has done more for our tea party than that, however — for has he not produced the tea itself? The tea grew a long way off, most likely in China, where the plant was ripened by the warmth of the sunbeams. From China the tea-chests were brought to London by a sailing ship, and the ship made that long voyage by means of sails, blown by what we call wind — which is merely great volumes of air hurrying from one part of the earth to another.

We may ask what makes the air move, for it will not rush about like that unless there is considerable force to drive it. Here again we see the influence of the sun. Tracts of land are warmed by the sunbeams; the air takes up the heat from the land; the warm air is buoyant and rises, and cooler air flows in continually to take its place. To do that it must of course rush across the country — and there is your wind. All the air currents on our earth are therefore due to the sun.

You see, then, how greatly we are indebted to our brilliant luminary for the pleasure of our tea-table. The sun has not only given us the coal and the tea; he actually provided the means by which the tea was carried all the way from China to our own shores.

We can trace the connection between the hot water and the sun as well. The water came immediately from the kettle, and the kettle was heated on the fire, and the fire was made of sunbeams; so it is the warmth of the sun that has made the water boil.

If you visit the waterworks you will see great reservoirs. Some have been filled by a river; sometimes the water is pumped up from a deep well in the ground; sometimes it is surface water caught on a mountainside. But whatever the immediate source of our water supply, the real origin is to be looked for not in the earth beneath but in the heavens above. All the water we use day by day has come from the clouds. It is the clouds that sent down the rain — or sometimes the snow, or the hail — and it is this water from the clouds that fills our rivers. It is this water, too, that sinks deep into the earth and supplies our wells. So from whatever source the water may seem to have come, it is really the clouds that have been our benefactors. The water in your teacup tonight was, a little while ago, in a cloud floating far overhead in the sky.

We may look a little further still and ask where the clouds have come from. Clouds are certainly nothing but a form of steam, of water vapour; and since they are for ever sending rain down on the earth, there must be some means of replenishing their supply. Here again our excellent friend the sun is to be found helping us — secretly, if not openly. He pours his rich warm beams down on the great oceans, and the heat turns some of the water into vapour, which, being lighter than air, climbs upwards for miles. There the vapour often passes into the form of cloud, and the winds carry the clouds away to refresh the thirsty lands of the earth.

So you see it is the sun that fetches us water from the great oceans covering so much of our globe, and sends it on by the winds to supply our waterworks and fill our teapots. And notice another little kindness of our great benefactor. The water of the oceans is quite salt, and we could not make tea with salt water; so when the sun lifts the vapour from the sea, he most thoughtfully leaves all the salt behind, and provides us with the purest of fresh water.

That nice muffin was baked by the sun, toasted by the sun, and made from wheat grown by the sun. If the wheat was ground in a windmill, then the sun raised the wind that turned the mill. Perhaps the flour-mill was driven by steam — in which case the sun, long ago, provided the coal for the boiler. The miller might have lived by a river and used a water-mill; but if he did, then here again it was the sun that actually did the work, for the sun raised that water to the clouds, and after it had fallen as rain and was on its way back to the sea, its descent was put to use turning the water-wheel. The water gets its power to turn the mill from the fact that it is running downhill; but it could not run down unless it had first been carried up. So it is indeed the sun that drives the water-wheel.

Nor can the baker do without the sun's help even if he rejects windmills and steam-mills and water-mills alike, and determines to grind the corn himself with a pestle and mortar. Here, at least, you might think it is a man's own sinews and muscles doing the work — and so it is. But you are mistaken if you think the sun has given no indispensable help. The sun has provided the power that moves the baker's arms just as surely as it raised the wind that turned the windmill. The force exerted in grinding with the pestle came from the food the man has eaten; that food was grown by the sun, and the man got from the food the energy the food had got from the sun's heat. So look at it whichever way you please: even for the grinding of the wheat for the muffin at your tea party, you are wholly indebted to the sun.

It is the sun that has bleached the tablecloth to that snowy whiteness. The sun has given the bright colours that look so pretty in the girls' dresses. With how much meaning we can say, and feel, that light is pleasant to the eye — and what prettier name than Little Sunbeam could we have for the darling child who makes our home so bright?

The Distance of the Sun

The sun is a very long way off. It is not easy for you to imagine so great a distance, but if you want to learn astronomy you must make the attempt. This is the first measurement we shall have to make on our way to that far-off country called Star-land; and long as we shall find it to be, we shall have to deal later with distances very much longer.

When you are out in the street, or taking a walk in the country, you can see at once that this man is near, or that house is far, or that mountain is many miles away. This is because you have other objects in between to help you judge. You see, for instance, that there are a number of houses and farmyards, and you notice hedges dividing one field from another between you and the mountain. You see woods and parks too, and perhaps stretches of moorland running up the slopes. You have a sense of how big farmyards and fields are, and of how wide woods and moors are; and putting all this together you realise that the mountain must be miles away.

But when we look at the sun we have no such conveniently placed helps for judging his distance. There is nothing in between, and merely gazing at the sun tells us very little. We must go to the astronomer and ask him how far off he has found the sun to be — and then beg from him some explanation of the method he used in making the measurement.

It has been found that the sun is on average about ninety-three million miles from the earth, though sometimes it is a little further and sometimes a little nearer.

Let us first try to count 93,000,000. The easiest way is to get the clock to do it for us, and here is a sum I would suggest you work out. How long will the clock have to tick before it has made as many ticks as there are miles between the earth and the sun? Every minute the clock makes 60 ticks, and in 24 hours the total comes to 86,400. Divide that into 93,000,000 and you will find that more than 1076 days — nearly three years — would be needed for the clock to finish the task.

We may look at it another way, and ask how long an express train would take to go all the way from the earth to the sun. Suppose the train travels at 40 miles an hour. Running for a whole day and a whole night without stopping, it would cover 960 miles; in a year it would cover 350,400 miles; and dividing that into 93,000,000 we reach the conclusion that a train at 40 miles an hour would have to travel not merely for days, nor for weeks, nor even for years, but for centuries. Not until 265 years had gone by would the mighty journey be over. Even if King Charles I had been present when the train began to move, it would not have arrived yet. Nobody who set out on that train could expect to see the end of the trip. That would not come until the time of his great-great-grandchildren.

How Astronomers Measure the Distances of the Heavenly Bodies

I shall have to speak so often of the distances of the heavenly bodies that I may as well explain, once for all, how we have been able to find out what those distances are. It would be a very puzzling business if we tried to describe it fully, but the principle of the method is not at all difficult.

Do you know why you have been given two eyes? One of the reasons, undoubtedly, is to help you judge distances. You see that this boy (Figure 4) judges the distance of his finger by how far his two eyes have to turn inwards to look at it. In much the same way we judge the distance of a heavenly body by making observations of it from two different stations.

[Figure 4: Two eyes are better than one — the boy has only to notice how far his eyes must turn inwards to know how far off his finger is.]

[Figure 5: How we measured the height of the ball. A boy at one end of the lecture table and a girl at the other, each holding a card cut to exactly the angle between the other child's face and the ball overhead.]

I shall illustrate our method of measuring the real distance of a body in the heavens by showing you how we can find the height of that large india-rubber ball hanging from the ceiling. I do not, of course, intend to run a measuring tape up to the ball, because I want to solve the problem on the same principle by which we measure the distance of the sun, or of any other heavenly body we cannot reach.

I will ask the help of a boy and a girl, who will please stand one at each end of the lecture table. The apparatus we need is very simple: two cards and a pair of scissors. The boy will kindly cut his card to such an angle that when he holds it to his eye, one side of the angle points straight at the little girl and the other points straight at the ball, just as you see in the picture (Figure 5). The girl will please do the same with her card, so that along one side she just sees the little boy's face while the other side points up to the ball.

These angles must be cut properly. If the angle is too big, then when one side points at the boy's face the other will be directed above the ball; if it is too small, one side will be directed below the ball while the other points at the boy. The whole accuracy of our little observation depends on cutting the card angles correctly.

When they have been truly shaped, it is easy to find the distance of the ball. We first take a foot rule and measure the length of our table from one of our young friends to the other. That length is twelve feet. To find the distance of the ball we must now make a drawing.

We take a sheet of paper and rule a line twelve inches long, which will stand for the length of the table — each inch of the drawing standing for a foot of the real table. Mark the end where the girl stood B, and the boy's end A. Now bring the cards and lay them on the line, just as the figure shows. The girl's card is placed with its corner at B and one edge along BA; the boy's card with its corner at A and one edge along AB. Next, with a pencil, we rule lines along the other edges of the cards, taking care to hold them in position all the while. Carried on, these two lines meet at C, and that must be the position of the ball on the scale of our little sketch. It only remains to take the foot rule and measure the length from A to C on the drawing. I find it to be twenty inches — and I have so arranged matters that the distance from B to C is the same.

[Figure 6: This is what we wanted the cards for. Laid down at either end of a line twelve inches long, they carry their angles onto the paper, and where the two ruled lines cross is the ball.]

I do not mean to trouble you much with Euclid in these lectures; but as many of my young friends have learnt the sixth book, I will just mention the well-known proposition which tells us that the corresponding sides of two similar triangles are proportional.

We have two similar triangles here. There is the big one, with the boy at one corner, the girl at another and the ball overhead; and here is the small one we have just drawn. They are similar because they have the same angles — and it was to make sure they had the same angles that we were so careful in cutting the cards. Since the two triangles are similar, their sides must be proportional. We agreed that the line AB, twelve inches long, should represent the length of the table between the little boy and girl. So the distance AC must, on the same scale, be the distance between the ball and the boy at the end. On the drawing that is twenty inches; and therefore the real distance from the end of the table to the ball is twenty feet.
