Lecture One: The Sun

(Part 3 of 7)

So you see that without going up to the ball, or running a string down from it, or making direct contact with it in any other way, we have been able to find out how high in the air the ball actually hangs. This simple illustration explains the principle of the method by which astronomers learn the distances of the various heavenly bodies from the earth. You must think of the sun, the moon and the stars as globes supported somehow over our heads, and we set out to discover their distances from measurements of angles made at the two ends of a base-line.

[Figure 7: This would be our base-line when finding the sun's distance — the two observers set as far apart as any two people on the earth can be, one at either edge of the globe.]

Astronomers must of course choose two stations far more widely separated than the ones in our little experiment. Indeed, the greater the interval between the two stations, the better. They need a much greater distance than from one side of this room to the other, or from one side of London to the other. If it were merely a balloon we were looking at, then when one observer on one side of London and another on the opposite side had shaped their cards carefully, we should be able to work out the height of the balloon quite easily. But the sun is so much further off than any balloon could ever be that we must separate the observers far more widely. Even the breadth of England would not be enough, so we must set them further and further apart until they are as widely divided as any two people on this earth can be.

One astronomer takes his position at A (Figure 7) and the other at the opposite side, at B, so that both can see the sun. They must use a far more accurate way of measuring the angles than cutting cards with scissors; and since the astronomer at A cannot see his friend at B, measuring the angles accurately is no easy matter. But we need not trouble ourselves with those difficulties now. It is enough for the present to know that the angles are measured with delicate and very accurate instruments. Nor do the astronomers make a little sketch such as served our purpose; they make a calculation, which is a far more accurate way of arriving at a true measurement.

The astronomers know the size of the earth, and so they know how many thousands of miles lie between the two stations where the observations are made. That distance plays the same part in their calculation as the length of the table did in our sketch. From each end of the line they set off an angle, just as we did; and the astronomer must use the principle of similar triangles out of Euclid, just as we had to. At last, having calculated the sides of their triangle, they obtain the distance of the sun.

The Apparent Smallness of Distant Objects

[Figure 8: The nearer you are, the bigger the globe looks. The girl standing close must turn her eyes right up and right down to take it all in; the boy, further off, sees the whole of it at a glance.]

[Figure 9: The globe is so far off that it lies beyond the picture altogether. The dotted lines show how narrow an angle is left, and so how small it seems.]

I ought to explain here a principle that anyone learning about the stars must always keep in mind: the further off a body is, the smaller it looks.

Perhaps this will be clear from the little sketch alongside (Figure 8). It shows a great globe, with oceans and continents marked on it, and a little boy and a little girl looking at it. The girl stands quite close, and I have drawn two dotted lines from her eye, one to the top of the globe and one to the bottom. If she wants to examine the whole of the side of the globe she can see, she must first look along the upper dotted line and then turn her gaze downwards until she reaches the lower one; and having to move her eyes so far up and down, she will think the globe very big — and she will be quite right.

The boy, as you see, is on the other side of the globe, but I have put him much further off than the girl. I have drawn two dotted lines from his eye to the globe as well, and it is plain that he will not have to move his head much up or down to see the whole of it. He can take it in at a glance, and so to him the globe will seem comparatively small, because he is far enough away from it. The further off he is, the smaller it will look.

You can easily imagine that if the globe were far enough away, the two lines taking in the whole of it would be like those in Figure 9, where the globe is so distant that it cannot be shown in the picture at all. The apparent size of the globe — which is really measured by the angle between those two lines — grows smaller and smaller as the distance grows greater. Now you can understand why an object seems smaller the further off it is; and indeed, when it is far enough, it stops being visible at all.

I could give you many illustrations of size dwindling with distance, and no doubt so could you. Every boy knows that his kite looks smaller and smaller the more string he lets out. I once saw in the west of Ireland a bird that seemed a mere speck high up near the clouds; but from its flight and other circumstances I knew that the speck was no little bird. It was a great eagle, dwarfed by the height it had soared to.

It is in astronomy that we find the best illustrations of this principle. Enormous objects seem small because they are so very far off. You must always remember, then, that although a thing may look small, the appearance may be pure delusion. It may be that the object is very big but very distant. In astronomy that is almost always the case — there is so much room above us, around us, on every side in space.

Look up at the ceiling. It certainly does not bound space, for there is another side to it; and then there is the roof of the house. But the roof is no boundary either, for above it is the air, and higher up still the clouds; and so we can carry our imagination on and on, through and beyond the air, up to where the stars are, and still on and on. And since there is unlimited room, the heavenly bodies take advantage of it, and are generally at distances so gigantic that however small they may look, their smallness is nothing but deception.

Let us try to bring home the sun's extreme remoteness another way. Imagine you were on the sun and took a look at our earth from that distance. To find out what we should expect to see, let us think about a balloon voyage.

If you went up in a balloon you would at first see only the houses and the objects immediately about you; but as you rose, the view would widen and widen. You would see that London was surrounded by countryside; and then, as you soared higher, the sea would come into view and you would be able to trace the coasts east and west and south. If somehow you could go higher than any balloon could carry you, the whole of the British Isles would presently lie spread out beneath you like a map. Higher and higher, and the continent of Europe would gradually open out, until at last the great oceans and even other continents came into sight — and then you would see that our whole earth is indeed a globe.

The higher you went, the less distinctly you would be able to make out the details on the surface. At last the outlines of continents and oceans would fade, and you would begin to lose any sense of the shape of the earth itself. Long before you had reached the distance of the sun, the earth would look merely as the planet Venus looks to us now.

It is instructive to consider how small our earth would seem if we could view it from the sun. Think of that very familiar little globe, a lawn-tennis ball, which is two and three-quarter inches across. Now suppose a tennis ball were on the opposite side of the street, or further off still — suppose it were half a mile away. What could you expect to see of it? And yet the earth, seen from the sun, would look no bigger than a tennis ball looks from half a mile.

The Shape and Size of the Sun

We have spoken of the heat of the sun, how hot he is, and of the distance of the sun, how far off he is. Now we must say a little about his size, and about his shape.

It is plain that the sun is round — that it has the shape of a ball. We are sure of this because although a plate is circular, if it were held so that we saw it edge-on from a distance it would not look round at all. The sun is always turning, and it always looks like a circle; so we are certain that its true shape must be globular, and not merely circular like a flat plate.

In the middle of the day, when the sun stands high in the heavens, it is impossible for us to form any notion of his size. People will make very different estimates of how big he looks. Some will say he looks as large as a dinner plate — but such statements mean nothing unless we say where the plate is to be held. If it is near the eye, the plate may of course hide the sun, and everything else besides. If the plate were about a hundred feet away it would often hide the sun. If it were more than a hundred feet away it could not hide the sun completely; and the further off the plate, the smaller it would seem.

There is no way of judging the sun's size while he stands high in the heavens. But when he is rising or setting we see him pass behind trees or mountains, so that there are objects in between to compare him with; and then we have actual proof that the sun must be a very large body indeed.

[Figure 10: A sunset viewed from Marseilles, by Marcus Codde — the peak of Mount Carigou in the Pyrenees, a hundred and fifty-eight miles off, standing as a small dark notch against the disc of the setting sun.]

Here is a picture by Marcus Codde, taken from the French journal l'Astronomie, which gives a charming illustration of a sunset at Marseilles (Figure 10). If you want to see for yourself that the sun is bigger than a mountain, you may go to the top of Notre Dame de la Garde — but you must choose either the 10th of February or the 31st of October for your visit, because it is only on those evenings that the sun sets in the right position.

On both those evenings the sun sinks directly behind Mount Carigou in the Pyrenees. That mountain is a long way from Marseilles — no less than one hundred and fifty-eight miles. But it is so lofty that when the sky is clear the summit can be seen distinctly against the sun as a background, in the way the picture shows. It must be a very pretty sight, and it teaches us an important lesson. The sun is further away than the mountain, and yet you see the sun on both sides of the mountain and above it as well. Here, then, we learn without any calculation at all that the sun must be bigger than the upper part of a great mountain in the Pyrenees.

When we work out the size of the sun from the measurements astronomers have made, we discover that he is a great deal bigger than Mount Carigou. We find that the entire range of the Pyrenees, the whole of Europe, and indeed our whole globe are insignificant by comparison.

[Figure 11: How we compare the earth and the sun. The football on the table is the sun; the earth is the single grain of small shot beside it, and it takes a hundred of those grains laid side by side to stretch across the football.]

There is a football on the table, shown in Figure 11. We shall let it stand for the sun, and now we must choose something to stand for the earth — but we must get the proportions exactly right.

A tennis ball will not do; it is far too big. The fact is that the width of the earth is less than the hundredth part of the width of the sun, whereas the tennis ball is a quarter the width of the football. So we must choose something a good deal smaller. I try a marble, even the smallest marble I can find; but on measuring it I find that a hundred such marbles laid side by side would be far longer than the width of the football. I must look for something smaller still. A grain of small-sized shot gives the right size for our model of the earth: about a hundred of those grains laid side by side will stretch to the width of the football.

Now you will be able to form some idea of how enormous the sun really is. Think how big this earth is when we begin to travel about it. What a tremendous voyage it is to New Zealand — and even then we have only gone halfway round the globe. Then consider that the sun is bigger than the earth in the same proportion as that football is bigger than that grain of shot.

If a million such grains of shot were melted down and cast into a single globe, it would still not be as large as that football. If a million globes the size of our earth could be joined together, they would no doubt make a vast globe, but not one as large as the sun. Think of a single house with three or four people living in it, and then think of this mighty London with its millions of inhabitants. The house stands for our earth, and great London for the sun.

The Spots on the Sun

I have shown you that the sun is intensely hot, and a very long way off, and enormously big. Now we must describe what the surface of the sun looks like when we examine it closely.

[Figure 12: Looking at the sun. A small telescope on a stand, its eyepiece drawn out a little further than usual, throws the sun's own picture onto a screen — where a whole roomful of young astronomers can study it at once, and nobody's eyes are at risk.]

If you take a piece of very dark glass, or smoke a piece of glass over a candle, you can look straight at the sun in comfort. A nicer plan is to prick a pinhole in a card and look at the sun through that, which is no trouble at all. Generally speaking, a view of the sun this way will show you nothing but a uniformly bright surface.

To study the face of our great luminary carefully you must use the help the telescope gives the astronomer. A very good way of doing it is shown in Figure 12. A small telescope fixed on a stand is pointed at the sun; the eyepiece is drawn out rather further than for direct observation, and the sun then draws its own picture on a screen. This can be examined without any inconvenience and without any protection for the eye, and a number of young astronomers can all look at the sun at the same moment.

On such a picture you will generally see the brilliant surface marked with dark spots, sometimes as many of them as in the case shown in Figure 13. These spots look very different according to circumstances. One of them, seen through a very powerful telescope, showed the wonderful structure represented in Figure 14.
