Lecture Two: The Moon

(Part 1 of 6)

The first day of the week is named after the greatest body in the heavens — the sun — and so we call it Sun-day. The second day is named after the next most important heavenly body, the moon; and though we do not quite say Moon-day, we do say Monday, which is very nearly the same. In French too the moon is la lune, and Lundi is our Monday. The other days of the week also take their names from the heavens, but we shall speak of those later. We are now going to talk about the moon.

We can divide the objects in this room into two classes. There are the bright faces in front of me, and there are the bright electric lights above. The lights give out light and the faces receive it. I can see both; but I see the lamps by the light they give out themselves, and I see the faces by the light they have received from the lamps.

This is a very simple distinction, but a very important one in Star-land. Among all the bodies that glitter in the heavens, some shine by their own light, like the lamps; others are bright only by reflected light, like the faces. It seems impossible that we should confuse the brightness of a pleasant face with the beam of a pretty lamp — but in the heavens it is often not at all easy to tell a body that shines by its own light from one that merely shines by light reflected from somewhere else. I think many people would go badly wrong if they were asked to point out which objects in the sky are really self-luminous and which are only lit up by other bodies. Astronomers themselves have sometimes been deceived in this way.

The easiest example of the contrast is the sun and the moon. The sun, as we have seen, is the splendid source of light, which it scatters in every direction. Some of that light falls on our earth and gives us the glories of the day; some of it falls on the moon. And though the moon has no more light of her own than earth or stones have, yet when a torrent of sunbeams is poured over her she enjoys a day as we do. One side of her is brilliantly lit, and that is what makes our satellite visible.

This explains the marked contrast between the sun and the moon. The whole of the sun is always bright, while half of the moon is always in darkness. When the bright side of the moon is turned straight towards us we see a complete circle, and we say the moon is full. At other times only a part of the bright surface is turned our way, and that is what produces the beautiful crescents and half-circles and other phases of the moon.

[Figure 28: To show that the moon is lighted by sunbeams. A large india-rubber ball hangs in a beam from the electric light; those on one side of the room see it nearly full, those in the middle see a half-moon, and those on the far side see a thin crescent — all at the same moment.]

A simple piece of apparatus (Figure 28) will explain these different appearances. The large india-rubber ball shown there represents the moon, and I shall light it with a beam from the electric lamp. The side of the ball turned towards the light is glowing brilliantly, and from the right-hand side of the room you see nearly the whole of that bright side: to you the moon is nearly full. From the centre of the room you see the moon as a half-circle, and from the left it appears as a thin crescent of light.

Now I move the ball round with respect to the lamp, and you see the phases are quite changed. To those on my left our mimic moon is now full; to those on my right it is almost new, or shows only a slender crescent; from the centre of the room the half-moon is visible as before. We can show the same series of changes with the little contrivance of Figures 29 and 30 as well.

So every phase of the moon (Figure 31), from the thinnest lovely crescent you can just make out low in the west after sunset up to the splendour of the full moon, is completely accounted for by the different aspects of a globe of which one half is brilliantly lit.

[Figure 29-30: The phases of the moon. Figure 29 shows the moon going round the earth with the sunlight coming from one side; Figure 30 shows, for each of those positions, the shape we actually see from here.]

We can now explain a beautiful thing you will see when the moon is still quite young. We describe it fancifully as the old moon lying in the new moon's arms — the faintly lit remainder of the circle of which the brilliant crescent is a part. This can only be explained by showing how some light has fallen on the shadowed side; for nothing that is not itself a source of light can ever be seen unless light from some other body falls on it.

[Figure 31: The changes in the moon — the whole series of shapes from the first thin crescent through half and gibbous to full, and back again.]

Suppose there were a man on the moon looking at the earth. To him the earth would appear just as the moon appears to us, only very much bigger. At the time of new moon the bright side of the earth is turned straight towards him, so the man in the moon sees an earth nearly full, pouring out a great flood of light.

Think of the brightest moonlit night you have ever seen on earth; and then think what light you would have if there were thirteen moons, each as big and as bright as our full moon, all shining together. How splendid the night would be — you could read a book quite easily! That is the sort of illumination the lunar man enjoys in these circumstances, and all the features of his country are brightly lit by the full earth.

Of course this earth-lit side of the moon cannot compare in brilliance with the sun-lit side; but the brightness is still perceptible, so that when we look at the moon from here we see this glow spread over the whole of the dark part. We see the feebly lit globe clasped in the brilliant arms of the crescent.

At a later phase the dark part of the moon stops being visible altogether, and for two reasons. First, the bright side of the earth is by then not so fully turned towards the moon, so the earth-shine it receives is not so strong. And second, the growing sun-lit part of the moon has so much more glow that the fainter light is overpowered by contrast.

You must remember that more light does not always increase the number of things that can be seen — sometimes it has the opposite effect. Have we not already noticed how the brightness of day makes the stars invisible? The moon herself, seen in full daylight, looks no brighter than a small scrap of white cloud.

The Size of the Moon

It is not easy to answer the question I am sometimes asked: "Is the moon very big?" I would meet it with another question: "Is a cat a big animal?"

The fact is there is no such thing as absolute bigness or smallness. The cat is no doubt a small animal compared with the tiger; but I think a mouse would tell you the cat was quite a big animal — rather too big, indeed, in the mouse's opinion. And the tiger himself is small compared with an elephant, while the mouse is large compared with a fly.

When we talk about the bigness or smallness of a body we must always consider what we are comparing it with. In speaking of the moon it is natural to compare it with our own globe, and then we can say that the moon is a small body.

The relative sizes of the earth and the moon can be illustrated with objects of much smaller dimensions. A tennis ball and a football are no doubt familiar to everybody; and if the earth is represented by the football, the moon would be about the size of the lawn-tennis ball. But this proportion is not quite accurate, so let me suggest a more instructive way of making a better pair of models.

Experiments rather like the ones I am about to describe have in fact been going on in every kitchen in the land this festive season. Have not globes and balls of every sort and size been made of plum pudding? It will need only a little care on the cook's part to produce a pair of luscious spheres that fairly set out the sizes of the earth and the moon.

First there is to be a nice little round plum pudding three inches across — just a little bigger than a cricket ball. It should only make its appearance at a bachelor's table, however: set down before a hearty circle on Christmas Day it would cause dire disappointment, since one boy of sound constitution could eat the whole of it. It would weigh perhaps three-quarters of a pound. This little globe represents the moon.

[Figure 32: Relative sizes of the earth and moon — the small three-inch globe beside the twelve-inch one, which is four times its width and sixty-four times its bulk.]

Another plum pudding is to be made to represent the earth (Figure 32). We must beg the cook to observe the proportions. The width of the earth — the diameter, to use the proper word — is about four times the diameter of the moon; so as the small pudding was three inches across, the large one must be twelve inches across. This will be a family pudding of truly satisfactory dimensions, and perhaps the cook will be a little surprised at the alarming quantity of materials needed to complete a sphere of plum pudding a foot in diameter.

These models having been duly made and boiled and set on the table, we now propose the following problem.

If one schoolboy could eat the small plum pudding, how many boys would be needed to dispose of the large one?

The hasty person who does not stop to think will dash out the answer: "Four!" He will say it is quite plain that since one pudding has four times the diameter of the other it must be four times as big, and therefore, as one boy can eat the small pudding, four boys will be enough for the large one.

But the hasty person will, as usual, be quite wrong. His argument would be sound if he were comparing two pieces of sugar-stick: there is indeed only four times as much material in a piece twelve inches long as in a piece three inches long. But the plum puddings have breadth and depth as well, in the same proportion as the length; and so the large pudding is far more than four times as big as the small one.

No four boys, however admirable their capacities, would be equal to the task of consuming it. Nor would the dish be cleared if four more were called in to help. Twenty boys, forty boys, fifty boys would not be enough. It would take sixty-four boys to demolish that magnificent plum pudding one foot across.

If the cook will try the experiment, she will find that by taking materials enough for sixty-four small plum puddings, all of the same size, and mixing them together, she will indeed make a large plum pudding — but its diameter will be only four times that of the small ones.

As a matter of fact the moon is 2160 miles in diameter and the earth is 7918 miles. These numbers are so nearly 2000 and 8000 that for simplicity I have spoken of the earth as having four times the diameter of the moon. If we want to be very accurate we ought to work out the ratio from the true figures, and our plum-pudding illustration must be modified a little: the earth is not quite sixty-four times as big as the moon. But the figure is accurate enough for our present purpose.

Another interesting question may be raised: how much land is there on the moon? We might give the answer in acres or in square miles, but it will perhaps be more instructive to make a comparison with the earth.

Here again I shall use an illustration, and again take two globes three inches and twelve inches across. This time the globes I use are hollow india-rubber balls. They will represent the earth and the moon accurately enough, and what I want to find is the relative surface of the two.

There are several ways the comparison might be made. I might, for instance, paint the two globes and see how much paint each took. If I did, I should find the great globe took just sixteen times as much paint as the small one.

But we can adopt a simpler plan. The india-rubber is the same thickness in both balls, and both are hollow, so the quantity of rubber in each may be taken to represent its surface. By simply weighing the two balls I find the large one is sixteen times as heavy as the small one.

Notice here the difference between the comparative weights of two hollow balls and of two solid ones of the same material. Had these globes been of solid india-rubber, the large one would have weighed sixty-four times as much as the small one, just as with the plum puddings; but being hollow, the ratio of their weights is only the square of the ratio of their diameters — four times four, or sixteen.

So we learn that if the moon were exactly one-fourth the diameter of the earth, its surface would be one-sixteenth of the earth's. No doubt it would have made our subject a little easier and simpler if the moon had been created somewhat smaller than it is; but as the universe has not been constructed solely for the purposes of these talks about Star-land, we must take things as we find them.

The proportion is not four; it is more nearly 3⅔. So the relative surfaces of the two bodies come to the square of 11/3 — that is, of 3⅔ — or about 13½. In other words, the whole extent of our globe's surface is about thirteen and a half times that of the moon.

The face of the full moon, being half of the moon's whole surface, is therefore about one twenty-seventh part of the earth's surface, taking continents, oceans, seas and islands all together. The British Empire and the Russian Empire are each of them as large as the face of the full moon.

How Eclipses Are Produced

The moon is the attendant, the satellite, of the earth, serving the earth's needs by softening the darkness of our nights. The earth goes round the sun on its yearly journey of 365 days; the moon goes round the earth once every twenty-seven days. The moon's motion is therefore a very complicated one, since it is moving round a body which is itself constantly in motion (Figure 33).

You will see from your almanacs every year that certain eclipses are due; and after what we have said about the sun and the moon it will be easy to understand how eclipses come about. There are two different kinds. Sometimes you will see an eclipse of the moon, and sometimes one of those eclipses of the sun we spoke of in the last lecture.

You may be surprised to find with what accuracy eclipses can be predicted. We can name not only those that will happen this year and next, but those that will appear a hundred or a thousand years from now; or we can calculate backwards just as easily, and work out the circumstances of eclipses that happened thousands of years ago. That shows how well we have learned the way the moon moves.
