Lecture Two: The Moon

(Part 2 of 6)

[Figure 33: To show how the earth goes round the sun and the moon round the earth — the moon tracing its own small circle about a body that is itself never still.]

[Figure 34: A total eclipse to the girl and a partial eclipse to the boy. She stands squarely in the line of sun and moon and the moon blocks the sun entirely; he, off to one side, sees only a bite taken out of it.]

[Figure 35: Different kinds of solar eclipse. On the left, a partial eclipse — a bite out of the sun's edge. On the right, an annular one, where the moon sits centrally but falls short of covering the sun, leaving a complete ring of light all round it.]

An eclipse of the sun is the simpler event, so we shall describe it first. It happens when the moon comes between the earth and the sun.

Look at our little astronomers in Figure 34. A boy and a girl are both gazing at the sun when the moon comes between. To the boy, the moon seems to take a great bite out of the sun, so that it looks like the left-hand picture in Figure 35. (I have drawn a line from the end of his telescope in Figure 34 which shows how much of the sun is cut off.) This would be called a partial eclipse of the sun.

The almanac will sometimes describe an eclipse as visible in London, or visible at Greenwich; but that need not be taken as literally as it was by a Kensington gentleman who, noticing that the almanac said an eclipse would be visible in London, called a cab and drove into the city to look for it. His almanac had not mentioned that it would be visible from his own house. You may usually take it for granted that when an eclipse is said to be visible from London or Greenwich, it will be more or less visible all over England.

Most of these eclipses are only partial, and though they are interesting to watch they do not teach us much. By far the most wonderful kind is the one in which the whole of the bright part of the sun is blotted out. Then indeed we see wonders. But such eclipses are rare, and even when they do happen they last only a very few minutes. The sights they display are so interesting that astronomers will travel thousands of miles to reach a suitable place from which to observe them.

The girl in Figure 34 is in the best possible position for seeing the eclipse. There she is, right in the line of the sun and moon; and I think you will agree she cannot see any part of the sun at all, for the moon is completely in the way. I have drawn two dotted lines, one on each side: everything she can see beyond the moon must lie outside those lines, and she will be in the dark as long as the moon stays where it is.

When the eclipse is complete, a comparative darkness steals over the land. The birds are deceived and fly home to the trees to roost. The owls and the bats, thinking their time has come, venture out on their nocturnal business. Even flowers close their petals, only to open again a few minutes later when the sun bursts out once more; and other flowers that give out their scent at night become sweetly perceptible for as long as the sun stays hidden. An unruly cow, in the habit of breaking into a meadow at night, was found there when one eclipse was over — while from the same authority I learn that a man rushed off in great excitement to see what his chickens were doing, and came back much disappointed to find them pecking away as though nothing had happened.

It sometimes happens that the moon is so placed that the edge of the sun can be seen all round it. A case of this kind is shown in the right-hand picture of Figure 35. It is called an annular, or ring-shaped, eclipse.

The eclipses we have been speaking of can of course only be seen by day, when the sun is up. Eclipses of the moon, which are seen at night, are caused by the earth coming between the sun and the moon. At night the sun is under our feet on the other side of the earth, and the earth throws a long shadow upwards. If the moon enters that shadow, the sunlight is plainly cut off, either partly or wholly; and since the moon shines by no light of her own but only by light borrowed from the sun, it follows that when she is buried in the shadow all the direct light is intercepted and she must lose her brilliance. That is what we call a lunar eclipse. It is total if the moon is entirely in the shadow, and partial if she is only partly in it.

A lunar eclipse is visible to everybody on the dark hemisphere of the earth, if the clouds will keep out of the way; so a great many more people can usually see a lunar eclipse than a solar one, which is only visible from a limited part of the earth. That is why the lunar eclipse is the more familiar spectacle of the two.

When the moon is entirely within the shadow, you might naturally think she would become completely invisible. That is not always so. It is a curious fact that in the depth of a total eclipse the moon is often still visible, glowing with a copper-coloured light bright enough to let some of the chief markings on her surface be clearly made out.

Effect of the Moon's Distance on Its Appearance

We are now going to take a good look at the moon and examine the various objects marked on it. There is a peculiar interest about this particular orb, because it is much the nearest of all the heavenly bodies to our globe, and therefore the one we can see best. Every other object — sun, star or planet — is hundreds, or perhaps thousands, of times as far away.

It is right that we should want to learn all we can about the bodies in space. We know that the earth is a great ball, and we can see that there are many other such bodies. Some are much larger and some smaller than the globe we live on; some are dark bodies like the earth, and the moon is one of them. Is it not reasonable to make a special effort to find out all we can about this interesting neighbour?

Close as the moon is to us compared with other objects in space, when we put its distance in ordinary measure it is a very long way off — about 240,000 miles, a length nearly as great as all the railways in the world put together.

An express train running forty miles an hour would cover 240 miles in six hours, so the whole distance to the moon would take 6000 hours; travelling day and night without stopping, you would make the journey in 250 days. To take another illustration: if you wound a thread ten times round the equator of the earth, it would be long enough to stretch from the earth to the moon. Or suppose a cannon could be built strong enough to be fired with a report loud enough to be heard 240,000 miles away — the sound would only reach that distance a fortnight after the gun went off.

The moon is too far off for us to make out the particular features on its surface with the unaided eye. Suppose there were a mighty city like London on the moon, with great buildings and teeming millions of people, and you went out on a fine night to take a look at our neighbour. What do you think you would be able to see of the great lunar metropolis? Would you see its streets full of omnibuses, or even its great buildings? Would you see St Paul's and Westminster, the great parks and the river? Of all these things your unaided eye would show you almost nothing.

Let me give you a little illustration. Suppose you made a tiny model of London, complete in every part, with the streets, the buildings, the bridges, the railways, the parks and the Thames all in their true proportions — and suppose the miniature city were so small that it would stand on a penny postage stamp. Surely everything would look very insignificant even if you held the model in your hand and examined it with a magnifying glass. But suppose it were put on the other side of the table, or the other side of the room, or the other side of the street. Even St Paul's Cathedral would by then have ceased to be distinguishable. And yet the distance would still be nowhere near great enough: you would have to put the little model a quarter of a mile away before it would be in the right position to illustrate how a lunar London appears to the unaided eye.

A Talk About Telescopes

The astronomer will not be content with a mere naked-eye inspection of a world as interesting as the moon. He will get a telescope to help his sight. The word "telescope" means a contrivance for looking at objects a long way off. We have explained that the further an object is, the smaller it appears; and the telescope allows us largely to get round this inconvenience, by making a distant object look larger.

Telescopes differ greatly in form, and instruments are large or small according to the purpose they are wanted for. Perhaps the most useful practical application of the telescope is by the officer on duty aboard a ship. He is generally provided with a pair of them bound together to make the binocular.

You all know this useful contrivance — or at any rate the opera glass, which is used for purposes more familiar to landsmen. The ship's telescope, or the binocular, or the opera glass, is feeble in power compared with the great instruments of the observatory. The officer on the ship will generally be satisfied with a telescope that shows what he is interested in at about one-third of its actual distance. Suppose his attention is drawn to a great steamer three miles off. He wants to see her more clearly, so he takes a look through his binocular; and at once the vessel is so transformed that she seems only one mile away. The apparent dimensions of the object are increased threefold: the hull is three times as long, the masts and the funnel three times as high, the sailors three times as tall. Various things aboard too small to be seen at three miles are visible from one mile, and it is to that apparent distance the ship has now been brought.

If the sailor wants to reduce the apparent distance of things, how much more keenly does the astronomer feel the same want? At best the sailor has only a range of a few miles to scan with his glass — but what are a few miles to the astronomer? It is true that he can count the distance of the moon in thousands of miles, a good many thousands no doubt; but for every other object he must use millions, and for most bodies in space it is millions of millions of miles that we are obliged to write down.

Need it be said that the astronomer must use every device he can to make a body appear closer? He does not despise the modest binocular; it is often a useful instrument in the observatory. It gives most beautiful pictures of the heavens, and you would be amazed to find how many thousands of stars it will show you that your unaided eye cannot see at all. The binocular will also greatly improve the appearance of the moon; but its powers still fall far short of what we need for studying lunar landscapes. Even if we can reduce the moon's apparent distance to a third, that third is still a very considerable distance. One-third of 240,000 is 80,000 — so we see the moon no better with a binocular than we should see it with the unaided eye if it were 80,000 miles away.

[Figure 36: The dome at Dunsink Observatory — a circular building on the lawn with a hemispherical copper roof and a single shutter, entered by the little porch at the front.]

[Figure 37: The equatorial at Dunsink Observatory. The astronomer stands at the eyepiece, and the tube is nearly three times as long as he is tall.]

I am not going to give a detailed account of the telescope here, since I shall say more about it in a later lecture; at present I shall only describe the form of instrument most convenient for studying the moon. I take as my example the South Equatorial at Dunsink Observatory, which belongs to Trinity College, Dublin.

This telescope has a building to itself, standing on the lawn in front of the house. The site is open and high, so as to command a wide view of the heavens. You can see a picture of the structure in Figure 36. It is circular, and you go in by the little porch.

The most peculiar feature of a building meant to house this kind of telescope is its roof — or Dome, as we call it. It is hemispherical in shape with a projecting rim at the bottom. Nobody would go to the trouble and expense of building a round dome like that over an observatory if it were not needed for a particular purpose. The dome is very unlike an ordinary roof, not only in appearance but because it can turn round.

In the next figure you will see a section through the building, with the wheels the dome is carried on exposed to view. They run easily on rails, so that when the attendant pulls the rope you see in his hands he turns a large pulley, which drives a little cogwheel working into a rack, and so makes the dome revolve. The roof is built of timber covered with copper and weighs more than six tons; but the machinery is so nicely adjusted that a child of four can easily set the whole thing in motion.

The point of all this machinery becomes clear when we learn that there is only one opening in the dome, closed by the shutter shown above the doorway in Figure 36. Opened right to the top, it gives a long, wide aperture through which the astronomer can look out at the heavens; and of course the dome must be turned until that opening faces the right way. The big telescope can then be pointed at any object above the horizon.

You see a gentleman using the telescope in Figure 37, and this shows that the great instrument is nearly three times as long as the astronomer himself. No doubt it seems to be made of a good many different parts, but the essential portions are comparatively few and simple.

At the upper end is the object glass, made of two lenses, one of flint glass and the other of crown glass. Both must be of exceptional purity, and the shape given to them is a matter of the utmost importance. It is in making this pair of glasses that the optician's skill is specially called for; and an object glass that meets all the requirements is so valuable that it is by far the most costly part of the instrument.

There are no glasses inside the tube until you come to the end the observer looks in at, which is closed by an eyepiece consisting of a lens or a pair of lenses. A telescope usually has a number of different eyepieces containing lenses of various powers, to be used according to the state of the atmosphere or the particular kind of observation in hand.

If you point a big telescope at the sky and find the sun, or the moon, or any of the stars in it, you will very soon find that the object drifts out of view. Remember that our earth is constantly turning and carries the observatory with it, so that although the telescope is rightly pointed at one moment, by the next it has been swung aside. To you at the eyepiece the effect looks as though the heavenly bodies were themselves moving.

We can counteract this inconvenience. The telescope stands on a pedestal built on masonry that goes down through the floor to a foundation on the solid rock beneath. In the iron casing at the top of the pedestal you will see a little window, and inside is clockwork driven by a heavy weight. This clockwork turns the whole telescope round in the opposite direction to the earth's motion, and the consequence is that the telescope stays constantly pointed at the same part of the heavens.

[Figure 38: The Yerkes telescope of the University of Chicago, the most powerful ever built, its object glass 40 inches across.]

This instrument is no doubt a large one, but in recent years many much greater have been built. The most powerful telescope ever erected is the great Yerkes instrument belonging to the University of Chicago, shown in Figure 38. Its object glass is 40 inches across.

How the Telescope Aids Us in Viewing the Moon
