Lecture Two: The Moon

(Part 3 of 6)

Those in charge of an observatory are often visited by people who, coming to see the wonders of the heavens and finding instruments of such great size, not unnaturally expect the views they get of the heavenly bodies to be correspondingly magnificent. So they are, no doubt; but it frequently happens that the pictures even the greatest telescope can show fall far short of the ideal ones the visitors have conjured up in their imaginations, and they go away sadly disappointed.

This is especially true of the moon. I have known people who, on getting a view of the moon through a great telescope, were surprised not to find vast mountain ranges looking as big to them as the Alps, or mighty deserts over which the eye could roam for thousands of miles. They have sometimes expected to behold stupendous volcanoes which not only were, but looked, as big as Vesuvius. Others seem to have thought they ought to see the moon so clearly that the fields would be plainly visible; and some would not have been much astonished to make out houses and farmyards, and perhaps even cocks and hens.

There are various ways of estimating the apparent size of an object, but the size the moon appears to me to have in a great telescope may be illustrated by taking an orange in your hand and looking at the innumerable little marks and specks on its skin. The amount of detail your eye will show you on the orange is about the amount a good telescope will show you on the moon. A desert on the moon a hundred miles across corresponds to a mark about an eighth of an inch across on the orange.

Some of you may ask what is gained by the telescope at all, if the moon looks as big as a plate to the unaided eye and we now hear it only looks as big as an orange through the telescope. But where is the plate you compare your moon with supposed to be held? Surely not in your hand: it is imagined up in the sky, a very long way off. Though an orange is much smaller than a plate, you can see far more detail on the orange by taking it in your hand than you could see on a plate held on the other side of the street.

[Figure 39: The advantage of using a telescope. Look with one eye down the tube and the other straight at the sky, and the two moons appear together — the telescopic one the larger crescent here, the naked-eye one the small.]

I sometimes find that people will not believe how much the telescope they are using magnifies the moon, until they use both eyes at once, one at the telescope and the other looking straight at the moon. It is then seen, even with a very small instrument, that the telescopic moon is as big as the larger of the two crescents in the figure alongside (Figure 39), while the naked-eye moon is like the smaller.

The greatest telescopes can reduce the apparent distance of an object to about one-thousandth of its real amount. So a body a thousand miles away would, seen through one of these mighty instruments, look as large as our unaided sight would show it if it were only a single mile off. No doubt this is a great addition to our powers, but it often falls far short of what the astronomer would like. The distances of the stars are all so great that even divided by a thousand they are still enormous: if you have a number written 100,000,000,000,000, then dividing by a thousand merely means striking off three of the noughts, and a very large number is still left.

We are concerned at present with the moon, however; and as its distance is about 240,000 miles, the effect of the best telescope is to reduce that apparently to 240 miles. Here, then, is the limit of what the best of all telescopes can do. It can never show us the moon better — hardly indeed as well — as we could see it with the unaided eye if it were only 240 miles over our heads. We cannot expect the most powerful instrument to reveal anything on the moon unless that thing would be big enough to be seen by the unaided eye from 240 miles. So what could we expect to see at a distance of 240 miles?

Here is a little experiment I made to study the point. I marked a round black dot on a sheet of white paper. The dot was a quarter of an inch across. I fastened the paper to a door in the garden and walked backwards until the dot stopped being visible, and I found this distance to be about thirty-six yards. I tried a little boy of eight, and the dot seemed to become invisible to him at about the same distance as to me.

"What has this to do with the moon?" you will say. We shall soon see. In thirty-six yards there are 5184 quarters of an inch; and since we need not be very particular about the figures, we may say in round numbers that the distance at which we could no longer make out the dot was about five thousand times the width of the dot itself.

You need not, then, expect to see anything on the moon — or on anything else — that is not at least as wide as a five-thousandth part of the distance you are viewing it from. The great telescope practically puts the moon at a distance of 240 miles, and a five-thousandth part of that is about eighty yards. So a round object on the moon about eighty yards across would be just glimpsed as the merest dot in the most powerful telescope, and to attract any attention a lunar object would have to be much larger than that.

If St Paul's Cathedral stood on a lunar plain it would be visible in our great telescopes. It is true we could see no details; we should not be able to tell a cathedral from a town hall. There would just be something visible, so that an artist sketching that part would put down a mark with his pencil to show that something was there. This shows us that we need not expect to see objects on the moon, even with the mightiest telescopes, unless they are of great size.

Telescopic Views of Lunar Scenery

I have already warned you not to expect too much even from the biggest telescope; and by way of caution I may perhaps tell you a story I once heard about an astronomer who had a great one. It was a very famous instrument, and people often came to the observatory at night to enjoy a look at the heavens. Sometimes these visitors were grave philosophers; frequently they were not very accomplished men of science.

One evening such a visitor arrived, sent in his name and an introduction to the astronomer, and asked to be admitted to the temple of mystery. The astronomer courteously welcomed the stranger and asked what he particularly wished to see.

"Oh!" said the visitor, "I have come specially to see the moon — that is the object I am particularly interested in."

"But, my dear sir," said the astronomer, "I would show you the moon with pleasure if you were here at the proper time. What brings you here now? Look up: the evening is fine, there are the stars shining brightly — but where is the moon? You see it is not up at present. In fact it won't rise till about half-past two tomorrow morning, and it is only nine o'clock now. Come back in five or six hours and you shall observe the moon with the great telescope."

But the visitor plainly thought the astronomer was merely trying to get rid of him on a pretext; and he was equal to the occasion. He was not going to be put off like that.

"Of course the moon is not up," he replied. "Anyone can see that, and that is exactly why I have come. If the moon had been up, I could have seen it without your telescope at all!"

Although no explorer can ever reach our satellite, it is hardly an exaggeration to say that in some respects we know the geography of the moon a good deal better than we know the geography of the earth. Think of the continent of Africa. In that great country there are mighty tracts, vast lakes and mountain ranges of which we know very little. We could make a better map of Africa — so far as its broad outlines go — if it were fastened up on our side of the moon, than the map we actually possess at this moment.

There is no spot on the near side of the moon as large as an ordinary parish in this country that has not been surveyed. There are maps and charts of the moon showing every part of it as big as a good-sized field. And since there are no lunar clouds, the features of its surface are never obscured whenever our own atmosphere will let us observe at all.

Artists have frequently sketched the lunar features, and there is plenty of material for them to work from. We have had photographs taken of the moon too — but there is a special difficulty in photographing heavenly bodies which photographers of familiar objects on this earth do not meet. Everybody knows that the first requirement for a successful photograph is that the sitter should stay still while the plate is exposed; and that, unhappily, is just what the moon cannot do.

We try to get round this by moving the telescope so as to follow the moon on its way, and this can be done with considerable accuracy. Unfortunately there is another difficulty entirely beyond our control. As the rays of light from the moon make their journey through hundreds of miles of unsteady air, they are bent this way and that, so that the picture is far more affected by the atmosphere than a portrait taken in a photographer's studio.

If we are merely looking at the moon through the telescope, the quivering these rays pick up on their long atmospheric voyage is rather inconvenient but does not stop us seeing the object; we can readily make out the true shape of each feature in spite of the incessant fluctuation. But when the rays fall not on the eye but on a photographic plate, their motion produces a picture that cannot be magnified much without becoming very confused and losing all sharpness. Nevertheless, for the general outline of our satellite's appearance, and for the portrayal of its splendid features, photography has been of the greatest help to us.

[Figure 40: The full moon — the great dark patches that were once taken for seas, and, crowding the upper part, the rings we call the lunar craters.]

The picture alongside (Figure 40) gives a fair idea of what the full moon looks like through a small telescope. I do not say that lunar objects can be observed under favourable conditions then; for full moon is the very worst time for observing our satellite. At that phase you can hardly see anything but slight differences of colour between one part and another.

The best time for observing the moon is at the first quarter — and even then you can only observe satisfactorily those objects lying along the border between light and shadow. To study the moon properly you must therefore watch it through several different phases, from the time when it shows a thin delicate crescent just after new moon until it has waned to a thin delicate crescent again just before the next. We want the relief that shadows give, to bring out the full beauty of lunar scenery.

On the map you will first notice the large dark patches that are so conspicuous on the moon's face. They are apparently the empty basins that great seas once filled; but if water was ever there, it has at all events quite disappeared now. These dark parts are no doubt a good deal smoother than the rest of the surface, but we can see many little irregularities which tell us we are not looking at oceans.

The chief features I want you to notice are the curious rings you can see in the figure. There is a very well-marked one a little below the centre, and in the upper part many rings, large and small, are crowded together. We call them lunar craters. You will see what they are like from the model in Figure 42; but to get the proper scale of the thing from that picture, you should imagine it to be some miles across. The cliffs that rise all round to make the wall, and the mountain that adorns the centre, are quite as high as any of the mountains of Great Britain.

[Figure 41: A view on the moon, by Lœwy and Puiseux of the Paris Observatory. The large central crater is Hipparchus, and above it lies Albategnius.]

[Figure 42: Our model of a lunar crater — the great circular enclosure walled all round by cliffs, with a sharp mountain peak standing in the middle of the floor.]

You may want to know how we can measure the heights of mountains on the moon. That is what I am going to show you now, and for the purpose we shall look at our imitation lunar crater. Here is the great ring, the circular enclosure surrounded by cliffs, and here is a sharp mountain peak rising in the centre.

I shall ask for the beam from the electric lamp to be turned on our model. You see how prettily it is lit up. I have placed the lamp so that the beams come in at a slant, and I have done it deliberately to make the shadows long. In fact, when we look at a lunar crater lying on the border between light and shade, the sun is lighting it under just the conditions shown in the figure.

I dare say you have often noticed what long shadows are cast at sunset. Shadows of that sort are made to teach the astronomer the heights of the lunar mountains: he measures the length of the shadow, and then by a little calculation he can find the height of the object that cast it.

Suppose we want to measure the height of a flagstaff (Figure 43). It is quite possible to do it by simply measuring the length of the shadow the flagstaff casts at noon. It would not be right to say that the height of the flagstaff equals the length of its shadow — though that will be the case if you are fortunate enough to make your measurement at or near London on either the 6th of April or the 5th of September. On every other day of the year a little calculation has to be made, which I need not go into, but which the astronomer with the help of his Nautical Almanac can do in a very few minutes. In the same way, by measuring the lengths of the shadows on the moon and working out how many miles long they are, we can calculate the heights of the lunar mountains and of the ranges of cliff that surround the walled plains.

[Figure 43: How we found the height of the flagstaff — measure the shadow it throws at noon, and a short calculation gives you the pole.]

On the Origin of the Lunar Craters

We must now offer an explanation of the curious rings which are the most characteristic features of the moon. To account for them we must look for a moment at some objects on the earth.

You have all heard of volcanoes, or burning mountains, such as Vesuvius or Etna, which break out from time to time into violent eruption and send out great showers of ash and torrents of molten lava. In the Sandwich Islands there is a celebrated volcano called Kilauea. It is like a vast lake of lava, so hot that it is actually molten and glows like red-hot iron. The adventurous tourist who visits this crater can climb to the brink of the lofty range of cliffs that surrounds it and gaze down on the fiery sea beneath.

Suppose that by some great change the internal heat keeping this mighty basin aglow were to decline and go out. The sea of lava would cease to be liquid, and would in the end grow hard and cold; and we should then have an immense flat plain surrounded by a range of cliffs. Examples of extinct craters of just this kind can be found elsewhere in the Sandwich Islands today.

Those who have studied these interesting places point out how such craters on the earth explain the ringed plains on the moon. It seems certain that in ancient days great volcanoes abounded on our satellite, and that the rings were often much larger than the ones in the Sandwich Islands — some of them a hundred miles or more across. The volcanoes must have raged on the moon long ago with a fury altogether unknown among any active volcanoes this earth can show now.

We can also guess how the lofty mountain peak that so often rises in the centre of a lunar ring was thrown up. When the fires had almost died down and the floor had grown nearly cold, one last expiring effort was made, by which the congealing surface was burst through at the centre and materials were shot out that remain as the central mountain to this day.
