Lecture Two: The Moon

(Part 4 of 6)

I must impress on you, however, that even our greatest telescopes never show us any volcanic eruption going on in the moon at present. Indeed it is most doubtful whether any change at all has been noticed in the features of its surface since the telescope was invented. The volcanoes carved the moon's crust into the form we see, and our satellite has kept that form for ages whose length we cannot even estimate. All the craters and all the volcanoes on the moon can only be described as extinct.

It is interesting to compare the present state of the volcanoes on the earth with the ringed craters of the moon. The noisy volcanoes of our globe are the ones most talked about. We often hear of Vesuvius being in eruption; and in August 1883 there was a terrific eruption at Krakatoa, which shot such a quantity of dust so high into the air that it was carried right round the earth and produced beautiful sunsets and strange colours in the sky in almost every country in the world. The explosion at Krakatoa made the loudest noise history has recorded. Fortunately such convulsions do not happen often, for on that occasion the sea rushed in over the land and thousands of lives were lost.

There are said to be one hundred and fifty volcanoes in various parts of the earth which are more or less active; but there are many others in which the fire has gone out and which seem to be just as cold and just as extinct as any volcano on the moon. Even in our own islands there are abundant remains of ancient volcanoes, and masses of lava are found in many places where there is now no trace of an active one. Perhaps there is no more remarkable sight in the British Isles than the lofty rock crowned by Edinburgh Castle: it is the remnant of a former volcano, and Arthur's Seat close by is another. In the centre of France lies the beautiful district of Auvergne, where ancient volcanoes abound and the lava streams can be traced for miles across the country. These have been extinct for thousands of years, during which the lava has largely become covered with soil and vegetation, and in some places vineyards are grown on it.

We can now contrast the earth with the moon so far as volcanoes are concerned. On the earth we have some that are active and a much greater number that are extinct; on the moon there are no active ones at all — every one is extinct.

I can explain how this difference has come about, but first let me show you a simple experiment. My assistant will kindly bring me from that furnace the two iron balls we put there before the lecture began. There they are, you see, both glowing with a bright red heat, for at present they are equally hot. We shall put them on these stands and let them cool.

One of these balls is a small cannon-ball four inches across, while the other is only one inch. They are in the same proportion as the earth is to the moon. But look — even while I have been speaking, the balls have stopped being at the same temperature. The little one has gone almost black with loss of heat, while the large one still looks nearly as red as it did at the start.

This simple experiment illustrates the principle that two heated bodies of different sizes will cool at very different rates when everything else about them is the same. The small body will always cool faster than the large one. They need not be globes, either. Put a poker and a knitting needle into the fire and leave both until they are red-hot, then put them out on the fender, and you will quickly find that although they were at the same temperature when they came out of the fire they do not stay so for long: the knitting needle has become cool enough to handle before the poker has stopped glowing. Our experiments have been made with small objects only, no doubt, but the law they teach us holds true even for the greatest.

Our earth today shows many signs of being much hotter inside than it is at the surface. The volcanoes themselves are mere outbreaks of glowing material from within. Then there are the hot springs at Bath, gushing up out of the earth; there are geysers of hot water in Iceland, and in the Yellowstone Park in America, and elsewhere. And there are other signs that every miner is familiar with. Wherever a deep pit is sunk into the earth, the rocks below are always found warmer than those at the surface, and the deeper the pit the greater the heat met with. From all over the world, then, we get proof that internal heat exists now.

Great as the earth is, we must still apply the plain common-sense principles we use in everyday life. Let me give an illustration. Suppose a servant came into the room and put a jug of water on the table, and an hour later you went to the jug and found it cold. From that fact alone you would not be able to infer anything with certainty about whether the water had been warm or cold when it was brought in. It might have been perfectly cold, as it is now; on the other hand it might have been warm at first and have cooled to the temperature of the room during the hour.

But suppose that when you went to the jug, after it had stood on the table for an hour, you found it tepid — no matter how slightly its temperature was above the room's. Do you not see what you could infer? You would argue like this: that water still has some heat; it must of course be cooling gradually; therefore it was hotter a minute ago than it is now, and hotter still two minutes ago, or ten; and it must have been very hot, perhaps boiling, when it was brought in an hour ago.

I want you to apply exactly the same reasoning to our earth. It is, as I have shown you, still hot and warm inside. That heat is of course gradually being lost, so the earth will cool down from year to year, though at an extremely slow rate. But we must look back over past ages. Just as we inferred that the jug must have held very hot water an hour before, from the mere fact that the water was still warm, so we are entitled to infer from the fact that the earth still keeps some heat that it must in ages gone by have been exceedingly hot.

Indeed, the further back we look the hotter we see the earth growing, until at last we are driven to think of a period in the exceedingly remote past — long before life began to dawn here — when even the surface of the earth was hot. Further back still, and we see the earth no longer covered with the hard, dark, cold surface we find now: we must think of it in those primitive times as a huge glowing mass, in which all the substances that now make the rocks were incandescent, and even molten.

There is good reason to know that in those early times the moon too was molten with heat. So our reasoning has led us to a period when there were two great red-hot globes, one about four times the diameter of the other, starting on their careers of gradual cooling.

Recall our little experiment with the two cooling globes of iron. Imagine those globes keeping their relative proportions, but one of them 8000 miles across and the other 2000. Ages will no doubt pass before they part with enough heat for their surfaces to cool and solidify. But we may be sure that the small globe will cool faster, that its outside will harden sooner than the large one's, and that long after the small globe has grown cold to the centre the large one may still be keeping some of its original heat.

We can thus readily understand why all the volcanoes on the moon have stopped: their day is over. It is over because the moon, being so small, has grown so cold that it can no longer sustain the internal fires needed for a volcanic outbreak. Our earth, being so much bigger, has cooled more slowly. It has no doubt lost its high surface temperature, and its volcanic energy has probably fallen off from what it once was; but there is still power enough in the subterranean fires to wake us occasionally with a Krakatoa, or to supply Vesuvius with material and vigour for its more frequent outbursts.

The argument shows us that the time must come at last when this earth will have parted with so much of its heat that it can no longer produce volcanic phenomena — and then we shall pass into that exhausted stage which the moon reached ages ago.

The Movements of the Moon

Although the moon goes round and round the earth incessantly, she always manages to avoid giving us a view of what is on the other side. Our satellite always turns the same face towards the earth, and we may reasonably guess that the other side is covered, like the side we know, with rings and other traces of former volcanoes.

In this respect the moon is quite a peculiar object. The other great heavenly bodies, such as the sun or Jupiter, turn on their axes and show us now one side and now another with complete impartiality. The way the moon revolves can be illustrated by taking your watch and chain and, holding the chain at the centre, swinging the watch round in a circle. At every point of its path the ring of the watch points, of course, to the centre where the chain is held. Imagine your eye at that centre, to stand for the earth, and the movement of the watch shows you how the moon goes round it.

There is one more point I must explain about the moon before we close this lecture. Nothing is more familiar than the fact that a heavy body will fall to the ground; and it hardly matters what the body is made of. You see I have a small iron ball in one hand and a cork in the other. I drop them at the same moment and they reach the ground together. Perhaps you would have expected the cork to lag behind the iron. I try the experiment again and again, and you can see no difference in the times of their fall — though I do not say this would hold if they were dropped from the top of the Monument.

In general we may say that a body let drop will fall sixteen feet in the first second. Even a bit of paper and a penny will fall through the same height in the same time, if you can get over the difficulty of the resistance of the air. That is easily managed: cut a small piece of tissue paper that will lie flat on top of the penny, and hold the penny horizontal with the paper uppermost. Though there is nothing fastening the paper to the penny, you will find that they fall together. And if we could do the experiment in a vacuum, then whether the paper were laid on the penny or placed any other way, the two would reach the table at the same moment, provided they were released at the same moment from equal heights.

Wherever we go we find that bodies always tend to fall towards the centre of the earth. In New Zealand, on the opposite side of our globe from where we are standing now, bodies fall up towards us; and this law of falling is obeyed at the top of a mountain just as it is down here. However high the ascent made in a balloon, a body let go will fall towards the earth's centre.

Of course we can only rise some five or six miles, even in the most buoyant of balloons; but we know that the attraction pulling bodies down towards the earth extends far beyond that limit. If we could go ten, twenty or fifty miles up, we should still find the earth trying to pull us down. Nor would gravitation have ceased even if you imagined an ascent to a height of 1000 miles: a cork, or an iron ball, or anything else dropped from 1000 miles up would assuredly tumble down to the ground below.

Suppose that by some device we could soar to a height of 4000 miles. I name that height because we should then be as far above the earth as the centre of the earth is below our feet. We should have doubled our distance from the centre, and the strength of gravitation would have dropped to a quarter of what it is at the surface. A body which at the earth's surface falls sixteen feet in a second would there fall only four feet in a second, and the apparent weight of anything would be so much reduced that it would seem to weigh only a quarter of what it weighs down here.

So the higher and higher we go, the less and less gravity becomes — but it never ceases, even at a distance of millions of miles. You might therefore ask: if gravity tries to pull everything down wherever it may be, why does it not pull down the moon? This is a difficulty we must consider carefully.

If the earth and the moon were simply held apart, both at rest, and the moon were then let go, it would no doubt drop straight down onto the earth. But the moon's movement would be very different if, instead of merely being let fall, it were thrown sideways. The effect of the earth's pull would then show itself in keeping the moon revolving around us, instead of letting her fly away altogether as she would have done had the earth not been there to attract her.

[Figure 44: An illustration to explain the movement of the moon. A cannon on an impossibly high mountain: fire it harder and harder and the ball flies further each time, until at last its curved path matches the curve of the earth and it never comes down at all.]

We can explain this with an illustration. On the top of a mountain I have placed a big cannon (Figure 44). We fire it off, and the ball flies away in a curved path, sinking gradually until it falls to the ground. I have drawn the mountain hundreds of times larger than any mountain could possibly be; and now I want you to imagine a cannon far stronger, and gunpowder far more potent, than any that has ever yet been made.

Fire off a ball with a still greater charge than before, and the path is much longer — but the ball still curves down and falls to the earth in the end. Now make one final shot with a charge powerful enough, and away flies the ball, this time following the curve of the earth; for the earth's attraction has the effect of bending its path out of a straight line into this circular form.

By the time the ball has travelled a quarter of the way round it is no nearer the earth than it was at first, nor has it lost any of its original speed. So in spite of its long journey the ball has practically as much energy as when it first left the muzzle. Away it flies round another quarter of the earth, and still in the same condition it completes the third quarter and the fourth, returning to the point it started from. If we have cleared the cannon out of the way, the ball will fly over the mountain top again without having lost any speed on its voyage round the earth. It is therefore in a fit state to start round again, and so to revolve about the earth permanently.

If, then, a great ball 2000 miles across had once been fired with the proper velocity from the top of a mountain 240,000 miles high, that ball would go on circling round and round the earth for ever; and even if the mountain and the cannon disappeared, the motion would be kept up indefinitely. This illustration will at any rate show you how the moon can go on revolving round the earth continuously, notwithstanding that the earth is constantly pulling our satellite down towards its surface.
