Lecture Two: The Moon

(Part 5 of 6)

On the Possibility of Life in the Moon

Astronomers are often asked whether any animals can be living on the moon. No observation we can make with the telescope will answer that question directly. There are great plains to be seen on the moon, of course; but even if there were elephants tramping across them, our telescopes could not show us. Nor will our instruments say straight off whether plants or trees flourish there. The mammoth trees of California are so big that a tunnel has been cut through the trunk of one, large enough for a carriage and pair to drive through; but even trees as big as that would not be visible on the moon from the most famous observatories.

Let us think what we should experience ourselves if we could by some marvellous means be carried from the earth to its satellite and set to explore that new and wonderful country. Alas — we should find it utterly impossible to live there for an hour, or even for a minute. Troops of difficulties would beset us at once.

The first would be the want of air. Think for a moment how invariably air is present around our own globe. Climb to the top of a high mountain, or take a lofty voyage in a balloon, and you are bathed in air the whole time. It is air that holds up the balloon, just as a cork is held up by water. In all circumstances we must have air to breathe. In that air is oxygen, and we must have oxygen supplied to our lungs without a break to refresh our blood. We need that oxygen to be diluted, too, with a much larger quantity of nitrogen, for our lungs and our circulation are fitted for living in that particular mixture of gases we find here.

The atmosphere grows thinner and thinner the higher we go, and apparently comes to an end altogether some two or three hundred miles over our heads. Beyond its limits it seems as though empty space would be met with all the way from the earth to the moon. We could not get a single breath of air, and life would of course be impossible. Even at a height of three or four miles breathing becomes difficult, and life could certainly not be kept up at a height of ten miles.

Plainly, then, for a voyage to the moon we should need an ample supply of air — or at least of life-giving oxygen — to be breathed somehow as the journey went on. And when at last the 240,000 miles had been crossed and we were about to land, the first thing we should want to know is whether the moon is wrapped in any coating of air.

Most of the globes in space are, so far as we can learn, covered and warmed by an enveloping atmosphere of some kind; but unhappily the poor moon has been left entirely, or almost entirely, without any such clothing. She is quite bare of any atmosphere at all comparable in density or bulk to the one that surrounds us — though possibly we do now and then detect traces of air, or of some kind of gas, in small quantities in the lunar valleys.

I am sure every intelligent boy or girl will want to know how we can tell all this. We have never been to the moon; how then can we say it is nearly destitute of air? Our telescope cannot answer directly either, for you could hardly expect to see air even if it were there. So how are we able to make such assertions?

There are many different ways in which we have learnt that the moon has no air. I will tell you one of the easiest and most certain.

First let me say that air is not perfectly transparent. No doubt I can see you and you can see me, though a good many feet of air lie between us; but when we deal with much greater distances there is a very simple way of showing that air is not quite transparent. In the evening, when the sun is setting and the sky is clear, you can look at him without discomfort; whereas in the middle of the day you know it is impossible to look at the sun without shading your eyes with smoked glass or something of the kind. The reason is that when the sun is setting or rising we look at him through an immense thickness of air, which, not being perfectly transparent, stops some of the light. That is why the sun in those circumstances loses his dazzling brilliance and we can look at him in comfort.

At the seaside you can notice the same effect another way. Go out on a fine clear night when the stars are glittering overhead in their thousands, then look gradually lower and lower towards the horizon, and you will find the stars growing fainter and fainter. Indeed, even the brightest star cannot be seen when it is right at the horizon, because an immense thickness of atmosphere is not transparent.

Now we can state the argument by which we may prove that there is little or no air on our satellite. The moon frequently passes between the earth and a star, and when the star is a really bright one the observations we can make are of great interest.

Let me first describe what we actually see. The star shines brightly until the moment the moon eclipses it, and its disappearance is generally instantaneous. But this would not be so if the moon were encircled with an atmosphere. If the moon were coated with air, the light of the star would not be put out at once; it would decline gradually, as it had to pass through more and more of the moon's atmosphere, and you would find the star dwindling in brightness before the solid body of the moon had come far enough forward to shut it out. The sudden extinction of the stars demonstrates that our satellite is airless.

There would be another insuperable difficulty in taking up residence on the moon, even supposing you could get there. Water is absent from its surface. We have examined every part of it and find no evidence of seas or oceans, of lakes or rivers; we never see anything like cloud or mist, which are of course only water in vapour form. We are therefore assured that, as far as water goes, the moon is an absolute desert.

This is perhaps the most striking contrast between the look of the earth and the look of the moon. If an astronomer on the moon were to look at our earth, he would find most of its surface hidden under cloud; and through the openings in that cloud he would see that by far the greater part of this globe is covered by the expanse of ocean. Indeed, once the lunar astronomer had grasped how much water there is on this earth, whether as ocean or as cloud, I feel sure he would conclude that nothing could live here but seals and other amphibious animals.

Because it has neither air nor water, the moon would be entirely unfit to support life of the kinds we know. Air and water are necessary to every animal, from the humblest animalcule up to the whale or the elephant; air and water are necessary to every form of plant life, from the lichen growing on a stone up to the noble old oak of the forest.

But suppose we could land on the moon carrying an ample supply of oxygen to breathe and water to drink. We should still find ourselves perplexed and embarrassed — to say the very least of it — by an extraordinary difference that would strike us at once. All that familiar experience of gravity, of the weight of things, which we have picked up living on a great globe like the earth, would seem ludicrously altered the moment we began to walk about on a little globe like the moon.

We should be astonished at the transformation, by which the weight of everything was so much reduced. When you pulled out your watch you would hardly feel it at the end of the chain; it would seem a mere shell. Yet the watch is perfectly all right and going as well as ever; nothing about it has altered except its weight. A big stone catches your eye, and to your amazement you find it does not weigh as much as a piece of wood of the same size would weigh down here. A stone you could hardly stir on the earth you can carry about on the moon.

This is not to be explained by anything peculiar in the make-up of lunar stone. Most probably it is not very different from some of the rocks on the earth; the lightness of a lunar stone is not because it is made of some very special material, and we must look for another explanation.

Every object on the moon would be found only one-sixth as heavy as the same object on the earth. A sturdy labourer at the docks can carry one sack of corn on his back here, and finds that as much of a load as is convenient. Placed on the moon, he would discover that his load had suddenly been lightened to a sixth (Figure 45), and that he could carry six sacks of corn there without making a greater effort than supporting a single sack costs him on the earth.

To explain how such a change comes about, look at these two pictures: one shows the labourer on a small body like the moon, the other on a great globe like the earth. What the labourer actually feels is not quite so simple a thing as he supposes. He imagines it is the weight of the corn, and the corn alone, that produces the pressure on his shoulders he knows so well. But that is not quite how the philosopher looks at the question. What the labourer really feels is the attraction between the earth beneath his feet and the corn on his back. That is the force producing the pressure on his shoulders. Its size depends, no doubt, on how much corn is in the sack — but it depends also on how much matter there is in the earth beneath his feet. In fact the force between two attracting bodies depends on the masses of both of them. When the labourer is moved to the moon, whose mass is so much less than the earth's, the attraction is less than it is here, even though the corn is the same in both cases.

[Figure 45: The lessened gravitation on the moon. The same labourer with the same load: one sack is as much as he cares for here, but on the moon he shoulders six of them for the same effort.]

Many odd instances could be given of the extraordinary consequences of life on a world where every weight is reduced to a sixth. One occurred to me the other day when I saw a postman going his rounds with an amazing load of Christmas presents and parcels. How much happier, I thought, must be the lot of a postman on the moon, if such officials are needed there! All the presents of toys, and the more substantial gifts, might be exactly the same as before; the only difference would be that they would not feel nearly so heavy. A box holding a pound of chocolate bonbons would still hold exactly the same quantity of sweets on the moon, but the effort of carrying it would be cut to a sixth: it would weigh only as much as two or three ounces do on the earth.

Our streets provide another admirable illustration of the drawbacks of life here compared with the conveniences offered on the moon. I feel quite confident that no perambulators can be necessary there. I cannot say whether there are babies on the moon; but of this I am certain, that even if lunar babies were as plump and sturdy as ours, they would still weigh only about a sixth as much. A lunar nurse would scorn to use a perambulator even for a pair of twins: she might take both of them out on her arm for an airing, and even then be carrying only a third of the load her terrestrial sister must bear with a single child.

The lightness of things on the moon would entirely transform many of our most familiar games. At cricket, for instance, I do not think the bowling would be much affected — but the hits would be truly terrific. I believe an exceptionally good throw of a cricket ball here is about a hundred yards; the same man, with the same ball and the same effort, would send it six hundred yards on the moon. Every hit, too, would carry the ball six times as far as it does here. Football would show a striking development in lunar play: a good kick would not merely send the ball over the crossbar, it would go soaring over the houses and perhaps come down in the next parish.

Our own bodies would of course share in the general buoyancy, so that with our muscular power undiminished we should be almost able to run and jump as though we were wearing the famous seven-league boots. I have seen an athlete in a circus jump over ten horses standing side by side. The same athlete, making the same effort, would jump over sixty horses on the moon.

A run with a pack of lunar foxhounds would indeed be a marvellous spectacle. There would be no need for timid horsemen to look about for open roads and easy gaps. The five-barred gate would be utterly despised by a huntsman who could clear a hayrick with ease; and it would hardly be worth taking a serious jump to clear a canal, unless there were a road and a railway or two that could be disposed of at the same time.

To look at this business of gravitation from the other side, suppose we were carried from this earth to some globe much greater — a globe, for instance, as large and as massive as the sun. We can show that the weight of everything would be increased; indeed everything would weigh about twenty-seven times what it does here. To pull out your watch would be to hoist a weight of five or six pounds out of your pocket. Indeed, I do not see how you could draw your watch out at all, for even raising your arm would be impossible: it would feel far heavier than if it were made of solid lead. It is perhaps conceivable that you might stand upright for a moment, particularly with a wall to lean against; but of this I feel certain, that once you got down on the ground it would be utterly beyond your power to rise again.

These illustrations will at least serve one purpose: they show how difficult it is for us to form any opinion about the presence or absence of life on the other globes in space. We are adapted in every way for living on this particular earth, of a particular size and climate, with an atmosphere of a particular composition. Within certain narrow limits our vital powers can accommodate themselves to change; but the conditions of other worlds seem so utterly different from those we find here that it would probably be quite impossible for beings made as we are to stay alive for five minutes on any other globe in space.

Whether there may not be inhabitants of some kind on many of those other splendid globes is, however, quite another question. Through the wide extent of space we have inconceivable myriads of worlds, presenting no doubt every variety of size and climate, of atmosphere and soil. It seems quite preposterous to imagine that among all these globes ours alone should be the abode of life. The most reasonable conclusion for us to come to is that these bodies may be endowed with life of kinds just as well suited to the physical conditions around them as the life on this globe, animal and vegetable alike, is suited to the special circumstances it is placed in.
