Lecture Three: The Inner Planets

(Part 2 of 7)

The joint labours of the two friends having thus discovered law and order in the movements of the comet, you may judge of their dismay when on one occasion Encke disappointed them. He appeared, it is true, but he was a little late, and he was not in the place where he was expected either.

There was very nearly a serious falling-out between the two friends. The astronomer accused the mathematician of having made mistakes in his figures; the mathematician retorted that the astronomer must have blundered in his observations. A quarrel was imminent, when at last it was suggested that they should question Encke himself and see whether he had any explanation to offer. The mathematician used peculiar methods which I could not explain here, so I shall turn his processes into a dialogue between himself and the offending comet.

"You are late," said he to the comet. "You have not turned up when I expected you, nor are you exactly in the right place; nor, for that matter, are you moving quite as you ought to be now. In fact you are entirely out of order. What explanation have you to give of this irregularity?"

You see that the questioner felt quite confident there must have been some cause at work that he did not know about. Mathematicians have one great privilege: they are the only people in the world who never make mistakes. If they knew accurately every influence at work on the comet, they could work out the figures and find exactly where the comet would be. If the comet is not there, then it is inevitable that something must have acted on it which the mathematician knew nothing of.

The comet, like every other transgressor, immediately began making excuses and shuffling the blame onto somebody else.

"I was," said Encke, "going quietly about my rounds as usual. I was following out stage by stage the track you know so well, and I should certainly have finished my journey and arrived here in good time, and in the place where you expected me, if I had been let alone. But unfortunately I was not let alone. In the course of my long travels — at a time when you could not have seen me — I had the misfortune to come very close to a planet you have no doubt heard of, called Mercury. I did not want to interfere with Mercury; I only wanted to hurry past and get on with my journey. But he was meddlesome and began pulling me about, and I had a great deal of trouble getting free of him. At last I did shake him off, and I kept up my pace as well as I could afterwards, but I could not make up the lost time — and so I am here a little late. I know I am not just where I ought to be, and that I am not moving quite as you expect. The fact is I have not yet quite got over the bad treatment I received."

The astronomer and the mathematician set about testing this story. They found out what Mercury had been doing; they knew where he had been at the time; and they established that what the comet said was true, and that it had indeed come very close to the planet.

The astronomer was quite satisfied and was about to turn to something else, when the mathematician said: "Wait a moment, my friend. It is the part of a wise man to get some particular good out of mishaps and disasters. Let us see whether poor Encke's tribulations cannot be made to give us some very valuable information. We expected to find Encke here. Well — he is not here; he is there, a little way off. Let us measure the distance between the place Encke is in and the place he ought to have been in."

This the astronomer did. "Well," he said, "and what will that tell you? It merely gives the amount of Encke's delinquency."

"No doubt," said the mathematician, "so it does. But we must remember that the delinquency, as you call it, was caused by Mercury. The bigger and heavier Mercury is, the greater his power of doing mischief, the more he would have troubled poor Encke, and the larger the derangement of the comet from that unfortunate encounter. We have measured how far Encke has actually been led astray. Had Mercury been heavier than he is, that distance would have been larger; and had Mercury been lighter, you would not have found so large an error in the comet."

We may illustrate what is meant like this. A steamer sails from Liverpool to New York, and in favourable circumstances the Atlantic crossing should be done within a week. But suppose that in mid-ocean she meets a storm which drives her off her course. She will of course be delayed and her voyage lengthened. A trifling storm she will hardly mind; a heavy one might delay her six hours; a greater one might hold her back half a day; and cases are not uncommon where the delay has come to one day, or two days, or even more.

The delay may be taken as a measure of the violence of the storm. I am not supposing her machinery has broken down — that does of course sometimes happen at sea, as do calamities of a far more tragic sort. I am merely supposing the ship exposed to very heavy weather and coming out of it as sound as she went in. In a case like that we may reasonably measure the strength of the storm by the number of hours' delay the passengers suffered. "The weather we had was much worse than yours," one traveller may say to another. "Our ship was two days late, while you got off with the loss of one."

When the comet at last came back to the earth after a three-year cruise through space, the number of hours it was late expressed the violence of the storm it had been through. The only storm the comet had met — so far as our present purpose is concerned — was its trouble with Mercury. So the mass of Mercury was bound up in the comet's delay: the delay was in fact a measure of the planet's mass.

I shall not try to describe all the long work the mathematician had to plod through before he could determine the mass of Mercury. It was a very tedious and a very hard sum; but at last his calculations reached an answer, and showed that Mercury must be a light globe compared with the earth. It would take twenty-five globes each equal to Mercury to weigh as much as the earth does.

I dare say you will think this a very long and roundabout way of weighing something. But suppose we had to weigh a mountain — or rather a body bigger than fifty thousand mountains, and many millions of miles away as well. All sorts of expedients would have to be resorted to, and I have told you one of them. If you have any doubts about how accurately such weighings can be made, I must tell you there are many other methods, and that they all agree in giving the same results.

[Figure 49: Relative weights of Mercury and the earth — it takes twenty-five globes the size of Mercury to balance one earth.]

We hardly know anything about what the globe of Mercury may be like. We can see little or nothing of the nature of its surface. We only make out that the planet is a ball brightly lit by the sun, and we cannot satisfactorily distinguish permanent features on it as we can on some of the other planets.

The Planet Venus

You will have no difficulty recognising Venus, but you must choose the right time to look for her. In the first place, never expect to see Venus very late at night. Look for the planet in the evening as soon as it is dark, towards the west; or in the morning, a little before sunrise, towards the east.

I do not say you can always see Venus, either before sunrise or after sunset. For a large part of the year the planet is not to be seen at all. You should therefore consult the almanac, and unless you find Venus given as an evening star or a morning star, you need not trouble to look for her.

I may tell you, too, that Venus can never be an evening star and a morning star at the same time. If you can see her this evening after sundown, there is no use getting up early tomorrow to look for her again. She will stay a splendid object after sunset for several weeks, then gradually disappear from the west, and a couple of months later she will be the morning star in the east.

Venus takes a year and seven months to run through her changes; so if you find her a bright evening star tonight, you may be sure she was a bright evening star a year and seven months ago, and that she will be one again a year and seven months from now. And never expect to see her right overhead: she is always to the west or to the east.

The splendour of Venus at her best will save you from mistaking the planet for an ordinary star. She is then more than twenty times as bright as any star in the heavens. The most conclusive proof of her unrivalled brightness is that she can be recognised in broad daylight without a telescope: even on the brightest June afternoons the lovely planet can sometimes be made out, like a scrap of white cloud on the perfect blue of the sky.

Venus is so brilliant that you will perhaps hardly believe me when I tell you she has no more light of her own than a stone has, or a handful of earth, or a button. Is it possible, you will say, that this can be so? We see the planet looking so exquisitely beautiful — how can she be merely a huge stone high up in the heavens?

The fact is that Venus shines by light that is not her own, but falls on her from the sun. She is lit up just as the moon is, just as our own earth is; her radiance comes simply from the sunbeams falling on her. It seems surprising at first that mere sunbeams should be able to give her the brilliance that is sometimes so striking. Let me show you an illustration which I trust will convince you that sunbeams are quite equal even to the glory of Venus.

Here is a button. I hang it on a piece of fine thread; and when I dip it into the beam from the electric lamp, look at the brilliance with which our mimic planet glitters. You cannot see the shape of the button — it is too small for that — you merely see it as a brilliant gem radiating light all round. We need not be surprised, then, to learn that the brightness of the evening star is borrowed from the sun; and that if, while we were looking at the planet in the evening, the sun were suddenly put out, the planet would vanish from view too, though the stars would shine as before.

This is how we explain the appearance of Venus. The evening star is a beautiful luminous point, but it has no shape that the unaided eye can make out. Turn the telescope on Venus, however, and we have the delightful spectacle of a tiny moon going through its phases just as our own satellite does.

When she is first seen as an evening star, Venus will often look like the moon at the quarter, and then she will pass to a crescent shape. The crescent gradually grows thinner, and then follows a short spell of invisibility before Venus appears as the morning star.

It seems a little strange at first that Venus should not be full when she is brightest, as the moon of course is when it shows a complete circle of light. In fact, when she is brightest the planet has a very marked crescent shape; but at that time she is so near us that the gain in brilliance from the reduced distance more than makes up for the small part of the lit side that is turned our way.

You ought all to try to get someone to show you Venus through a telescope. A very large instrument is not necessary, and I feel sure you will be delighted to see the beautiful moon-shaped planet. You will then have no difficulty in understanding that the brightness of the planet comes from the sun, and that the changes in the crescent depend simply on how much of the lit side is turned towards us. If Venus were herself a sun-like body we should of course see no crescent at all, but only a bright circle of light.

In Figure 50 you will see an imaginary picture of a young astronomer surveying Venus with a telescope. I have obviously not attempted to draw the various objects in their true proportions. The sun is supposed to have set, so his beams do not reach the astronomer: night has begun at his observatory. But the sunbeams fall on Venus and light up the side of her turned towards the sun; part of that lit side is of course seen by the telescope he is using, and so the planet appears to him as a crescent of light.

[Figure 50: To show that Venus shines by sunlight. The sun has set for the young astronomer at his telescope, but not for Venus; the sunbeams still strike her, and he sees part of the lit side as a crescent.]

The Transit of Venus

We might naturally suppose from Figure 46 that Venus must pass directly between the earth and the sun at every revolution, and therefore that what is called the transit of Venus across the sun ought to happen each time between her appearance as the evening star and her next appearance as the morning star.

No doubt on each of those occasions Venus does seem to approach the sun closely; but the orbits of Venus and the earth do not lie quite in the same plane, so the planet usually passes just above or just below the sun, and it is a very rare event indeed for her to come right in front of him.

But it does happen sometimes. It happened in the year 1874, for instance, and again in 1882. Alas, I cannot hold out to you the prospect of ever seeing another such spectacle. There will be no further transit of Venus until the year 2004 — though there will be another eight years after that, in 2012.

It seems rather odd that one transit of Venus should be followed by another after an interval of eight years, and that then much more than a century must pass before a similar pair comes round again. This is because of a curious relation between the motion of Venus and the motion of the earth, which I must try to explain with a little illustration.

Suppose a clock with the ordinary numbers round the dial, but arranged so that the slowly moving short hand takes 365.26 days to go once round, while the faster long hand goes round in 224.70 days. The short hand then goes round once in a year, and the long hand once in a revolution of Venus.

Suppose both hands start together from XII. In 224.70 days the long hand is back at XII, but the short hand will only have got round to about VII; and by the time it reaches XII the long hand will have completed a good part of a second circuit.

Now it happens that the two numbers 224.70 and 365.26 are very nearly in the ratio of 8 to 13. Indeed, if the numbers had been 224.8 and 365.3 they would be exactly in the proportion of 8 to 13. It follows that eight revolutions of the short hand must take very nearly the same time as thirteen revolutions of the long one. So after eight years the short hand will of course be found at XII again — and at that same moment the long hand will also be back at XII, having completed thirteen revolutions.
