Lecture Three: The Inner Planets

(Part 3 of 7)

We can now understand why transits, when they do happen, generally come in pairs eight years apart. Suppose that at a certain moment Venus happens to place herself directly between the earth and the sun. When eight years have gone by, the earth is of course back at the same place for the eighth time since that transit, and Venus has returned to almost the same spot for the thirteenth time. The two bodies are practically in the same state as at first, so Venus comes between us again and the planet is seen as a black spot on the sun's surface.

We must not push this argument too far. The relation between the two periods of revolution is nearly, but not exactly, 8 to 13. The consequence is that when another eight years have passed, the planet goes a little above the sun or a little below it, and so a third transit is missed for more than a century. The next one takes place at the opposite side of the path.

We were fortunate enough to see the transit of Venus of 1882 from Great Britain — or part of it, I should say, for the sun had set long before the planet had finished its journey across the disc. Venus looked like a small round black spot stealing in onto the bright surface of the sun and advancing gradually along the short chord that formed her track.

[Figure 51: Venus in transit across the sun — a small, perfectly round black spot creeping across the brilliant disc.]

An immense amount of trouble was taken in 1882, as in 1874, to observe this rare event. Expeditions were sent to various places over the earth where the circumstances were favourable. I do not suppose there was ever any other celestial event that aroused so much interest.

The reason it attracted so much attention was not only its beauty or its rarity: it was that the transit of Venus gives us a valuable means of finding the distance of the sun. When observations of the transit made at opposite sides of the earth are brought together, we can calculate from them the distance of Venus; and knowing that, we can find the distance of the sun, and the distances and sizes of the planets.

This is very valuable information, though you would have to read some rather hard books on astronomy to understand clearly how the transit of Venus tells us all these wonderful things. I may say, however, that the principle of the method is really the same as the one we used in the first lecture with the two cards and the base-line. And when you remember that neither we, nor our children, nor scarcely even our grandchildren will ever see another transit of Venus, you will perhaps not be surprised that we tried to make the most of the ones that fell in our own time.

Venus as a World

Although Venus shows such pretty crescents in the telescope, I must say that in other respects a view of the planet is rather disappointing. She is dressed in such a very bright suit of sunbeams that we can see little more than the sunbeams themselves, and can hardly make out anything of the real nature of the planet underneath. We can sometimes detect faint markings on the globe, but it is impossible even to guess what the country of Venus is like. This is greatly to be regretted, for Venus comes comparatively close to the earth and is a world so like our own in size and other circumstances that we feel a legitimate curiosity to know more about her.

The markings, faint as they are, have nevertheless been definite enough to let some sharp-sighted astronomers answer a question of much interest. They have made it plain that in one most important respect Venus is very unlike our earth. Our globe of course turns on its axis once a day, whereas Venus takes no less than 225 days for each rotation. In fact she turns in such a way that she always keeps the same face to the sun. The inhabitants of Venus will therefore find perpetual day on one side of their globe and everlasting night on the other.

Venus is one of the few globes that might conceivably be the home of beings not very different from ourselves. In one respect especially — that of weight — she resembles the earth so closely that the bodies we actually possess would probably serve, so far as strength goes, for living on the sister planet. Our present muscles would not be needlessly strong, as they would be on the moon, nor should we find them too weak, as they would certainly prove on one of the very heavy bodies of our system.

Nor need the temperature of Venus be thought to present any insuperable difficulty. She is of course nearer the sun than we are; but climate depends on other conditions besides nearness to the sun, so the question whether Venus would be too hot for us could not be settled offhand. The composition of the atmosphere surrounding the planet would be the most material point in deciding whether beings from the earth could live there. I think it in the highest degree unlikely that the atmosphere of Venus should happen to suit us in the necessary particulars, and therefore I think there is not much likelihood that Venus is inhabited by any men, women or children resembling those on this earth.

The Planet Mars and His Movements

The path of the earth lies between the orbits of Venus and Mars. It is natural for us to try to learn what we can about our neighbours; we ought at least to know something of the people who live next door on either side. But I have already said that we cannot observe very much on Venus. With Mars the case is very different. He is a planet we are fortunately able to study minutely, and he is full of interest when we examine him through a good telescope.

We must of course wait for the right season for observing Mars, since he is not always visible. Such seasons come round about every two years, and then for months together Mars is a brilliant object in the sky every night. Nor need he be looked for in the early morning or just after sunset, in the way we have described for Venus and Mercury. When Mars is at his best he reaches his highest point at midnight, and he can generally be seen for hours beforehand and followed for hours afterwards.

You may, however, find some difficulty in recognising him: you probably would not at first be able to tell Mars from a fixed star. He is a ruddy object, no doubt, but some stars are ruddy too, and at best that is a very insecure way of identifying him. I cannot give you any more general directions, except that you should get your papa to point Mars out to you the next time he is visible. It is just conceivable that papa himself may not know how to find Mars — in which case, the sooner he gets a set of star maps and starts teaching himself, and you, the better it will be for you both.

Mars, though he looks so like a star, differs in some essential points from any star in the sky. The stars proper are all fixed in their constellations and never change their positions relative to one another. The groups that form the Great Bear or the Belt of Orion do not alter; they are just the same now as they were centuries ago.

With a planet like Mars it is very different. The very word planet means a wanderer, and it is justly applied — for instead of staying permanently in any one constellation, Mars goes constantly roaming from one group to another. He is a very restless body. Sometimes he pays his respects to the heavenly Twins and is found near Castor and Pollux in Gemini; then he goes off for a brief stay with the Bull, though it looks as if that fierce animal got tired of his company and drove him off to the Lion. His quarters then become more perilous still. Sometimes it looks as though he wanted to seek peace beneath the waters, and so he visits Aquarius; at other times he is found in dangerous proximity to the claws of the Crab.

Mars cannot even make up his mind to run steadily round the heavens in one direction. Sometimes he will bolt off rapidly, then pause a while and turn back again; then the original impulse returns and he resumes his journey the way he first intended.

It is no wonder I cannot give you very explicit directions for catching sight of a truant whose wanderings are apparently so uncertain. Yet there is a definite order underneath all his movements. Astronomers who make it their business to study Mars can follow him on his way. They know exactly where he is now and where he will be on every night for years and years to come. The people who make the almanacs come to the astronomers for hints about what Mars intends to do, so that the almanacs announce the positions the planet will be found in as regularly as if he were in the habit of behaving with all the orderly propriety of the sun or the moon.

We must not lay all the blame for these eccentric movements on Mars. Our earth is very largely responsible. What we take for the vagaries of Mars is often to be explained by the fact that we ourselves on the earth are shifting rapidly about and changing our point of view.

[Figure 52: How the tree seems to move about. From the first position of the carriage the tree stands on one side of the house; from the second it stands on the other — and it is the little girl, not the tree, that has moved.]

I was driving down a pretty country road with a little girl of three beside me when I was addressed with the remark: "Look at the tree going about in the field."

Now you and I, with our longer experience of the world, know that it is not the custom of trees to take themselves up and walk about fields. But this was what the little girl saw — or rather what she thought she saw; and very often what we do see is something very different from what we think we see. We think we see Mars performing all these extraordinary movements, just as the little girl thought she saw the tree moving about. But just as that little girl, when she grew into a big girl, found that what she took for a tree walking across a field must really have some quite different explanation, so we too find that what Mars seems to do is one thing, and what Mars actually does is quite another.

Let us see what the little girl noticed. She was looking at the tree, and first she saw it on one side of the house and then on the opposite side (Figure 52). Had it been a cow instead of a tree, the natural supposition would of course have been that the cow had walked. Our little friend may have thought it unusual for a tree to walk; but still, she had seen the undoubted fact that the tree had shifted to the other side of the house, and so — remembering, perhaps, what a cow could do — she said the tree had moved.

[Figure 53: A specimen of the track of Mars — the loop he seems to trace among the stars at the very time the earth is sweeping past him, and the very time he is best worth watching in a telescope.]

The little girl did not stop to reflect that she herself had entirely changed her position, and that was where the surprising phenomenon of a walking tree came from. You will understand it at once from the two positions of the carriage shown here. In the first, as the girl looks at the tree, the dotted line shows the direction of her glance; the other dotted line shows how the apparent places of tree and house have altered. It is her change of place that has worked the transformation. Notice too that the tree appeared to her to move in the direction opposite to the one she was travelling in.

Mars generally appears to move among the stars from west to east; and indeed, if we viewed him from the sun he would always seem to move that way. But at certain seasons our earth is sweeping past Mars very fast, and this makes him appear to move the other way. This apparent motion is sometimes so much greater than his real motion that it can give us an entirely wrong idea of what the planet is actually doing.

So although Mars is moving one way, he may appear to us who live on the earth to be going the other. The illusion only lasts a short time, just when we are passing him, as we do every two years. Its effect is to make the path he follows at that season something like the one shown in Figure 53. The planet is nearest to us while he is moving in this loop, and is then seen at his best in the telescope — so it is especially interesting to watch Mars through this critical part of his career.

I want to show you a little calculation which explains the rule by which the good seasons for seeing Mars follow one another. The time he needs for a voyage round the sun is not quite two years, for that would be 730 days, and Mars takes only 687 days for his journey. It is true, however, that 1-15/17 years is very nearly his period; and so every 32 years Mars completes 17 rounds. From this we can work out how long it takes, after the earth has once passed Mars, before they pass again.

Suppose there is a circular course round which two boys start together to run a race. One is such a good runner that he gets right round in 17 minutes; the other can hardly run more than half as fast, and needs 32 minutes to complete one circuit. Here, then, is the question: if the two boys start together, how long will it be before the faster gains a whole lap on the slower?

By the time the good runner (A) has finished one circuit, the slow runner (B) has only got a little more than halfway. When A has finished his second circuit he has run for twice 17 minutes — that is, 34 minutes — which is two minutes longer than B needs to get round once. So B is only ahead by a distance A could cover in about one minute. But during that minute B advances a distance A will need another half-minute for; during that half-minute B covers a distance needing a further quarter; and so on. All these intervals — one minute, half a minute, a quarter, an eighth, a sixteenth, and so on — added together come to two minutes; and so B will not be overtaken until about two minutes after A has finished his second lap, that is, at 36 minutes altogether.

We can pass from this illustration to the case of Mars and the earth. The earth's orbit is travelled in a year; and so, after the earth has once passed Mars — when the planet is, as astronomers say, in opposition — about two years and an eighth of a year, that is two years and six or seven weeks, will go by before Mars is favourably placed again. You will see, then, that we must not expect to observe Mars under the best conditions every year. Besides, the distance of the planet from the earth at opposition varies so much that some oppositions are far more favourable than others.
