Lecture Three: The Inner Planets

(Part 4 of 7)

The time has come when I must tell you something about the shapes of the paths in which the earth and the other planets make their great journeys round the sun. Perhaps you will think I am about to contradict some of what I have told you already. I have often drawn the orbits of the planets as circles, and now I am going to tell you that this is not correct.

The fact is that the paths are nearly circles, but there is still some departure from the exact circular shape. Mars in particular moves in a path that differs from a circle more than the earth's does, so it is a good moment to bring the subject up while we are busy with Mars.

[Figure 54: How to draw an ellipse. Two drawing-pins through the paper, a loop of twine passed round them, and a pencil kept inside the loop with the string always taut.]

We must first take another lesson in drawing, and the things I want you to use are very simple: a smooth board and some tacks or drawing-pins, besides paper, pencil and twine.

[Figure 55: Specimens of ellipses — two of very different proportions, and beside them a parabola.]

First lay a sheet of paper on the board and push two tacks through the paper into the board. It does not much matter where you put them. Then take a piece of twine and tie the two ends together to make a loop, and pass the loop round the two tacks (Figure 54). I put the pencil inside the loop, and now you see I move it round, taking care to keep the twine stretched — and so I produce a pretty curve which we call the ellipse.

I must ask all of you to practise this. Try different lengths of string, and try different distances between the tacks. Here are sketches of two shapes of ellipse and a parabola (Figure 55). Elliptical curves can be made almost circular by putting the two tacks close together, or made very long in proportion to their width. They are all pretty and graceful figures, often useful in ornamental work; an ellipse is a pretty shape for a flower bed in a lawn.

The ellipse matters more to astronomers than any other geometrical figure. All the planets, as they make their long and unceasing journeys round the sun, move in ellipses; and though these ellipses are very nearly circles, the difference is quite appreciable.

It is also important to notice that the sun is not at the centre of the ellipse the planet describes. The sun is nearer one end than the other, and its actual position must be carefully noted. Suppose some mighty giant were setting out to draw an exact path for the earth, or for Mars. He would of course need millions of miles of string to produce a curve big enough — and one of the nails he used would have to be driven right into the sun.

The astronomer states the facts more precisely. He calls each of the points marked by the tacks, round which the string is looped, a focus of the ellipse; the two together are the foci; and as the planet describes its orbit, the sun lies exactly at one of the foci.

The ellipse is a curve nature is very fond of reproducing. A brilliant beam spreads out from an electric light; hold a globe in the beam and let its shadow fall on a sheet of paper, and the shadow is an ellipse. Hold the sheet square-on and the shadow is a circle; tilt it, and you get a beautiful oval; and by gradually changing the position you can get a greatly elongated curve. Indeed you can produce an ellipse of almost any form this way. The electric light is not essential either: any ordinary bright lamp with a small flame will do, and by taking balls of different sizes and putting them in various positions you can make ellipses great and small.

The Discoveries Made by Tycho and Kepler

It was through the observations of a celebrated old astronomer named Tycho Brahe that the true shape of a planet's path came afterwards to be determined. Tycho lived in the days before telescopes were invented. He had few of the excellent measuring contrivances we have in our observatories. Let us take a look at this fine old astronomer as he sits among his curious astronomical machines.

[Figure 56: Tycho Brahe in his observatory. The great quadrant on the wall, the assistant at the sighting slit, another at the clock and a third writing the observation down — and one of the King of Denmark's great hounds asleep at his feet.]

He lived on an island near Copenhagen, and he has left us a picture of himself (Figure 56), seated among his quaint apparatus with his assistants around him, busily engaged in observing the heavens. You see that the walls of his observatory are decorated with pictures, and that one of the great Danish hounds the King of Denmark gave him lies asleep at his feet. I do not think we should encourage big dogs in the observatory at night nowadays. Nor do modern astronomers put on velvet robes of state, as Tycho is said to have done when he went into the presence of the stars, to show his respect for the heavens. Astronomers today rather prefer a comfortable coat that will keep out the cold, whatever it may look like from the picturesque point of view.

In this wonderful contrivance, you see, Tycho used no telescope at all. He observed through a small opening in the wall; and in case there should be any doubt about what is going on, you see him pointing towards it and giving his three assistants their instructions.

The most important work is being done by the man on the right, who is making the actual observation. But he has no help from magnifying lenses. All he can do is slide a pointer up or down until it is just in line with the planet or star as he sees it through the hole opposite.

A number of marks have been engraved on the circle, with numbers set against them, and it is by these that the position of the object is found. If the object is high, the pointer will be low; if the object is low, the pointer will be high. The observer calls out the position when he has it — and there, you see, is a man ready with writing materials to take the observation down. Notice too the other astronomer watching the clock: he gives the time, which must also be recorded accurately.

In fact the whole process of finding the place of a heavenly body consists of two observations, one from the circle and one from the clock; so although Tycho had no telescope to help his sight, the principle his work was done on is the same as the one we use in our observatories at this moment.

You may think such a contrivance could hardly produce much reliable work. But Tycho made up in great measure for the imperfection of his instruments by the skill with which he used them. He had a noble determination to do his very best; and perseverance will work wonders even with very imperfect means. A great astronomer has said that a skilful observer ought to be able to make valuable measurements with a common cart-wheel.

It was with instruments on the principle of the one I have shown you that Tycho made his celebrated observations of Mars. Week after week, month after month, year after year, the patient old astronomer tracked the planet through his capricious wanderings.

Before we try to explain anything, we must of course find out as accurately as we can what the thing actually is. So when we set out to explain the irregular movements of a planet, the first thing to do is to examine carefully what those irregularities are. That is what Tycho strove to do with the best means at his disposal.

The full benefit of Tycho's work was realised by Kepler, when he began to search out what kind of figure Mars was moving in. First he tried various circles; then he tried putting the centre in different positions, to see whether that would account for the irregularities of the wayward planet. It would not do — the movement was not circular.

This was thought very strange in those days, for the circle was held to be the only perfect curve, and it was considered quite impossible that a planet should have any but the most perfect of motions. But there was no help for it; so Kepler shrewdly tried the ellipse, which he considered the most perfect curve after the circle. He went on with his long calculations until at last he found one particular ellipse, placed in one particular position, which would exactly explain the strange wanderings of our erratic neighbour.

Nor was it only that the planet's motion traced out an ellipse: it was further discovered that the sun lies at one of the foci of the curve. Had the sun been anywhere else, the motion of the planet would have been different from what Tycho had found it to be.

You must understand that this discovery is one of the very greatest ever made in the whole range of human knowledge. Once it had been proved that the orbit of Mars was an ellipse, it became plain that the same path must be traced by every planet. There are very big planets and small ones; there are planets that move in very large orbits and planets whose paths are comparatively small. In every case the high road the planet follows is invariably an ellipse, and the sun is invariably to be found at the focus. It is surely interesting that these beautiful ellipses, which we can draw so simply with a piece of twine and a pencil, should be the very same figures that our great earth and all the other bodies revolving round the sun are for ever obliged to follow.

Kepler made another great discovery on the same subject. If a planet moved in a circle with the sun at the centre, there would be very good reason to expect it always to move at the same speed, for there would be no reason for it to go faster in one place than another: it would always be at the same distance from the sun, and every part of its path would be exactly like every other part. But when we consider that the motion takes place in an ellipse, so that the planet is curving round more sharply at the ends of its path than in the parts where the curvature is gentler, we have no reason to expect the speed to stay the same all the way round.

We know that the driver of a railway engine always has to slacken speed when going round a sharp curve. If he did not, his train would very likely run off the line and a dreadful accident would follow. The engine-driver knows well that his pace depends on the curvature of his line.

The planet finds it too must pay attention to the curves — but the extraordinary thing is that the planet does exactly the opposite of what the engine-driver does. The planet puts on its highest speed at one of the most critical curves of the whole journey.

There are two specially sharp curves in the planet's path, namely the two ends of the ellipse it follows. The cautious engine-driver would creep round both with equal care; and the planet does indeed go slowly enough round the end of the ellipse furthest from the sun. Its pace there is slower than anywhere else. But from that moment on, the planet steadily applies itself to getting up more and more speed. As it crosses the comparatively straight part of the celestial road the pace is always accelerating, until the sharp curve near the sun is coming up; then the velocity grows more and more alarming, until at last, in utter defiance of every rule of engine-driving, the planet rushes round one of the worst parts of the orbit at the highest possible speed. And yet no accident happens, though the planet has no nicely laid rails to keep it on the track.

If rails are needed to save a railway train from destruction, how can we possibly escape when we have no such help to keep us from flying away from the sun into infinite space?

Kepler taught us to measure the changes in a body's speed precisely. He showed that the planet must, at every point of its long journey, have exactly the right speed, or everything would go wrong.

I dare say you have seen boards put up here and there along a railway line with notices like "Ten miles an hour" on them. These are of course a warning to the driver not to depart from the speed stated. Kepler has given us a law equivalent to a great many caution boards set all round the planet's path, showing the safe speed for every stage of the journey. It is fortunate for us that the planet is careful to observe the regulations. If the earth left her track, the consequences would be far worse than the most frightful railway accident that ever happened — and whichever way we went would be about equally disastrous. If we went inwards we should plunge into the sun; if we went outwards we should be frozen with cold.

We owe our safety to the care with which the earth's speed is prescribed. When near the sun the earth is pulled inwards with exceptionally strong attraction. We are often told that when a strong temptation seizes us, the wisest thing to do is run away as hard as we can; and that is precisely what the laws of dynamics make the earth do at this critical time. She puts on her very best pace, and only slackens when she is well away from the danger.

The peril we face at the other end of the orbit is of the opposite kind. We are then a long way from the sun, and the pull it can exert on the earth is correspondingly weakened. Care is needed then in case we should escape altogether from the sun's warmth and his guidance. So we must give the sun time to exert his power and call the earth back; and accordingly we move as slowly as possible, until the sun overcomes the earth's inclination to fly off and we begin to return.

You may remember that when we were speaking about the moon I showed you how a body might revolve round the earth in a circle under the influence of an attraction towards the earth's centre. So long as the path is really a circle, the force with which the earth pulls the body stays the same. In just the same way a body could revolve round the sun in a circle, and there too the sun's attraction would stay the same all the way round.

But now we have a much more difficult case to consider. If the body does not always stay at the same distance, the sun's power will not be the same at different places. Whenever the object is near the sun the attraction will be greater than when it is further off. When the distance between the two bodies is doubled, for instance, the pull is reduced to a quarter of what it was before.

The Discoveries Made by Newton
