Lecture Three: The Inner Planets

(Part 6 of 7)

[Figure 60: Views of Mars. The lower picture shows the horn-shaped Kaiser Sea near the centre; the upper shows the opposite face of the planet, brought round by its rotation.]

[Figure 61: Mars, by Douglass of the Lowell Observatory — the disc crossed by the fine straight lines that have been given the name of canals.]

In the most favourable circumstances Mars is at least a hundred times as far from us as the moon. But we know that an object on the moon must be as large as St Paul's Cathedral to be visible in our telescopes; so an object on Mars must be at least a hundred times as broad and a hundred times as long as St Paul's if astronomers on our earth are to make it out. We can therefore only expect to see the general features of our fellow planet.

If we were looking at our own earth from a similar distance, and with equally good telescopes, the continents and oceans and the larger seas and islands would all be big enough to be conspicuous — though it is doubtful whether they could ever be properly made out through the serious hindrance to vision that our atmosphere would present.

It fortunately happens that the surface of Mars is obscured by cloud only very slightly, so we are able to see a panorama of our neighbouring globe laid out before us. Mars is not nearly as large as our earth, the diameters of the two being nearly as two to one; from which it follows that the number of acres on the planet is only a quarter of the number on the earth.

Careful telescopic scrutiny shows that the chief features we see on Mars are permanent. In this respect Mars is much more like the moon than the sun. The sun presents us with nothing but glowing vapours, hardly more permanent than the clouds in our own sky; whereas the complete absence of cloud from the moon lets us see the permanent features of its surface. Most of the visible features of Mars are unchanging too, although it seems that the climate does occasionally produce some change in its appearance.

[Figure 62: The south pole of Mars in September 1877, drawn by Green — the dense white cap that grows through the Martian winter and shrinks again in the summer, with a patch of snow lingering on high ground after the rest has gone.]

The first thing we notice is that there are differently coloured regions on Mars. The darkish or bluish parts are usually spoken of as seas or oceans — though we should be going beyond our strict knowledge to assert that water is actually to be found there.

Look at the horn-shaped object in the centre of the lower picture in Figure 60. We call it the Kaiser Sea, and it is so strongly marked that it can often be seen even in a small telescope. But you must not always expect to see it when you look at the planet through a telescope, for the planet turns round.

We can make a globe representing Mars, with this great sea and the other characteristic objects drawn on it. As we turn the globe, the opposite side of the planet comes into view and other features are revealed, like the ones in the upper figure. Mars takes 24 hours 37 minutes 22.7 seconds to complete a single rotation. It is somewhat remarkable that this differs from the earth's period of rotation by only a little more than half an hour.

Mars has what we call continents as well as oceans, and we also find lakes and seas and straits there. These are marked on the drawings shown here. But the most striking features the planet displays are the marvellous white regions seen at both its north and its south pole (Figure 62).

If we could soar above our earth and take a bird's-eye view of our own polar regions, we should see a white cap at the middle of the Arctic Circle, produced by the eternal ice and snow. It would grow through the long dark winter and be somewhat reduced by melting during the continuously bright summer. We cannot see our own earth that way; but we can sometimes observe one pole of Mars and sometimes the other, and we find each of them crowned with a dense white cap which grows in the severity of its winter and shrinks again with the warmth of the summer that follows.

Sketches of Mars have been made by many astronomers, among them Mr Green, who made a beautiful series of pictures at Madeira in 1877. These may be supplemented by Mr Knobel's drawings of 1884, when the opposite pole of the planet was turned towards us. The drawings show the polar snows, and there seem to be some elevated districts in those Martian arctic regions which keep a little patch of snow after the main body of the ice cap has shrunk within its summer limits. An interesting case of this kind is shown in Figure 62, copied from one of Mr Green's drawings.

It has lately been suggested that the continents of Mars are occasionally flooded with water. There are also signs of clouds hanging over the Martian lands, though in this respect the inhabitants of that planet get off much better than we do. A certain amount of atmosphere always surrounds Mars, though far less of it than we have here.

As to the composition of that atmosphere we know nothing. For all we can tell it might be a gas so poisonous that a single breath would be fatal to us; or, if it held oxygen in much greater proportion than our own air, it might be fatal simply from the excitement to our circulation that an over-supply of stimulant would produce. I do not think it in the least likely that our lives could be supported on Mars, even if we could get there. We need certain conditions of climate as well, and those would probably be entirely different from anything we should find on Mars.

Many remarkable observations of Mars have lately been made by Mr Percival Lowell. It now seems very doubtful how far our former division of the planet into continents and oceans can be maintained. Mr Lowell has paid particular attention to a wonderful system of lines on its surface, to which the name of "canals" has been given, and which often show such regularity as would almost suggest that they had been laid down under intelligent guidance.

The Satellites of Mars

When Mars appeared in his full splendour in 1877, he was for the first time honoured with the notice of instruments capable of doing him justice. I do not mean that he had not been carefully observed at earlier appearances; but a great improvement had recently been made in telescopes, and so it was under specially favourable auspices that his return was welcomed in 1877. That year will always be celebrated in astronomical history for a beautiful discovery made by Professor Asaph Hall, the illustrious astronomer at Washington.

Before I can explain what the discovery was, I must have a little talk about moons — or satellites, as they are often called. You know that we have one moon, constantly going round the earth and accompanying it on its long voyage round the sun. But the earth is only a planet, and there are many other planets which are worlds like ours. It is natural to compare these worlds; and since we have one moon, why should the other planets not have moons too? If there are children in one house in a square, why should there not be children in the other houses?

We find that some of the other planets do have satellites, but they do not seem to be handed round very evenly. In fact they are allotted about as capriciously as children would be in eight houses taken at random.

[Figure 63: Mars and his two satellites. The planet turns in nearly the length of our own day, while the inner moon runs right round him in 7 hours 39 minutes — three times over while a Martian day goes by once.]

At Number One there lives an old bachelor, and at Number Two a single lady. These are Mercury and Venus, and of course there are no children in either house.

Number Three is inhabited by old mother Earth, and she has a fine big son called the Moon.

Number Four is a nice little house inhabited by Mars. A pair of little twins are to be found there, and nimble creatures they are.

Number Five is a great mansion. A very big man lives here called Jupiter, with four robust sons and daughters that everybody knows. I fancy they must go to a great many dancing parties, for every night they can be seen whirling round and round. These four moons have been known to astronomers for three hundred years; but in 1892 there was an addition to the family, in the shape of a tiny moon that had never been seen before.

Number Six is also a fine big house, not quite so big as Number Five but larger than any of the others. Saturn lives here, and has the biggest family of all. Until the other day, eight sons and daughters were known to live here; but they are nowhere near as sturdy as Jupiter's children. The young Saturns do not make much of a display, and some of them are so delicate that they are hardly ever seen. In this household too a new member has recently appeared: for fifty years the family was known to consist of those eight, but in August 1898, while they were being photographed as a group, it was discovered that a ninth moon had been added.

Number Seven is also a fine large house; but Uranus, who lives there, is such a recluse that unless you keep a careful eye on his house you will hardly ever catch a glimpse of him. There are four children in that house, I believe, but we hardly know them. They move in circles of their own and appear to have seen a good deal of trouble.

Only one more house remains — Number Eight, inhabited by Neptune. It contains one child; but we are hardly on visiting terms with this household, and we know next to nothing about it.

Before 1877 Mars appeared to be in the same case as Venus or Mercury: without the dignity of any attendant at all. There was, however, good reason to think Mars might have satellites which we had simply not seen. Since Number Three had one child, and Numbers Five, Six, Seven and Eight had one or more each, it seemed hard that poor Number Four should have none. But it was certain that any satellites Mars had must be comparatively small things — for if Mars had even one considerable moon it would have been discovered long ago.

On that memorable occasion in 1877, Professor Hall discovered that the ruddy planet Mars was attended not by one moon but by two. Their behaviour was most extraordinary. It seemed to him at first almost as though one of these little moons were playing hide-and-seek: sometimes it would peep out at one side of the planet and sometimes at the other.

Here is a picture (Figure 63) showing how the moons of Mars revolve. That is the globe of the planet himself in the middle, turning steadily in a period nearly the same as our own day. But the remarkable point is that the inner moon runs right round the planet in 7 hours 39 minutes. It would seem very strange in our sky to have a little moon that rose in the west instead of the east and galloped right across the heavens three times every day — and that is what Mars has. The outer moon takes a more leisurely journey, needing 30 hours 18 minutes to complete a circuit. If for no other reason than to see these wonderful moons, it would be very interesting to visit Mars.

The satellites of this planet stand in complete contrast to our own moon. In the first place, our moon takes 27 days to go round the earth and is comparatively a long way off, whereas the moons of Mars are much nearer their planet and go round far more quickly. There is another difference too: they are much smaller bodies than our moon. If we represented Mars by a good-sized football, his moons on the same scale would be hardly as big as the smallest grains of shot.

Does it not speak well for the power of telescopes in these modern days that objects as small as the satellites of Mars should be seen at all? Remember, of course, that neither Mars nor his moons have any light of their own; they shine solely by the sunlight falling on them, and are lit just as the earth is, or the moon. The difficulty of observing the satellites is all the greater because they are seen in the telescope close beside so brilliant a body as Mars. The glare from the bright planet is such that when we want to see faint objects like these we have to hide Mars, so as to get a comparatively dark space to search in.

Now that they know exactly what to look for, a good many astronomers have observed the satellites of Mars. A superb telescope is nevertheless required; indeed you could not find a better test of an instrument's excellence than to see whether it will show these delicate objects.

But do not imagine that having a good telescope and a clear sky is all that is needed for making astronomical discoveries. You might just as well say that putting a first-rate cricket bat in a man's hands will ensure his making a grand score. Every boy knows that the bat does not make the cricketer, and I can assure him that the telescope does not make the astronomer either. In both cases there is some element of luck, no doubt. But of this you may be certain: as it is the man that makes the score and not the bat, so it is the astronomer that makes the discovery and not his telescope.

Deimos and Phobos were the names, according to Homer, of the two personages whose duty it was to attend on the god Mars and yoke his horses. A conclave of classical scholars and astronomers appropriately decided that Deimos and Phobos should be the names of the two satellites of the planet that bears his name.

How the Telescope Aids in Viewing Faint Objects

So far we have been talking about large planets which, if not as big as our earth, are at least as big as our moon. But now we must say a few words about a number of little planets, many of them so very small that a million of them rolled together would not make a globe as big as this earth. You cannot see these little objects with the unaided eye, and even with a telescope they look like nothing more than very small stars.

I have often been asked why it is that a telescope lets us see objects, both faint and small, which our unaided eyes fail to show us. Perhaps this is a good opportunity to say a few words on the subject. I think we can explain the usefulness of the telescope by examining our own eyes.

The eye undergoes a remarkable transformation when its owner passes out of darkness into a brilliantly lit room (Figure 64). Here you see two views of an eye, and you notice the great difference between them. They are not meant to be the eyes of two different people, nor the two eyes of one person; they are two conditions of the same eye. They are meant to show two states of a collier's eye: the right shows it when he is above ground in bright daylight, the left when he has gone down the coal pit to his useful work in the dark regions below.

I remember when I went down a coal pit I was lowered down a long shaft, and when we reached the bottom a safety lamp was handed to me. The gloom was such that at first I found some little difficulty in guiding my steps; but the capable guide beside me said in an encouraging voice, "You will be all right, sir, in a few moments — you will get your pit-eyes." I did get my pit-eyes, as he promised, and was able to see my way well enough to enjoy the wonderful sights that are to be met with in the depths below.
