Lecture Three: The Inner Planets

(Part 7 of 7)

[Figure 64: The same eye in two conditions — on one side the collier's eye down the pit, its pupil opened wide to gather what little light there is; on the other, the same eye above ground in daylight, with the pupil shrunk to a point.]

The change that came over my eyes is the one these two pictures illustrate. The black round spot in the centre is an opening covered by a transparent window, through which light enters the eye. That black spot is called the pupil, and nature has provided a beautiful contrivance by which it can be made larger or smaller, so as to keep vision comfortable.

When there is a great deal of light we limit how much gets in by contracting the pupil to make the opening smaller; so the picture with the small pupil shows the collier's eye above ground in bright sunlight. When he goes down into the pit, where light is very scarce, he wants to grasp every scrap of it he can, and so his pupil enlarges to make a wider opening. That is what he calls getting his pit-eyes.

But you need not go down a coal mine to see the use of the iris — for so that pretty membrane surrounding the pupil is called. The same thing can be observed every time you pass from light into darkness. Turn down the lamps in a room so that we are in comparative darkness, and our pupils gradually widen; turn them up again and the pupils begin to contract.

Other animals have the same contrivance in their eyes. You may notice at the Zoological Gardens how quickly the pupil of the lion contracts when he lifts his eyes to the light. The power of changing the pupil rapidly might well be of service to a beast of prey. Imagine him crouching in deep shade waiting for his dinner: his pupil will of course be wide for want of light. But when he springs out suddenly on his victim in bright daylight, it would surely be an advantage to be able to see clearly at once. So his pupil adjusts itself to the changed conditions with a speed that might not be necessary in creatures of less predatory habits.

These changes of the pupil explain how the telescope helps our eyes when we want to make out faint objects such as the little planets. Such bodies are invisible to the unaided eye because our pupils are not large enough to grasp light enough for the purpose. Even opened to the utmost, they need something to let them open wider still. We must therefore borrow help from some device that will have the same effect as enlarging the pupil beyond the limits nature has actually given it. What we want is something like a funnel, to turn a broad beam of rays into a narrow one.

Let me explain what I mean with an illustration. Suppose it is raining heavily and you want to fill a bucket with water. Put the bucket out in the middle of a field and it will never fill; but bring it to where the rain-shoot from a house roof is running down, and it will be overflowing in a few moments. The reason of course is that the broad roof of the house has caught a vast number of drops and brought them all together into the narrow shoot, and so the bucket is filled.

In the same way the telescope gathers up the rays of light falling on the object glass and condenses them into a small beam that can enter the eye. We thus have something nearly equivalent to an eye with a pupil as big as the object glass. The effect of a grand telescope amounts to increasing the pupil from the size of a threepenny piece to that of a dinner plate — or even a great deal larger.

The Asteroids or Small Planets

An asteroid looks like a tiny star, and indeed the two are very often mistaken for one another. If we could get close to them we should see a wide difference. We should find the asteroid to be a dark planet like our earth, lit only by rays from the sun; whereas the star, small and faint as it may seem, is itself a bright sun, at such a vast distance that it is only visible as a small point. The star is millions of times as far from us as the planet, and utterly different in every respect.

It is a curious fact that the planets should happen to resemble the stars so closely. We can find something like it in quite another part of nature. Visit a good entomological collection and you will be shown some of the wonderful leaf-like insects. These creatures have wings formed exactly to imitate the leaves of trees, with the stalks and veins completely represented. When one of them lies at rest with its wings folded among a number of leaves, it would be almost impossible to see through the disguise.

This mimicry is no doubt an ingenious device to deceive the birds and other enemies that want to eat the insect. There is, however, one test the cunning bird could apply: leaves do not move about of their own accord, and leaf-insects do. If the bird will only have the patience to wait, he will see a pair of the seeming leaves move — and then the deception is a deception no longer, and he gobbles up the poor insect.

In trying to discover the planets we meet exactly the same difficulty as the insect-eating bird. Wide as the true difference between a planet and a star is, there is such a seeming resemblance between them that we are often puzzled to know which is which. The planets imitate the stars so successfully that when one is set before us among myriads of stars, it is impossible to pick it out by its appearance. But we can be cunning. We can watch steadily; and the moment we find one of these star-like points beginning to creep about, we can pounce on it. We know from its movement that it is only disguised as a star and is really one of the planets.

It is not always easy to discover the asteroids even on this principle, for unfortunately they move very slowly. If you have a planet in the field of view, it will creep along so gradually that an hour or more must pass before it has shifted appreciably against the neighbouring stars. The search for such little planets is therefore a tedious business. There are two ways of going about it: the new one, only recently come into use, and the old one. I shall speak of the old one first.

Slow as the body's motion is, given enough time the planet will not merely move away from the stars near it but will travel right round the heavens. The surest way of making the discovery is to study a small part of the heavens now and examine the same place again months or years later.

Memory will not do for this. Nobody could recall all the stars he saw distinctly enough to be confident that the field of the telescope held more or fewer stars on the second occasion than on the first. The only way to do the work is to draw a map of the stars very carefully. This is a tedious business, for the stars are so numerous that even in a small part of the heavens there will be many thousands visible in the telescope, and every one must be entered faithfully in its true place on the map.

That done, the map is laid aside for a season, and then brought out again and compared with the sky. The great majority of the objects will of course be found just as they were before; these are the stars, the distant suns, and our concern at present is not with them.

Sometimes an object marked on the first map will have left a vacant place on the second. That does not help us much, for whatever the object was it has vanished into obscurity, and a new planet could hardly be discovered that way. But sometimes there will be a small point of light on the second map with no corresponding point on the first. Then indeed the astronomer's expectation is roused: he may be on the brink of a discovery.

Of course he watches the little stranger closely. It might be a star accidentally overlooked when the map was made, or possibly a star that has grown brighter in the interval. But here is a ready test — is the body moving? He looks very carefully and notes its position with respect to the stars around it. In an hour or two his suspicions may be confirmed: if the object is in motion, it really is a planet. A few more observations on later days will show its path; and the astronomer has only to satisfy himself that it is not one of the planets already found before he announces his discovery.

The new method of searching for small planets, which has only come into use in recent years, is a very beautiful one, and makes such discoveries far easier than the older way I have just described.

We can take photographs of the heavenly bodies by fixing a sensitive plate in the telescope so that the images of the objects we want fall on it. The method will work for very small stars if, with excellent clockwork and careful guiding, we can keep the telescope pointing steadily at the same spot until the stars have had time to imprint their little images. In this way we get a map of the heavens made in a thoroughly accurate manner. Indeed photography is so delicate for this purpose that the plates show many stars which cannot be seen even with the greatest of telescopes.

Now suppose a little planet happens to lie among the stars being photographed. All the time the plate is exposed the wanderer is of course creeping along; and after an hour — and even longer exposures are often used — it may have moved far enough to ensure being noticed. The plate will show the stars as points, but the planet will betray itself by drawing a streak.

The asteroids now known number between 400 and 500. A few of this host give the astronomer some information, but the majority are objects of only the slightest individual interest. No small planet is worth looking at as a telescopic picture. We should call an asteroid a large one if its whole surface were as great as England or France; many of them have an extent no greater than some of our large counties. A globe just big enough to be covered by Yorkshire — if you can imagine that large county neatly folded round it — would make a very respectable minor planet.

We know hardly anything of the nature of these small worlds; but it is certain that any living beings they could support must be of a totally different nature from the creatures we know on this earth. We can easily prove this by a calculation.

Suppose a small planet a hundred miles across, its diameter being therefore the eightieth part of the earth's. If we were landed on such a globe we should be far more puzzled by the extraordinary lightness of everything than in the similar case of the moon, which I spoke of in the second lecture. Supposing the planet to be made of material of the same density as the earth's, every weight would be reduced to the eightieth part of what it is here.

There would be one curious consequence of living on such a globe. We have heard of attempts to make flying machines, or to give a man wings so that he can soar aloft like a bird; and all such contrivances have failed so far. It may be possible to make a pair of wings a man can fly down with, but flying up again is quite another matter. On a small planet, however, it would be perfectly easy to fly; for as our bodies would seem to weigh only a couple of pounds, we ought to be able to flap a pair of wings hard enough to overcome so trifling a force. I should add that this assumes the atmosphere has the same density as our own.

Life on these small planets would indeed be extraordinary. Take Flora, for example, and consider how a game of lawn tennis might be managed there. The very slightest touch of the racket would drive the ball a prodigious distance before it could reach the ground; indeed, unless the courts were about half a mile long it would be impossible to serve a ball that was not a fault. Nor would much exertion be needed to play, even though the courts covered several hundred acres. As a young lady ran to meet the ball and return it, each of her steps might cover a hundred yards without any extra effort; and should she have the misfortune to fall, her descent to the ground would be as gentle as if she were settling down on a bed of the softest swan's-down.

These little planets are clustered together in one particular part of our system. Inside them are the four inner planets we have already spoken of; outside them are the four outer planets we are shortly to speak of. Between the two groups there was an empty space. It seemed unreasonable that where there was room for planets none should be found; so the search was made, and these objects were discovered. Even now, more and more of them are constantly being added to the list.

Until quite recently every small planet discovered kept within the space between the paths of the major planets Mars and Jupiter. This invariable rule was departed from, however, in the case of one body discovered in August 1898. This little object, known for a time by the provisional name of D Q and now definitely christened Eros, is an exception to the rule. Its average distance from the sun is actually less than that of Mars, and at its nearest it can come within 15,000,000 miles of the earth.

We occasionally get information out of these little bodies; for on their travels through the solar system they sometimes pick up scraps of useful knowledge, which careful examination can draw out of them. One of the most important problems in the whole of astronomy, for instance, is to determine the sun's distance. I have already described one way of doing it, by means of the transit of Venus. But astronomers never like to rely on a single method, so we are glad to find any other means of solving the same problem — and this the little planets will sometimes do for us. Juno on one occasion came very close to the earth, and astronomers in various parts of the globe observed her at the same moment; and when they compared their observations, they had a measure of the sun's distance. I shall not trouble you now with anything so difficult. It is enough to say that for this, as for every similar investigation, the observers were obliged to use the very same principle we illustrated in Figure 5.

Let me rather close this lecture by remarking that we have been considering only the lesser members of the great family that circles round the sun, and that in our next lecture we shall speak of the giants of our system.
