Lecture Four: The Giant Planets

(Part 1 of 4)

Our lecture today ought to give us a very humble view of the size of our earth. Mercury, Venus and Mars may be regarded as the earth's peers — we are slightly larger than Venus and a good deal larger than Mercury or Mars — but all four of these globes are insignificant beside the gigantic planets in the outer parts of our system.

These great bodies do not enjoy the benefits of the sun to the extent we are allowed to. They are so far off that the sun's rays are greatly enfeebled before they can cross the distance. But the gloom of their situation seems to matter little, for it is highly improbable that any of them could be inhabited.

A view of parts of the paths of these four great planets is given in Figure 65. The innermost is Jupiter, which completes a circuit in about twelve years. Then comes Saturn, revolving in an orbit so great that twenty-nine and a half years are needed to finish the journey. Further out still is Uranus, which has a longer journey than Saturn and moves so much more slowly that a man would have to live to the ripe old age of eighty-four for a single revolution of Uranus to be completed in his lifetime. And at the boundary of our system revolves the planet Neptune; a mighty globe, yet one we cannot see without a telescope. It is invisible to the naked eye for two reasons: first because it is so far from the sun that the light falling on it is exceedingly feeble, and second because it is so far from us that whatever brilliance it has is greatly reduced.

[Figure 65: The orbits of the four giant planets — Jupiter's twelve-year circuit innermost, then Saturn, then Uranus, and Neptune out at the boundary of the system.]

Jupiter

Of all these bodies Jupiter is by far the greatest. He is indeed greater than all the other planets rolled into one. The relative insignificance of the earth beside him is well shown by the fact that if you took 1200 globes each as big as our earth and made them into a single globe, it would only be as large as the greatest of the planets. A comparison of the sizes of the earth and Jupiter is shown in Figure 66.

[Figure 66: Jupiter and the earth compared. It would take 1200 globes the size of ours to build the one beside it.]

Figure 67 shows Jupiter as seen through the telescope. The first thing you notice is that the outline of the planet is not circular: the vertical diameter in this picture is plainly shorter than the horizontal one. Jupiter is flattened at the poles and bulges at the equator, so that a section through the poles is an ellipse. He is turning rapidly on his axis, and that accounts for the bulge.

We find the planet has taken almost exactly the form it would take if it were actually a liquid. We can illustrate this with a globe of oil poised in a mixture of spirits of wine and water so carefully adjusted that the oil has no tendency either to rise or to sink. Make the globe of oil rotate — which we can easily do by passing a spindle through it — and you see it bulge out into the shape Jupiter and the other planets have taken.

[Figure 67: The clouds of Jupiter — the shaded bands crossing the disc, and the visible flattening at the poles from the planet's rapid spin.]

On the picture of the planet you will see shaded bands. These are constantly changing their appearance, and for two reasons. In the first place they change because Jupiter turns so quickly that in five hours the whole of the side facing us has been carried out of sight; in another five hours the original side is back again, for the entire rotation takes about 10 hours — or more precisely 9 hours 55 minutes 21 seconds.

But the bands are not permanent objects in themselves. They have no more permanence than the clouds in our own sky. Sometimes Jupiter's clouds are more strongly marked than at other times, and sometimes they are hardly to be seen at all. From this we learn that the markings we see when we look at the great planet are merely masses of cloud, surrounding and hiding whatever his interior may consist of.

There is one circumstance which shows that Jupiter must be a very different object from the earth, although the two agree in having clouds. What would you think if I told you that we have been able to weigh Jupiter with the help of his little moons, which I shall speak of presently? Those little bodies tell us that Jupiter is about 300 times as heavy as our earth, and we have no doubt about it, for the result has been confirmed in other ways.

But we have found by actual measurement that Jupiter is 1200 times as big as the earth; so if he were made like the earth he ought to be 1200 times as heavy. This is quite plain, I think. If two cakes are made of the same material and one has twice the bulk of the other, it will certainly be twice as heavy. If there are two balls of iron, one twice the bulk of the other, one will of course weigh twice as much. But if a ball of lead has twice the bulk of a ball of iron, the lead will weigh more than twice as much as the iron, because lead is the heavier material.

In the same way, the weights of the earth and Jupiter are not what we should expect from their relative sizes. If the two bodies were made of the same materials, and in the same state, Jupiter would certainly be four times as heavy as we find him to be.

We are therefore led to believe that Jupiter is not a solid body, at least in his outer parts. The masses of cloud that surround the planet seem to be immensely thick; and as clouds are of course light for their bulk, they have the effect of greatly increasing Jupiter's apparent size while adding very little to his weight. There is thus a great deal of mere inflation about this planet, which makes him look much bigger than his actual materials would warrant if he were built like the earth.

These facts suggest an interesting question. Why has Jupiter such an immense atmosphere, if we may call it that? The clouds we are so familiar with down here on the earth are produced by the heat of the sun beating down on the wide surface of the ocean, evaporating the water and raising the vapour to where it forms cloud. Heat is therefore necessary for making cloud; and with clouds as dense and massive as Jupiter's, apparently a good deal more heat would be needed than the moderate clouds of this earth require.

Where is Jupiter to get this heat? Have we not seen that the great planet is far more distant from the sun than we are? In fact the intensity of the sun's heat on Jupiter is not more than a twenty-fifth part of what we get from the same source. We can hardly believe the sun supplied the heat to make those great clouds, so we must look about for an additional source — and it can only be inside the planet itself.

So far as internal heat goes, Jupiter seems to be in much the same state now as our earth was ages ago, before its surface had cooled to its present temperature. Being so much larger than the earth, he has been slower to part with his heat; and the planet seems not to have had time yet to cool enough for water to stay on his surface. So the planet's internal heat supplies an explanation of his clouds.

We may remark, too, that just as the present condition of Jupiter shows us the early condition of our earth, so the present condition of the earth foreshadows the future in store for Jupiter — when he has had time to cool down, and the waters that now exist as vapour are condensed into oceans on his surface.

The Satellites of Jupiter

Every owner of a telescope delights in turning it on Jupiter, both for the spectacle the globe itself affords and for the sight of the wonderful system of moons attending the giant planet. Fortunately the four satellites of Jupiter are within reach of even the most modest telescope, and their incessant changes of position, relative to Jupiter and to one another, give them a never-ending interest for the astronomer.

Compared with the torpid performance of our own moon, which takes a month to complete a circuit of the earth, Jupiter's moons are wonderfully brisk and lively. Nor are they small bodies like the satellites of Mars: the second of Jupiter's satellites is quite as big as our moon, and the other three are very much larger. It is true, though, that they look insignificant beside Jupiter's own enormous bulk.

The innermost of these little bodies flies right round in a period of one day and eighteen or nineteen hours, while the outermost takes a little more than a fortnight — rather more than half the time our moon needs for a complete revolution. Jupiter's satellites are too far away for us to see much of their structure or appearance even with mighty telescopes; it is of course their great distance that makes them look so insignificant. They would be bright enough to be seen as small stars were it not that, lying so close to Jupiter, they are drowned by his overpowering brightness.

It was by means of the satellites of Jupiter that one of the most beautiful discoveries in science was made.

As a satellite goes round the giant planet, it often happens that the little body enters the great planet's shadow. No sunlight then falls on the satellite; and since it has no light of its own, it disappears from sight until it has passed through the shadow and comes out into the sunlight again on the other side. We can watch these eclipses with our telescopes, and there can be no more interesting employment for a small one.

The movements of these bodies are now known so thoroughly that the eclipses can be predicted. The almanacs will tell you when a satellite is calculated to disappear and when it ought to return to view. But when astronomers first began making these computations, a couple of hundred years ago, the little satellites gave a great deal of trouble. They would not keep their time. Sometimes they were a quarter of an hour too soon, and sometimes a quarter of an hour too late. At last, however, the reason for these irregularities was discovered — and a wonderful reason it was.

Suppose there were a number of cannon all over Hyde Park, and that they were all fired at the same moment by electricity. Although the sounds would all be produced simultaneously, you would not hear them all together wherever you stood: the noise from the cannon close at hand would reach your ears first, and the more distant reports would follow.

You can work out how far off a flash of lightning is by allowing a mile for every five seconds between seeing the flash and hearing the peal of thunder that follows. The light and the noise were produced at the same instant; but the sound takes five seconds to cross every mile, whereas the light, by comparison with sound, may be said to travel instantaneously.

That sound travelled at a limited speed was always obvious; but not until the discrepancies arose over Jupiter's satellites was it learnt that light too takes time to travel. Light does travel much faster than sound — about a million times as fast. It goes so fast that it would rush more than seven times round the earth in a single second. So far as distances on the earth are concerned, the time light needs for its journey is imperceptible.

The distances between one heavenly body and another, however, are so enormous that even a ray of light, moving as fast as light alone can move, takes a measurable time on the way. Our moon is comparatively so near that light takes little more than a second to cross the short distance. Eight minutes are needed for light to travel from the sun to the earth: the sunbeams entering our eyes now left the sun eight minutes ago. If the sun were suddenly put out, it would still seem to shine as brightly as ever to the people of this earth for eight minutes longer.

Since Jupiter is five times as far from the sun as we are, the light from the sun to Jupiter takes forty minutes on the journey, and the light from Jupiter to the earth takes something similar. When we look at Jupiter and his moons we do not see him as he is now, but as he was more than half an hour ago — the interval varying somewhat with our changing distance from the planet. Sometimes the light from Jupiter reaches us in as little as thirty-two minutes, sometimes it takes as much as forty-eight; so the journey sometimes needs a quarter of an hour more than it does at other times.

Now we can understand that irregularity in Jupiter's satellites which puzzled the early astronomers. An eclipse sometimes appeared a quarter of an hour before it was expected, because the earth was then as near to Jupiter as it could be, while the calculations had been made from observations taken when Jupiter was at his greatest distance. It was these eclipses of the satellites that first suggested the possibility that light must have a measurable speed. Once that was taken into account, the occasional lateness of the eclipses was found to be satisfactorily explained; confirmation came in from other sources, and so the discovery of the velocity of light was completely established.

Professor Barnard, while studying Jupiter in 1892 with the splendid refractor at the Lick Observatory, saw a very small point of light nearer the planet than the nearest of the four known satellites. Further examination showed that this little object was indeed another satellite; so Jupiter has a fifth moon besides the four that have been known so long. This little body is so small and faint that it can only be made out under the most favourable conditions and with the most powerful telescopes.

Saturn

Next outside Jupiter, on the frontier of the ancient planetary system, revolves another grand planet called Saturn. His distance from us is sometimes nearly a thousand million miles, and he needs more than a quarter of a century to complete each revolution.

Some people do not pronounce the names of the planets quite correctly. I have heard of a gardener with a taste for astronomy who occasionally begins to talk about the planets Juniper and Citron; probably you will know which he means. The ancients had discovered Saturn to be a planet, for though he looks like a star, his movement through the constellations could not escape notice once attention was paid to the heavens.

[Figure 68: Saturn and the earth compared. The small object marked E is our earth, drawn to its true relative size beside the ringed planet.]

In size Saturn is surpassed among the planets only by Jupiter. He is about 600 times as large as the earth; the small object E in Figure 68 shows our earth at its true relative size beside the ringed planet. But Saturn is so far away that even at his best he is never as bright as Venus, or Mars, or Jupiter when they are favourably placed.

On the globe of Saturn we can sometimes see a few bands, though they are faint compared with Jupiter's. There is no doubt that what we see on Saturn is a dense mass of cloud. Indeed he can have comparatively little solid matter inside him, for this planet does not weigh as much as a ball of water of the same size would. Saturn, like Jupiter, must be intensely hot in his interior.
