Lecture Four: The Giant Planets

(Part 2 of 4)

The ring — or rather the series of rings — surrounding the planet is also shown in Figure 68. These appendages are not fastened to the globe of Saturn by any material bond. They are poised in space without any support, while the globe of the planet proper stands symmetrically inside them.

I have made a model showing Saturn with his rings, but I have had to fasten the rings to the globe with little pieces of wire, since there is no mechanical way of poising the rings of a model without support as they are poised around the planet. If we throw the beam of the electric lamp on the little planet, we see the shadow it casts on its own ring. Similar shadows can be seen on the real Saturn in the sky, and they prove that the planet does not shine by its own light but by the sunlight falling on it. Here again we see the wide difference between a planet and a star: if our sun were put out, Saturn and all the other planets would vanish from the sky, while the stars would of course twinkle on as before.

There are three rings round Saturn. They all lie in the same plane, and they are so thin that when they are turned edge-on to us the whole system almost disappears, except in very powerful telescopes. The outer and the inner bright rings are separated by a dark line which can be traced the whole way round. At the inner edge of the inner ring begins that strange structure called the crape ring, which reaches halfway in towards the globe of the planet. The most remarkable thing about the crape ring is that it is semi-transparent: we can sometimes see the globe of the planet through this strange curtain. The crape ring can only be seen with a powerful telescope; the other two are within the reach of very moderate instruments.

The Nature of the Rings

For the explanation of the nature of Saturn's rings we are indebted to the calculations of mathematicians. You might perhaps have thought nothing could be simpler than to suppose the rings were stiff plates of solid material. But the question cannot be settled that way. We know the ring could not bear the strain of the planet's attraction if it were a solid body.

I may illustrate the argument with some familiar facts about bridges. Where the span is small — where a road has to cross a railway, a canal or a river — the arch is of course the proper kind of structure. There is a specially beautiful arch over the river Dee at Chester. But for a longer bridge, masonry arches will not do. Where a considerable span has to be crossed, as at the Menai Straits, or a gigantic one, as at the Firth of Forth, arches must be abandoned and iron bridges of a totally different construction used instead.

Arches cannot be used beyond a certain span because the strain on the materials becomes too great for them to withstand. Every stone in an arch is squeezed by intense pressure, and there is a limit beyond which even the stoutest stone cannot be relied on. As soon as the span is so great that the stones are squeezed as hard as is compatible with safety, the size limit for that form of arch has been reached.

Now suppose you stood on Saturn at his equator and looked up at the mighty ring stretching edge-on across your sky. It would rise from the horizon on one side, pass over your head and slope down to the horizon on the other. You would in fact be standing beneath an arch of about 100,000 miles span. Because of Saturn's attraction, every part of that structure would be pulled forcibly towards his surface; and so the materials of the arch, if it were a solid body, would be compressed with terrific force.

It does not really matter that the arch I am speaking of is half of a ring whose other half lies below the globe of the planet. That is only a difference in how the two ends of the arch are supported, and does not affect the question of the pressure on its materials. Nor does the fact that the ring is revolving remove the difficulty, though it undoubtedly lessens it. We know of no solid substance that could endure the pressure; even the toughest steel ever made would bend up like dough under such conditions. We cannot, therefore, account for Saturn's ring by supposing it solid, for no solid would be strong enough.

Do you not remember the old fable of the oak tree and the pliant reed — how, when the storm was gathering, the oak laughed at the poor reed and said it would never be able to stand the blast? But things did not turn out that way. The mighty oak, which would not yield to the storm, was blown down; while the slender reed bent to the wind and took no harm at all.

This gives us a hint as to the true constitution of Saturn's ring. It is not a solid body trying to resist by sheer strength; it is to be explained rather as an exceedingly pliant structure. Indeed I ought not to call it a structure at all. It is rather a multitude of small bodies not in the least joined together. I do not know what size those bodies may be. For all we can tell, they may be no bigger than the pebbles you find on a gravel walk.

Let us see how we might encircle our earth with rings like Saturn's. I shall ask you to provide a sufficiently large number of pebbles; and you must also imagine that I have the means of going up into space, halfway from here to the moon.

Suppose I went up there and simply dropped a pebble. It would of course tumble straight back down to the earth. But if I threw it out with the proper speed and in the proper direction, I could start it off as a little moon, and it would go round and round our earth in a circle. I say a pebble, but it really matters little what size the object is — it might be as small as a grain of shot or as big as a cannon-ball.

Now take another pebble and cast it into a somewhat similar path, taking care that the planes of the two orbits are the same. Each of these little bodies will pursue its journey without interference from the other. Then do the same with a third and a fourth, with thousands and millions and billions of pebbles, until at last the small bodies are so numerous that they almost fill a large part of the plane with a continuous shoal. Each little object, guided entirely by the earth's attraction, will follow its path with undeviating regularity; its neighbours will not interfere with it, nor it with them.

Now let us mark out the limits of our flat shoal of moonlets. First we take away all those lying outside a certain large circle. Then we clear enough of them to leave an empty space between an outer ring and an inner one, and so the two conspicuous rings are made. At the inside of the inner ring we take out pebbles here and there, so as to make that part much less dense than the outer portions, and so produce a semi-transparent crape ring. Then we clear away those that come too close to the planet, and so form a neat inner boundary.

If we could then view our handiwork from another planet, what would our earth look like? The separate pebbles, though individually so small, would by their countless numbers reflect the sun's light so as to produce the appearance of a continuous sheet. We should see a large bright outer ring surrounding the earth, separated by a dark interval from an inner ring; and at the margin of the inner ring the pebbles would be so much more sparsely spread that we should be able to see through them to some extent.

That beautiful system of rings Saturn displays is undoubtedly of the same character as the imaginary system I have tried to describe. No other explanation will account for the facts — especially for the semi-transparency of the crape ring. The separate bodies making up Saturn's rings seem, however, so small that we cannot see them individually. There are some other fine lines running round the rings besides the great division, and these too can be explained by the theory I have given.

Saturn has other claims on our attention besides his rings. He has an elaborate retinue of satellites — no fewer than nine of them; though some are very faint objects, and not nearly as interesting as the system attending Jupiter. The ninth was discovered quite recently by Professor W. H. Pickering of Harvard College Observatory. This little moon, for which the name Phoebe has been suggested, is further from the planet than any of the others. It is a minute object shining as a star of the 15th or 16th magnitude, and goes round the planet in a period of about sixteen months.

Saturn was the last and outermost of the planets known to the ancients. His path lay on the frontier of the solar system as they knew it; and the magnificence of the planet itself, with its attendant lights and its marvellous rings, made it worthy indeed of so dignified a position. These five planets — Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn — made up, with the sun and the moon, the seven "planets" of the ancients. They were supposed to complete the solar system; and more than that, the existence of any other member was thought impossible.

In modern times two more planets have been discovered. I am not referring now to those little bodies that run about in scores between Mars and Jupiter. I mean two grand first-class planets, far bigger than our earth. One is Uranus, which revolves far outside Saturn; the other is Neptune, which is further still, and whose mighty orbit takes in the whole planetary system within its circuit. To complete its journey round the sun, no less than 165 years is required.

William Herschel

I must begin the account of this discovery by telling you a little story.

In the middle of the eighteenth century there lived at Hanover a teacher of music named Isaac Herschel. He had a family of ten children, and he did the best for them that his scanty means allowed. William was the fourth of his children, and he inherited his father's talent for music, as most of his brothers and sisters did.

He was a bright, clever boy at school, and made such good progress with his music that by the time he was fourteen he was playing in the military band of the Hanoverian Guards. Then war broke out between France and England; and as Hanover was at that time under the English crown, the French invaded it, and a battle was fought in which the poor Hanoverian Guards suffered terribly. Young Herschel spent the night after the battle in a ditch, and came to the conclusion that he did not like fighting — though he was only a bandsman — and resolved to change his profession.

That was not so easy to do just then, for even a bandsman cannot leave the service in wartime simply because he wishes to. William Herschel, however, showed all through his life that he was not a man to be baffled by difficulties. I do not know whether he asked for leave; at all events he took it. He deserted, in fact, and his friends managed to get him away to England.

He was nineteen when he began looking for a career over here, and he certainly found his prospects in the musical profession very discouraging. But Herschel was very industrious, and at last he was appointed organist of the Octagon Chapel at Bath. He gradually became famous for his musical skill and had numbers of pupils; he used to conduct concerts and oratorios, and became well known in that way throughout the west of England.

Busy as he was with his profession, Herschel kept his love of reading and study. Every moment he could spare from his duties he gave to his books. It was natural that a musician should want to study the theory of music; and to understand that properly you need Euclid and algebra, and indeed the higher branches of mathematics as well. Herschel did not know these things at first — he had had no means of learning them as a boy — so he worked very hard at them as a man. And he studied with such success that he made fair progress in mathematics; after which it occurred to him that it would be interesting to learn something about astronomy.

Once he had begun reading about the stars, he thought he would like to see them, and so he borrowed a telescope. It was only a little instrument, but it delighted him so much that he said he must have one of his own; so he wrote to London to make inquiries.

Telescopes were much dearer in those days than they are now, and Herschel could not afford the price the opticians asked. Here again his invincible determination came to his aid. What was to prevent him making a telescope himself, he asked — and forthwith he set about the attempt.

Perhaps you will think it strange that a music teacher with no special training as a mechanic should embark straight away on so delicate and difficult a task. But it is not really as hard to make a telescope as you might imagine. The amateur cannot make as pretty an instrument as he could buy in the shops — the tubes will not be so beautifully polished, and the finish will be such as a trained workman would be ashamed of — but the essential part of a telescope is comparatively easy to make. At least, that is true of a reflecting telescope, which is the kind Herschel attempted, and succeeded in making.

You must know that there are two kinds of telescope. The commoner one, which you are more familiar with, is called the refracting telescope, and it has glass lenses; it was an instrument built on that principle that we spoke of in a former lecture. The reflecting telescope gets its power from a bright mirror at the lower end, and when you use it you look at the reflection of the stars in the mirror.

It was a reflector of this kind that Herschel set about building, and he threw himself into the task with enthusiasm. His sister Caroline had come to live with him and used to help him at the work. He was so much in earnest that he would rush into his workshop the moment he got home from a concert and, without even taking off his best clothes, plunge into grinding and polishing his mirrors. His sister tried to keep the house as tidy as she could, but Herschel set up a carpenter's shop in the drawing room and turning-lathes in the best bedroom.

At last he succeeded. He made a mirror of the right shape and found that it showed the stars properly. It was not a looking-glass in the ordinary sense, with glass on one side and quicksilver on the other: the mirror Herschel made was entirely of metal, a mixture of two parts of copper to one of tin.
