Lecture Four: The Giant Planets

(Part 3 of 4)

[Figure 69: The mirror. Ground with coarse sand, then with finer and finer emery, until the shallow basin at its centre — a twentieth of an inch deep in a six-inch mirror — has been given exactly the right curve.]

The copper has first to be melted in a furnace, for the metal must be hotter than red heat before it will begin to run. Then the tin has to be carefully added, and the mirror is cast by pouring the molten metal into a flat mould. This gives the rough mirror, which in Herschel's earlier telescopes seems to have been about six or seven inches across and nearly an inch thick.

Copper is a tough substance and tin is tough too, but when they are melted together to make speculum metal, as this alloy is called, they produce an exceedingly hard and brittle material. Remembering that we could never break a copper penny by throwing it down on the paving, it may seem strange that speculum metal should be so very brittle; but a piece the size of a penny would be more brittle than a bit of glass the same size, and when the speculum is cast it will fly to pieces unless it is cooled very carefully.

Here lay one of the difficulties Herschel had to face. Speculum metal must go into an oven as soon as the casting has set, and the heat must then be allowed to fall very gradually.

When the speculum has at last been obtained, there follows the labour of giving it its true figure and polish. It is not only more fragile than glass but quite as hard, so the grinding is a tedious business. First the surface has to be ground with coarse sand and then with emery, made finer and finer until the true figure has been given (Figure 69).

The mirror is then somewhat basin-shaped, but the hollow is very slight. In a mirror six inches across, the depression at the centre would perhaps be no more than a twentieth of an inch. Small as it is, it has to be made exactly: if it were wrong at any point by so much as a tenth of the thickness of this sheet of paper, the telescope would not perform accurately.

The tool used for grinding is of cast iron, turned in a lathe to the right shape, and divided into squares as shown in Figure 70. After the grinding comes the polishing, done with a tool the same shape as the grinder. This has to be covered with little squares of pitch, so that when it is warmed and set down on the mirror it is soft enough to take the right form. Some rouge and water is spread over the mirror and the polisher is worked backwards and forwards by hand until a brilliant surface is obtained.

[Figure 70: The grinding tool — cast iron, turned to the right shape in a lathe and divided across into squares.]

When the amateur astronomer has finished this part of the task, all the great difficulties of his telescope are conquered. The tube may be made of wood, and a square tube will do just as well as a round one. He must also provide a small mirror for the top of the tube, which has to be perfectly flat. Preparing this needs much care, for it is not as easy as you might suppose to get an accurately flat surface. One way is to take three pieces and grind each pair of them together until every pair touches all over; then they must certainly all be flat. One more part is wanted, an eyepiece, and this presents no difficulty: a single glass lens can be made to answer, and your telescope is complete.

The Discovery of Uranus

It was in the year 1774 that Herschel first had a view of the heavens through a telescope of his own making. In the early part of his career he does not seem to have made any important discoveries. He was gradually preparing himself for the great achievement that would make his name famous.

It was on the 13th of March 1781 that the organist of the Octagon Chapel at Bath turned his telescope on the constellation of the Twins and began to look at one star after another.

You must know that a star merely looks like a little point in a telescope. Even the greatest instrument will only make a star look brighter; it will never show it with a perceptible disc. Looking over the stars that night, Herschel's attention was arrested by one object which did look larger when magnified, and which therefore was not a star.

The only other objects that would behave in this way were the planets — or possibly a comet. Indeed, Herschel at first supposed that what he saw must be a comet. It could hardly have occurred to him that he was to have the good fortune to discover a new planet. The five great planets had been known from all antiquity; was it reasonable to suppose there could be another that had never been noticed?

Fortunately there was a test available. A star stays in the same place from night to night and from year to year, whereas a planet, as we have already had occasion to mention, is a body that wanders about. But the movements of a planet are not at all like those of a comet; so to settle the nature of Herschel's new body it was enough to observe the character of its motion. A few nights sufficed. Its position was carefully marked against the neighbouring stars, and it was soon shown to be a planet.

Here, then, a great discovery had been made. A new planet, now called Uranus, was added to our system. It would be nothing to discover a new star — you might as well talk of discovering a new grain of sand on the seashore. The stars are in untold myriads, and they are so far off that they have no relation whatever to our system, which the sun presides over. But by detecting a new planet revolving far outside Saturn, Herschel showed that a new and most interesting member had to be added to the five old planets known from the earliest records of history.

You may well imagine that a discovery so startling caused astonishment throughout the scientific world. "Who is this Bath organist?" everybody asked. Accounts of him and his discovery appeared in the papers; his fellow-citizens were not as familiar with the name as we happily are now, and the spelling of the unusual name showed many varieties.

When George III heard of Herschel's great achievement, he ordered the astronomer to be summoned to Windsor so that the King might have an account of the wonderful discovery from the discoverer's own lips. Herschel of course obeyed, and brought with him his famous telescope and a map of the whole solar system to show the King. No doubt he supposed His Majesty had probably not paid much attention to astronomy, and so came prepared to explain whatever the King would need to know before he could fully appreciate the magnitude of the discovery.

You will remember that Herschel, when still a boy, had deserted from the army many years before. It appears the King had somehow learnt this; for when Herschel was shown into his presence, His Majesty said that before the great astronomer could discuss science there was a little matter of business to be disposed of. The King then handed Herschel a paper — in which, I dare say, he was greatly surprised to find a pardon for the deserter, written out by the King himself.

Then Herschel unfolded his wonderful discovery, which the King thoroughly appreciated; and in the evening the telescope was set up in the gardens and the glories of the heavens displayed. Herschel made a most favourable impression on His Majesty; and when the King told the ladies of the Castle next day about everything Herschel had shown him, their astronomical ardour was aroused too, and they asked to look through the marvellous tube.

Herschel was of course ready to oblige, and the telescope was carried to the windows of the Queen's apartments at Windsor, which would have commanded a fine view had the clouds not been in the way — which unfortunately they were. Even for royalty the clouds would not disperse. What was to be done?

Herschel was equal to the occasion. He particularly wanted to show them Saturn, which is one of the most beautiful objects in the sky and will fascinate any intelligent beholder. No astronomer could have seen Saturn through those clouds; but Herschel did not disappoint his visitors. He pointed the instrument not at the sky — there was nothing to be seen there — but at a distant garden wall.

Now what would you expect to see by looking through a telescope at a garden wall? Bricks, perhaps, or ivy. What these ladies saw was a beautiful image of Saturn, his globe in the centre and his rings all complete, so true a likeness of the planet that even an experienced astronomer might have been deceived. Herschel had seen in the afternoon that the clouds were thick and there would be little chance of using the telescope properly; so he had cut out a little image of Saturn, lit it with lamps, and set it up at a suitable distance on the garden wall.

Herschel's visit to Windsor had important consequences. The King said it was a pity so great an astronomer should devote himself to music, and that it would be far better for him to give up that profession and come and live at Windsor. His Majesty promised to pay him a salary, and undertook to meet the cost of building great telescopes as well. His faithful sister Caroline came with him as his assistant, and she too received some bounty from the King. From that moment Herschel gave up all his musical business and devoted himself to the great task of his life, observing the heavens.

He built telescopes on a scale far beyond anything that had been thought of before. He used to stand out in the open air at night from dusk to dawn, gazing down the tube of his mighty reflector, watching the stars and other objects in the heavens as they moved past. He would dictate what he saw to Caroline, who sat near him; it was her business to write down his notes and record the positions of the objects he described. Sometimes, she tells us, the cold was so great that the ink froze in her pen while she was at this work. Until he was a very old man Herschel gave himself up to his astronomical labours. His discoveries are to be counted in thousands, though not one of them was as striking or as important as the detection of the new planet that first brought him fame.

The question of a name for this addition to the sun's family had of course to be settled. Herschel surely had a right to be heard at the christening; and as a compliment to His Majesty he named the stranger the Georgium Sidus. For a brief while the planet was actually called by that name. The Continental astronomers, however, would not accept it. All the other planets were named after ancient divinities, and it was felt that the King of England would look oddly associated with Jupiter and Saturn; perhaps they also considered that the British dominions, on which the sun never sets, were quite large enough already without further extension into the heavens. Accordingly a consultation was held, at the end of which George III was stripped of his planetary honours and the body was given the name of Uranus, which by universal consent it now bears.

The planet Uranus lies just on the verge of visibility to the unaided eye. It can sometimes be glimpsed as a faint star, and with a telescope it is of course readily seen. Many generations of astronomers before Herschel's time had been observing the heavens, making maps of the stars and compiling great catalogues in which their places were accurately set down; and Uranus often came under their notice. But it never occurred to them that something looking so like a star was really a planet.

I have said that Uranus looked unlike a star when Herschel examined it; but that was because Herschel was a particularly skilful astronomer. To an observer of a more ordinary kind Uranus would present nothing very remarkable and would be passed over as a small star. In fact the planet was observed in that way not once or twice but no fewer than seventeen times before Herschel's acute eye perceived its true character. On many earlier occasions it had been noted as a star by astronomers who are in every way entitled to our respect. It took a Herschel, determined to see everything in the very best way, to grasp the discovery that had eluded so many others.

When Uranus was observed on those earlier occasions and mistaken for a star, its place had been carefully recorded. Those records are now of the utmost use, because they show us the planet's past history — and they seem all the more valuable when we remember that Uranus takes no less than eighty-four years to complete a single revolution round the sun. So, since the planet was discovered in 1781, it had completed one revolution by 1865, and is now (1899) about a third of the way round another. The earlier observations reach back almost 200 years, so that altogether we have more or less information about the planet's movements over two and a half circuits.

Uranus is a great deal bigger than the earth, as you will see from the view of the comparative sizes of the planets (Figure 47). It appears to be of a bluish hue; but we cannot tell whether it turns on its axis — or rather I should say we cannot see whether it turns on its axis, for we can hardly doubt that it does.

Despite the great distance of Uranus from the earth, we have been able to put this planet in the weighing scales just as we did the nearer ones, and we assert with confidence that Uranus is fifteen times as heavy as our earth. For this information we are indebted to its satellites.

The Satellites of Uranus

You must use a very good telescope to see the satellites of Uranus. They are four in number and bear the names Ariel, Umbriel, Titania and Oberon. The innermost, Ariel, completes a journey round the planet in two days and a half; Oberon, the most distant, takes thirteen days and a half.

A planet is always tending to pull its satellite down, and the satellite is saved from falling by the speed at which it revolves. The heavier the planet, the faster its satellites must go round. To take an illustration from our own moon: we know that if the earth were made four times heavier than it is, the moon would have to spin round twice as fast to stay in the same orbit. The speed at which the satellites of Uranus revolve therefore gives us a measure of the planet's mass. If Uranus were heavier than he is, his satellites would go round faster; if he were lighter, they would take longer.

Uranus too seems greatly swollen with cloud, in the same way as Jupiter and Saturn. Indeed, if our earth were as big as Uranus it would weigh four or five times as much as Uranus does. So we are certain that Uranus must be made of materials less dense on the whole than those our earth is made of.

There is another singular circumstance about the moons of Uranus. I have told you that every body revolving round another by gravitation describes an ellipse; but of course there are many different kinds of that curve, and some may be nearly circles. There is nothing whatever to prevent a satellite revolving round its primary in an exact circle, if it is started properly — in the right direction and at the right speed. All four satellites of this planet seem to revolve in circles so perfect that we can draw an accurate picture of the system with a pair of compasses.

It is further to be noticed that the four circles seem to lie exactly in one plane. The orbits of the other great planets, and of their satellites, lie in planes tilted at less than 35° to the ecliptic, the plane the earth moves in. Here again the satellites of Uranus are exceptional: the plane they lie in stands up almost square to the plane in which the planet's own motion is performed. The moons of Uranus seem to have been given a twist by some accident we are not able to account for.
