Lecture Four: The Giant Planets

(Part 4 of 4)

The Discovery of Neptune

The boundaries of the solar system had been much extended by the discovery of Uranus; but they were destined to be enlarged further still by the detection of another vast planet revolving far outside Uranus, whose orbit forms, so far as we know at present, the outline of the whole planetary system.

I have here to describe one of the greatest discoveries ever made. It is not the magnificence of the outermost planet itself I am referring to, though it is indeed bigger than Uranus. I am thinking rather of the way the discovery was made.

I mean no disrespect to Herschel when I say that the discovery of Uranus was chiefly a stroke of good fortune; but let me put it that way in order to bring out as strongly as I can how utterly different was the train of ideas that led to Neptune. Herschel merely looked at one star after another until he suddenly came upon the planet, having beforehand not the slightest notion that any such planet was likely to exist. But Neptune was shown to exist before it had ever been seen — and indeed the man who first saw the planet, and knew it for a planet, was not its discoverer.

This is rather a difficult subject, and it would take you years of hard study to follow the reasoning by which Neptune was found. I shall, however, try to explain it well enough to give at least some idea of the kind of problem that had to be solved.

You will remember Kepler's law, which tells us that every planet moves round the sun in an ellipse. If the planet is not interfered with in any way, and is guided only by the sun's attraction, it will go on describing precisely the same ellipse for ever without the slightest alteration.

Now it was found that the path Uranus followed was not always regular. The early observations of the planet, from when it was mistaken for a star, have been of the utmost service here: they show us the ellipse Uranus described on its last time round, while our modern observations tell us the path the planet is describing at present. The two ellipses are slightly different; and the consequence is that if we take the observations of Uranus made 100 years ago and calculate from them where Uranus ought to be now, we find the planet a little astray.

Astronomers are not accustomed to being wrong in such calculations, and when discrepancies arise the first thing to do is to find what has caused them. It is certain that the position Uranus is found in tonight, for example, is not the position it would have had if the sun alone had been guiding it. Perhaps you will think it impossible to make reliable computations about such matters; but I assure you it can be done — and the very fact that the motion of Uranus appeared irregular made it interesting to try to find out the cause of the disturbance.

I explained, when we were speaking about Mars, that there is an attraction between every two bodies; but in the group of planets the earth belongs to, the sun's attraction is so much stronger than any other force that all the movements are guided mainly by it. Nevertheless it is true that not only does the sun pull our earth and all the other planets: all the planets, the earth included, are pulling one another. There is an incessant struggle going on in the family party. Fortunately the sun is so much more powerful than any other member that he keeps them all pretty well in order, and unless you look very carefully you will not see the effects of the little struggles going on between every pair in the system.

Our own earth is pulled and swayed to and fro by the actions of its brothers and sisters. It is dragged perhaps a thousand or two thousand miles this way by Jupiter, or gets a good tug the other way from Venus; and Mars and Saturn do their little best to force it off its strict path as well. Our earth does not suffer much from these irregularities, however. It keeps its course well enough — just as a coach from London to Brighton will reach its destination safely, notwithstanding that it has to swerve a little whenever it meets another vehicle on the way, or when the coachman wants to avoid a stretch of road on which fresh stones have been laid.

The track Uranus followed was found to be somewhat irregular, like that of every other planet. Jupiter gave it a pull and so did Saturn; and at first it was thought the irregularities noticed could be explained by the action of those planets, so big and so well known.

Here is a question for calculation. It involves a very long and a very hard piece of work, but it is possible to estimate how far each of the other planets is capable of dragging Uranus out of its path. Is it not remarkable that by working through long calculations we can find what one planet hundreds of millions of miles away has been able to do to another planet further off still — and not only today or yesterday, but through past time extending over more than a century? If you will listen a little longer, I think I can give you a proof that these sums were worked out correctly.

When the calculations had been made showing how much the known planets could disturb Uranus, it was found that some deviations still remained unexplained. They were not large; they amounted only to showing that the body was a little astray from where the calculations said it should be. But the rest of astronomy was so perfect, and the law of attraction held so universally, that it was felt the law of attraction must provide some way of explaining the behaviour of Uranus. He could not have left his track of his own accord; therefore some agency must be at work on him that we knew nothing of.

What could this unknown source of disturbance be? Every trouble of the kind had so far turned out to be a consequence of the attraction of gravitation; so there must be some unknown body pulling at Uranus which nobody had ever seen. Where could it be? How was it to be discovered? These were the questions asked, and they were answered in a most satisfactory way.

First of all, what sort of body could be pulling Uranus? Obviously none of the stars would be capable of producing so great an effect; they are all so far off that they have nothing whatever to say to the domestic affairs of our little solar system, which is simply a group to itself. It would be more reasonable to suppose there must be yet another planet that nobody had recognised, but which was affecting Uranus in a way that accounted for his truant behaviour.

To begin searching for this planet with telescopes and no guidance would be futile. Astronomers had been scanning the heavens for planets for nearly fifty years; several had been discovered, but they all belonged to the zone of little planets, and none was big enough to pull Uranus about appreciably. Of course, if all the stars could be blotted out of the sky so that nothing but planets were left, then by sweeping a telescope over the heavens every planet in existence might soon be found. The difficulty is that planets which are either small or very distant look so like stars that it is impossible to pick them out among the millions of glittering points in the sky. It was hoped, however, that the unknown planet would be bright enough to be visible in the telescope — if only we knew exactly where to point it.

Two illustrious astronomers, Adams of Cambridge and Leverrier of Paris, each separately undertook an astonishing piece of calculation. They tried to find the position of the unknown planet from the mere fact that it was deranging Uranus in a particular way.

I dare say many who read this book have learnt simple equations in algebra, and have worked out such questions as finding the length of a pole of which half is in mud, a quarter in water and ten feet above the water. Anyone who knows that much can perhaps get some idea of the problem that had to be solved in discovering the unknown planet.

But this question was so difficult that it had to be solved in a way your schoolmasters would hardly let you use for your algebra. I do not think they would allow you to make a series of guesses — to say, let us try 20 feet for the length of the pole; that gives 10 feet in the mud, 5 feet in the water and 5 feet outside; that will not do, it is not enough, we must try again; and then, after another guess or two, to see that a pole 40 feet long answers exactly. We do not use guessing in algebra, because solving the simple equation is a much better method. But Adams and Leverrier found their problem so very difficult that they were obliged to use a kind of guessing — very intelligent guessing, I need hardly assure you.

They proceeded like this (Figure 71). They would draw a circle outside the path of Uranus and suppose a planet revolving in it. Its effect on Uranus would then be calculated, and they would see whether the observed irregularities could be accounted for that way. The first planet they tried was not the right one; so they began again with another, and so on — until at last, after many trials and much very hard work, they saw that there might be a planet in one particular path far outside Uranus, such that if it had the right weight and moved at the right speed it would pull Uranus in exactly the way astronomers had observed him to be pulled. In the end they found there could be little doubt about it, for this unknown body would account for all the facts. They had solved their equation: they had found the unknown.

[Figure 71: The orbits of Uranus and Neptune — the circle Adams and Leverrier arrived at by trying one supposed planet after another until the disturbances of Uranus were exactly accounted for.]

The two great astronomers had thus discovered a planet — but so far only a planet on paper. Those competent to judge had no doubt it was really in the sky; but just as you like to prove that you have found the right answer to your sum, so people were naturally anxious to prove the truth of this wonderful sum Adams and Leverrier had worked out. That could only be done by actually seeing the planet whose existence they had asserted.

Leverrier calculated that on a certain night the new planet would be in a particular place in the sky. Accordingly he wrote to Dr Galle at the observatory in Berlin, asking him on the evening in question to point his telescope at the very spot named, where he would see a planet that human eyes had never beheld before. Dr Galle was of course only too delighted to undertake so marvellous a commission. The evening was fine; the telescope was opened and turned to the heavens; and there, in the very spot Leverrier's calculations had indicated, shone the beautiful little planet.

At Cambridge arrangements had also been made to search for the new member of the solar system, following Professor Adams's calculations; and there too the planet that had given Uranus all this trouble was brought to light. At first it looked like a star, as all such planets do; but it was quickly proved not to be a star, by the two tests that are sure signs of a planet. First, the body was moving, so that its position with respect to the neighbouring stars was constantly changing. And second, when a strong magnifying power was put on the telescope, the little object was seen not to be a mere star-like point but to expand into the small disc which tells us we are looking not at a distant sun but at a world like our own.

Was this not truly a great discovery? Have we not shown you how much the calculations of astronomers deserve our respect, when we find that they actually discovered a majestic planet before the telescope had revealed it?

See, too, how much greater an interest now belongs to Herschel's discovery of Uranus. We can hardly imagine anything that would have given the old astronomer more gratification than to think his Uranus had given rise to a discovery even more splendid than his own. He died, however, more than twenty years before the achievement.

The authorities who decide such matters christened the new planet Neptune. This body wanders round the outskirts of our solar system, needing no less than 165 years for each journey. The circle it describes has a radius thirty times as great as that of the earth's track.

Neptune is altogether invisible to the unaided eye, but it is bright enough to have been occasionally recorded as a star. Indeed, nearly fifty years before it was actually discovered to be a planet, it had been included by the astronomer Lalande in a list of stars he was observing.

A curious circumstance was afterwards brought to light. When the books in which Lalande's observations were written were consulted, it was found that he had observed this object twice, on 8 May and 10 May 1785. If the object had really been a star its position would have been the same on the two days; but being a planet, it had moved. When Lalande looked over his papers and saw that the places of this supposed star were different on the two nights, he concluded he must have made a mistake on the first night, and accordingly treated the position recorded on the 10th as the right one.

Just think how narrowly Lalande missed making a discovery! Unhappily for his renown, he took it for granted that one or both of his observations were wrong — and so they must have been, had the object been a star. But both were right. It was the planet that had moved in the interval.

As Neptune is half as far again from the earth as Uranus, we can hardly expect to learn much about the actual nature of the planet. We do know that it has four times the diameter of the earth, so that it exceeds the earth in the same proportion as the earth exceeds the moon.

Like the other great planets, Neptune is enveloped in copious cloud; indeed it weighs only a fifth of what it would if it were made of materials as substantial as the earth's. And like our earth, Neptune is attended by one moon, which goes round the planet in a little more than six days.

The orbit of this great planet marks the boundary of our known system of planets. We have seen how the five great planets of antiquity have been added to in modern times by Uranus and Neptune, while the discovery of a multitude of small planets has increased the number of the sun's family further still.

We have still some other objects in our solar system to describe. Some of them are exceedingly big — these are the comets. Some are exceedingly small — these are the shooting stars. We shall talk about comets and shooting stars in our next lecture.
