Lecture Five: Comets and Shooting Stars

(Part 1 of 6)

The planets are all massive globes, more or less flattened at the poles. Now we have to talk about a multitude of objects of the most irregular shapes and the flimsiest description. We call them comets, and they exist in such numbers that an old astronomer said there were "more comets in the sky than fishes in the sea" — though I do not think we can quite believe him.

There is another wide difference between planets and comets. Planets move round in nearly circular ellipses; and we not only know where a planet is tonight, but where it was a month ago, or a hundred years ago, and where it will be a hundred or a thousand years from now. All those movements are conducted with conspicuous regularity and order.

But now we are to speak of bodies that generally come in on us in the most uncertain and irregular fashion. They visit us we hardly know from where, except that it is out of outer space; they are dressed in a glittering raiment almost spiritual in its texture; and they are always changing their appearance in a baffling but very fascinating way. If an artist tries to draw a comet, he will hardly have finished his picture of it in one charming robe before he finds it arrayed in another.

The astronomer has his own complaints to make against the comets. I have told you how thoroughly we can rely on the movements of the planets; but comets often play sad pranks with our calculations. They sometimes take astronomers by surprise and blaze out with their long tails just when we do not expect them; and then, by way of compensation, they frequently disappoint us by not appearing when they have been most anxiously looked for.

After its voyage through space the comet at length begins to draw in towards the central parts of our system; and as it approaches the sun its pace grows greater and greater. Indeed, as the body sweeps round the sun its speed is sometimes 20,000 times that of an express train. It is sometimes more than 1000 times as fast as the swiftest rifle bullet, occasionally reaching 200 miles a second.

The closer the comet goes to the sun, the faster it moves. A case has been known in which a comet, after falling in towards the sun for an incalculable length of time, had acquired a speed so tremendous that in two hours it had whirled round the sun and begun its return to the depths of outer space.

This terrific outburst of speed does not last long. A pace which near the sun is 20,000 times that of our express trains falls off to 10,000 times, then to fifty times, then to ten times that pace; and in the outermost part of its path the comet seems to creep along so slowly that we might think it fatigued by its earlier exertions.

[Figure 72: How the comet's tail is disposed. It does not stream out behind along the path travelled, as the sparks of a rocket do: draw a line from the sun through the comet's head and continue it, and that is the way the tail lies, whichever way the comet happens to be going.]

We have so often seen a stream of sparks stretching out along the track of a sky-rocket that we might naturally suppose the tail of a comet streamed out along its path in much the same way. This would be quite wrong. You can see from Figure 72 that the tail does not lie along the comet's path at all, but is always directed away from the sun. Draw a line from the sun to the head of the comet and continue it, and that line shows how the tail is arranged.

You will also notice how the tail seems to grow in length as the comet approaches the sun. When the comet is first seen the tail is often a very insignificant affair; but it shoots out with enormous rapidity until it is many millions of miles long by the time the comet is whirling round the sun. Then those glories soon begin to wane as the comet flies outward; the tail gradually vanishes, and the wanderer retreats into the depths of space in the same undecorated condition it first approached in.

When a comet appears, it is always interesting to see whether it is an entirely new object or only another return of one that has paid us a previous visit. The question is how they are to be identified. Here we see a wide contrast between unsubstantial bodies like comets and the weighty, stately planets.

Sketches of the various planets, or of the face of the sun, may show slight differences from time to time but are always characteristic enough — just as a photographic portrait will identify a person even though the passing years bring some change in his appearance. But a drawing of a comet is almost useless for identification. You might as well try to identify a cloud, or a puff of smoke, by making a picture of it. Draw a comet at one appearance and sketch particularly the ample tail it is provided with; and the next time it comes round it may very possibly have two tails, or possibly no tail at all.

We can therefore place no reliance on a comet's personal appearance in trying to identify it. The highway it follows through the sky is the only means of recognition, for a comet, if undisturbed by other objects, will never change its actual orbit. But even this method often fails, for it not infrequently happens that in the course of its erratic movements the comet gets into fearful trouble with other heavenly bodies. In such a case the poor comet is sometimes driven so completely off its road that it has to make an entirely new path for itself, and our efforts to identify it are thrown into confusion. It has happened that a second comet, or even a third, is found in nearly the same track; but whether these are wholly different objects, or merely parts of the same original one, it is often impossible to determine.

The great majority of comets can only be seen with a telescope, and hardly a year passes without at least a few of these faint objects being detected. The number of really brilliant comets that can be seen in a lifetime, however, could be counted on the fingers.

Encke's Comet

We have already mentioned the little body called Encke's comet, discovered by an astronomer at Marseilles. It was in the year 1818 that he was scanning the heavens with a small telescope when an object caught his attention. It was not one of those grand long-tailed comets that everyone notices; this body was so faint that it appeared merely as a very small cloud of light, and was recognised as a comet by the fact that it was moving.

There happen to be other bodies in the sky very like comets. We call them nebulae, and we shall have something to say about them later. It is remarkable that just as a planet is liable to be mistaken for a star, so a comet is liable to be mistaken for a nebula. In each case, however, movement is the test by which the planet or the comet is at once detected. A nebula stays always in one place, like a star, whereas a comet is incessantly moving. Indeed, with a telescope you can actually watch a comet stealing past the stars that lie near it.

You know that an object a very long way off may appear to move slowly although it is really moving very fast. Look at a steamer near the horizon at sea: in a minute or two it will not appear to have shifted its position appreciably — but that is because it is far off. If you were near the ship you would see her dashing along at perhaps fifteen or twenty miles an hour. In the same way a comet seems to move slowly because it is at such a great distance; whereas in fact, at the time we see it, it is moving faster than any steamer, faster than any express train, faster than any cannon-ball.

There were special reasons why the movements of Encke's comet should be watched with particular care and the track it followed worked out. If you can observe a comet three times and measure its position in the sky, its motion is completely determined — or rather, I should say, would be determined if the comet were let alone, which unfortunately is not often the case. You may remember that I told you of some of the misadventures of this very comet when we were speaking about the planet Mercury.

Encke's comet comes round in a period of a little more than three years, and it has given us some curious information gathered on its journeys. One of the things we have learnt from it is so important that we cannot leave it out (Figure 73).

[Figure 73: The orbit of Encke's comet — a long ellipse bringing it in past the inner planets and out again in a little over three years.]

As we go higher above the earth's surface there is gradually less and less air, until at last, at about 200 or 300 miles above the surface we live on, there would be none at all. You might as well try to quench your thirst by drinking from an empty cup as attempt to breathe in the open space that begins a few hundred miles up.

In open space, motion could take place quite freely. Down here the resistance of the air is a great hindrance to movement, especially when the movement is very rapid. A heavy cannon-ball is checked and robbed of its pace by having to plough its way through our dense atmosphere. Its motion is arrested in the same way — though of course not to the same degree — as if it had been fired into water.

Unsubstantial objects are of course impeded by the air far more than heavy bodies like cannon-balls. You know you cannot throw a handful of feathers across the road as you could throw a handful of gravel: the light feathers cannot force their way through the air as well as the pebbles.

A body as flimsy as a comet would never be able to push its way through an atmosphere like ours; but out in empty space the comet meets no resistance over the greater part of its path. So although it has little more substance than a will-o'-the-wisp, the comet pursues its journey with as much resolute dignity as if it were made of cast iron.

If at any part of its track the body did have to pierce its way through some material — even the thinnest possible air — the unsubstantial nature of cometary material would show at once. The motion would be impeded and the body's path would change. A comet may in this way be made very instructive, for it will show us whether space really is as empty as we sometimes suppose.

Through the greater part of its course, the flimsy little Encke tears along with such ease and speed that there seems to be nothing at all to impede it; and so we learn that space is generally empty. But when the comet begins to wheel round the sun, the freedom of its movement seems to be checked. The unsubstantial object has to force its way with a difficulty it did not meet while it was moving round the greater part of its orbit. From this we learn that there is a thin diffused atmosphere surrounding the sun. We cannot say that it is like our own air; its composition is quite different, and almost the only way we know of its existence is the evidence this comet affords.

In a former lecture I showed how Encke's comet told us the mass of the planet Mercury; now we see how the travels of the same body give us information about the sun himself. I ought to add, however, that some more recent observations seem not to have confirmed the belief that there is resistance of the kind we have just been considering.

The Great Comet of Halley

I dare say you would find it more interesting to talk about some big bright comet than about an object as faint as Encke's. Unfortunately most of the fine comets pay our system only a single visit. There is only one really splendid object of the kind that comes back to us with anything like regularity.

It was last seen in the year 1835, and I am glad to tell you it is coming again: it is expected about the year 1910.

You may ask how we can feel sure that such a prediction will turn out correct. The fact is that this comet has been watched for a great many centuries. We find ancient records, some of them nearly 2000 years old, of the appearance of grand comets; and several of these fit in with the supposition that there is a body completing its journey in a period of about seventy-five or seventy-six years. There are of course thousands of other comets recorded in those old books as well; but what I mean is that among the records a number are found which clearly indicate successive returns of this one particular body.

Let me explain how the movements of this comet were discovered. There was a great astronomer named Halley, who lived two hundred years ago; and in the year 1682 he, like everybody else, was looking with admiration at a splendid comet with a magnificent tail which adorned the sky that year. At the observatories they diligently set down its positions, measured carefully with telescopes.

Halley first calculated the highway this comet followed through the heavens, and then looked over the list of old comets that had been seen before. He found that in 1607 — that is, seventy-five years earlier — a great comet had also appeared, whose path seemed much the same as the one he had worked out for the body he had observed himself. This was a remarkable fact, and it became more significant still when he found that seventy-six years before that — in 1531 — another great comet had been recorded, moving in a path that agreed with those of 1607 and 1682 as well.

It then occurred to Halley that perhaps these were not three different objects at all, but three different appearances of one and the same body, coming round in a period of seventy-five or seventy-six years.

There is a test an astronomer can often apply in proof of his theory, and it is a very severe one. If it fails he will not only have shown himself to be wrong; he will also have made himself somewhat ridiculous. Halley ventured to submit his reputation to this ordeal. He prophesied that the comet would appear again in another seventy-five or seventy-six years. He knew he would of course be long dead before 1758 came round; but in venturing on the prediction he said he hoped posterity would not refuse to admit that this discovery had been made by an Englishman.
