Lecture Five: Comets and Shooting Stars

(Part 2 of 6)

You can easily imagine that as 1758 drew near, great interest was aroused among astronomers to see whether Halley's prediction would be fulfilled.

We are accustomed nowadays to find astronomical events foretold with the same sort of punctuality we expect from a railway timetable. The Nautical Almanac is full of such prophecies, and we find them universally fulfilled. Even now, however, we cannot set out our timetables for comets with the confidence we show in issuing them for the sun, the moon or the stars. How astonishing, then, must Halley's prediction have seemed!

Here was a vast comet which had to make a voyage through space of many hundreds of millions of miles. For three-quarters of a century it would be utterly invisible in the greatest telescopes, and the only way it could be perceived at all was by figures and calculations, which let the mind's eye follow the hidden body all round its mysterious track.

For fifty, sixty, seventy years nothing had been seen of the comet, nor indeed was anything expected to be seen of it. But as seventy-one, seventy-two and seventy-three years went by, it was felt that the wanderer, still unseen, must be drawing rapidly nearer.

The problem was made harder for the skilful mathematicians who set about calculating it by the fact that the comet was approaching the thoroughfares where the planets circulate; and of course so flimsy an object would be pulled this way and that out of its path by the attraction of those weighty bodies. It was computed that the influence of Saturn alone was enough to delay the comet by more than three months, while the attraction of Jupiter appeared potent enough to hold back the expected event by another year and a half.

Was it not wonderful that mathematicians should be able to find out all these things merely from knowing the track the comet was expected to follow? Clairaut, who devoted himself to the problem, suggested that there might also be disturbances from other causes he knew nothing of, and that consequently the expected return might be a month out either way. Great indeed was the admiration in astronomical circles when, true to prediction, the comet blazed out upon the world within the limits of time Clairaut had specified.

The remarkable fulfilment of this prophecy entitles us to speak with confidence about the comet's past performances. Among all the appearances of Halley's comet over the last two thousand years, perhaps the most remarkable is the one in the year 1066. I am sure you will all remember that date from your English history: it is the year of the Conquest.

In those days they did not understand astronomy as we understand it now. They used to think of a comet as a fearful portent of evil, sent to threaten some frightful calamity — a pestilence, a war, a famine, or something else equally disagreeable. So in the year of the Conquest the appearance of so terrifying an object in the sky was a very significant omen indeed. Attention was concentrated on the spectacle, and a picture of Halley's comet as it appeared to the somewhat terrified imaginations of the people of that day has been preserved for us. There is a celebrated tapestry at Bayeux on which historical incidents are shown in beautifully worked pictures, and on that fabric we have a view of Halley's comet in a quaint and rather ludicrous aspect. You will read of this comet too in the early pages of Tennyson's Harold.

How the Telegraph Is Used for Comets

In these days the study of comets is pursued with energy. Observatories are placed all over the world, and whenever a comet is discovered the news is spread among those likely to be interested. Suppose one is discovered in the southern hemisphere: the astronomers there write to warn the northern observatories. But comets often move faster than Her Majesty's mails, so the telegraph has to be called on.

The kind of message needed is one that will give the position and the movements of the body. It necessarily involves a good many figures and words, so it is desirable to abbreviate as much as possible for the sake of economy. There is a further difficulty in using the telegraph, because such messages are unintelligible to anyone not specially versed in astronomy. Skilful as telegraph clerks are, they can hardly be expected to be familiar with the technicalities of astronomers. The clerk at the receiving end is handed a message he does not clearly understand; the clerk at the other end did not understand the message given to him either; and between the two of them it has happened that they have transformed the message into something which not only they do not understand but which, unfortunately, nobody else can understand either.

These difficulties have been got over by an agreement among astronomers which is so simple and interesting that I must tell you of it.

The kind of message that gives the place of a comet will contain sentences of this sort: "One hundred and twenty-three degrees and forty-five minutes." Surely it would be an advantage to replace all those words with a single word, particularly if that reduced the risk of error. And this is what the astronomers' telegraphic arrangement lets them do.

There is a certain excellent dictionary known as Worcester's. I am sure that when Mr Worcester compiled his work he had not the slightest notion of the odd use it would occasionally be put to. Every astronomer taking part in the comet scheme must have a copy of the book.

To send the message I have just quoted, he takes up his dictionary and turns to page 123. Then he counts down the column to the forty-fifth word on that page, which he finds to be "constituent"; and by this plan the message, or at least this part of it, is just that one word: "constituent." The astronomer who receives the message and wants to interpret it takes up his own copy of Worcester's Dictionary and looks up "constituent." He sees that it is on page 123 and that it is the forty-fifth word down that page — and so he knows the message means one hundred and twenty-three degrees and forty-five minutes.

The Parabola

Generally speaking, great comets come to us once and are then never seen again. Such bodies do not move in closed ovals or ellipses; they follow another kind of curve, like the one shown in Figure 74. It is a curve every boy ought to know. In fact one of his earliest accomplishments was learning to make a parabola — though he did not call it by any name so fine as that. Every time a ball is thrown into the air it describes part of the beautiful curve geometers know by that word (Figure 74). Indeed, you could not throw a ball so that it described any other curve at all. No boy could throw a stone in a truly horizontal line: it will always curve down a little, and will always in fact be part of a parabola.

[Figure 74: The path of a projectile is a parabola. Throw a ball and this is the curve it must describe; you could not make it describe any other.]

There are big parabolas and small ones. A shell thrown into a town bombarded from a distance describes, as it rises and slopes down again, part of a mighty parabola. So does a tennis ball thrown by hand or struck with the racket — though there I admit that a spin may be put on the ball which detracts somewhat from the simplicity of its movement. In playing baseball a large part of the pitcher's skill consists in throwing the ball so that it shall not move in a parabola but in some twisting curve by which he hopes to baffle his adversary. Setting aside these exceptions, and the case of a body tossed straight up or dropped straight down, we may say that the path of a projectile is a parabola.

[Figure 75: The lighthouse reflector. Its bright surface catches the rays that would otherwise run off into the sky or inland, and sends every one of them out to sea — which it will only do properly if the mirror is truly a parabola.]

There are some remarkable practical applications of the same curve. From our lighthouses we want to send beams out to sea to guide ships into port. If we merely used a lamp without concentrating its rays we should have a very imperfect lighthouse, for a lamp scatters light in every direction. Much of it goes straight up into the air, much of it would be directed inland; in fact only an extremely small part of the whole number of rays would naturally take the useful direction.

We therefore need something round the lamp to catch the truant rays that are running away to idleness and waste, and to concentrate them in the direction where they will be useful to the mariner. An effective way of doing this is to fit the lamp with a reflector. All the rays that would otherwise have gone astray fall on its bright surface (Figure 75) and each is properly redirected to where the sailors can see it. It is essential that the mirror should do this work accurately, and it will only do so when it has been truly shaped as a parabola.

You will remember, too, how I described the reflector Herschel made for his great telescope. The shape of that mirror had to be most accurately worked, and it too must have a parabola for its section. So you see this curve is important in a variety of ways.

But the grandest parabolas of all are the ones the comets follow. Unlike the ellipse, the parabola is an open curve. It has two branches stretching away and away for ever, always getting further apart. In the examples I have given, of course, only a small part of the figure is involved. When you throw a stone it describes only that part of the parabola lying between your hand and the spot where the stone strikes the ground — a piece of the curve, in the way that a crescent is a piece of a circle. It is to the comets that we must look for the most complete illustration of a parabola's full extent.

The shape of this grand curve explains why so many comets appear to us only once. It is quite clear that if you begin running round a closed racecourse, you may, if you keep going long enough, pass and repass the starting post thousands of times. So comets that move in ellipses, tracing closed curves, will pass the earth times without number, and we may see them over and over again as we see Encke's comet or Halley's.

But suppose you were travelling along a road which, however it may turn, never leads back into itself. Then it is quite plain that even if you went on for ever you could never pass the same house by the roadside twice. That is exactly the case with most of the comets. Their orbits are parabolas bending round the sun; and generally the sun is very close to the turning point. The earth too is comparatively close to the sun, so while the comet is in that neighbourhood we can sometimes see it. We do not see it for a long time before it approaches the sun, nor for a long time after it has passed. All we know of its journey is that the two ends of the parabola stretch on and on for ever into space. The comet is first seen coming in along one branch to whirl round the sun; and having done so, it retreats along the other branch and gradually sinks into the depths of space.

Why one of these mysterious wanderers should approach in such a hurry, and why it should fly back again, can be partly explained without the help of mathematics.

Suppose that at a distance of thousands of millions of miles there floated a mass of flimsy material of the kind comets are made of. Despite its vast distance from the sun, the attraction of that great body reaches even there. It is true that the sun's pull on the comet will be of the feeblest and slightest description, on account of the enormous distance; but the comet will respond to some degree, and will begin gradually to move in the direction the sun invites it.

Perhaps centuries, perhaps thousands or even tens of thousands of years will pass before the object reaches the solar system. By that time its speed will have grown so great that after a terrific whirl round the sun it will fly off at once along the other branch of the parabola.

Perhaps you wonder why it does not tumble straight into the sun. No doubt it would, if it had started from a position of complete rest; but generally the comet has some motion to begin with, which is not directed exactly at the luminary — and that is what makes it miss actually hitting the sun.

It may also be difficult to understand why the sun does not keep the comet once it has arrived at last. Why should the wandering body be in such a hurry to get away? Surely the sun's attraction might be expected to hold it.

If something were to check the comet's pace during its terrific dash round the sun, then no doubt the object would simply tumble into the sun and be lost. But the sun has not time to pull the comet in when it comes up at 20,000 times the speed of an express train. What the sun does succeed in doing is altering the direction of the comet's motion — and the attraction has shown itself in that way.

I can illustrate what happens like this. Here is a heavy weight hanging from the ceiling on a wire. It hangs straight down, of course, and there it is kept by the pull of the earth. Now suppose I draw the weight aside and let it swing: the motion continues like the beat of a pendulum. The weight is always being pulled as near to the earth as possible; but when it gets to the lowest point it does not stay there. It passes through that point and rises up the other side.

The reason is that the weight has gathered speed by the time it reaches the lowest point, and by virtue of that speed it passes through the position where it would naturally rest and actually climbs the other side, against the earth's pull, which is dragging it back the whole time. This illustrates how a comet can pass by, and even recede from, the body that is continually attracting it.

A few words of caution must be added. Suppose you had an ellipse so long that the comet would take thousands and thousands of years to complete a circuit. Then the part of the ellipse the comet travels during the time we can see it is so like a parabola that we might well be mistaken about it. A geometer will tell us that if one end of an ellipse were carried further and further away, the end that stayed with us would grow more and more like this curve. So some of the comets that seem to move in parabolas may really be moving in extremely elongated ellipses, and may after excessively long periods come back to visit us again.

The Materials of a Comet
