Lecture Five: Comets and Shooting Stars

(Part 3 of 6)

A comet is made of very unsubstantial material. We can show this in a very interesting way when we see one moving across the sky between the earth and the stars. Sometimes a comet will pass over a cluster of very small stars, so faint that the lightest cloud that ever crosses the sky would be quite enough to hide them; yet the stars are distinctly visible right through the comet, even though it may be hundreds of thousands of miles thick. This shows how exceedingly flimsy a comet's substance is: a few feet of haze or mist will put out the brightest star, while this immense curtain of comet-stuff, whatever it is made of, is practically transparent.

I have often told you that we are able to weigh the heavenly bodies; but a comet gives us a great deal of trouble. You see that the weighing machine must be of a very delicate kind if you are to weigh a very light object.

Take, for example, a little lock of golden hair, which no doubt generally has a value quite independent of how many grains it contains. Suppose, however, that we were curious enough to want to know its weight. One of those beautiful balances in our laboratories would tell us; indeed, if you snipped a little fragment off a single hair, the balance would be sensitive enough to weigh that. But if you had nothing but a common pair of scales such as would do for the parcel post, you could never weigh anything as light as a lock of hair. To begin with, you have no small enough weights; and even if you had, they would be no use, for the scale is too coarse to register such a trifle.

This is precisely the difficulty we meet in trying to weigh a comet. The body, big as it is, is very light, and our scales are so cumbersome that we are in the position of a man trying to weigh a lock of hair on a parcel-post balance. We cannot always find suitable scales for weighing heavenly bodies; we have to use whatever methods happen to be available. So far, the methods I have described are of the crudest kind. They serve well enough for weighing heavy masses like planets, but they will not do for bodies as unsubstantial as comets.

But though we fail in this, skilful astronomers have succeeded in something you might at first think almost impossible: they have actually discovered some of the ingredients a comet is made of. This is so important a subject that I must explain it fully.

The most instructive comet seen in modern times is the one that appeared in 1882. It was an object so great that its tail alone was twice as long as the distance from the earth to the sun. It was discovered at the observatories in the southern hemisphere early in September of that year, and a little later it was observed in the northern hemisphere in extraordinary circumstances.

It must be remembered that a comet is generally a faint object, and that even those large and bright enough to make glorious spectacles in the night sky are usually invisible in the brightness of day. For a comet to be seen in daylight was indeed unusual; but on the forenoon of Sunday 17 September, Mr Common at Ealing saw a great comet close beside the sun. Unfortunately clouds came over and he was prevented from observing the critical event that was just approaching.

An astronomer at the Cape of Good Hope, Mr Finlay — who had also been among the earliest discoverers of the comet — was watching it on the same day. He followed it as it advanced right up to the sun; and bright indeed that comet must have been to permit so wonderful an observation. At the sun's edge the comet disappeared instantly. The observers thought it must have gone behind the sun; they could not otherwise account for the suddenness with which it vanished. But that is not what really happened. It was afterwards established that the comet had not passed behind the sun at all: it had come between us and our luminary.

As it went on its way, this body showed in a striking degree how incoherent the materials of a comet are. It seemed to throw off portions of its mass along its track, each of which went on with an independent journey of its own. Even the central part of the head — the nucleus, as it is called — showed itself to be of a widely different nature from a substantial planetary body. The nucleus divided into two, three, four, even five distinct parts, which seemed, in the words of one observer, to be strung together like pearls on a string.

The comet of 1882 was also very instructive about the actual materials such bodies are made of. Astronomers have a beautiful method of finding out what substances are present in a heavenly body, even though they can never get a specimen of it into their hands. We know at least three materials that were present in this comet.

The first is an ingredient very commonly found in comets, which a chemist calls carbon. It is an extremely familiar material on the earth — coal, for instance, is chiefly carbon. When charcoal is burnt it leaves only a few ashes, and all the substance that has vanished in the burning is carbon. It is not too much to say that carbon is found abundantly not only in wood but in almost every form of vegetable matter. The food we eat contains plenty of it, and it is an important constituent in the building up of our own bodies. Generally speaking carbon is not found pure but in company with other substances: soot and lampblack are largely made of it, while the purest form of the element we know is the diamond.

It is interesting that carbon is certainly a frequent constituent of comets. The great comet of 1882 undoubtedly contained it, as well as certain other substances, two of which we know. The first is the element sodium, an extremely abundant material on earth, since the salt in the sea is mainly composed of it. It was also discovered that the same great comet contained another substance very common here and extremely useful to mankind: Dr Copeland and Dr Lohse at Dunecht showed that iron was present in this body which had come to visit us out of the depths of space.

These discoveries are especially interesting because they seem to show the uniformity of the material composing our system. We already knew that sodium and iron abounded in the sun; and now we have learnt that these, and carbon as well, are present in the comets. In the next chapter we shall learn that these very same materials — sodium and iron — are met with in bodies far more remote from us than anything in our own system.

Comets have such a capricious habit of dashing into the solar system at any time and from any direction that it is worth asking whether one might not sometimes collide with the earth. There is nothing impossible in such an event; but there is no reason to fear that any disastrous consequences would follow for the earth.

Man has lived on this globe for many, many thousands of years, and the rocks are full of the remains of fossil animals that flourished in past ages. Indeed we cannot possibly estimate the number of millions of years that have passed since living things first crawled about this globe. There has never been any complete break in the succession of life; consequently, through all those millions of years, we are certain that no such dire calamity has befallen the earth as a frightful collision would have produced — and we need not fear any such catastrophe in the future.

I do not mean, however, that harmless collisions with comets may not have happened occasionally. Indeed there is good reason to know that they have.

In the year 1861 a fine comet appeared. It is not as well remembered as it deserves, because it happened — unfortunately for its own renown — to come just three years after the comet of 1858, which was one of the most gorgeous objects of the kind seen in modern times. But in 1861 we had a novel experience: on a Sunday evening in midsummer of that year we dashed into the comet, or it dashed into us.

We were not, it is true, in collision with its densest part; it was rather the end of the tail that we encountered. There were fortunately no very serious results. Indeed, most of us never knew anything had happened at all, and the rest only learnt of the accident long after it was over. For a couple of hours that night it seems we were actually inside the tail of the comet; but so far as I know nobody was injured or suffered any alarming inconvenience.

Indeed I have only heard of one calamity arising from the collision. A clergyman tells us that at midsummer he was always able in ordinary years to read his sermon at evening service without artificial light. On this particular occasion, however, the sky was overcast with a peculiar glow, and the ordinary light was so much interfered with that the sexton had to provide a pair of candles to get him through the sermon. The cost of those candles was, I believe, the only loss the earth sustained from its collision with the comet of 1861.

[Figure 76: How the tail of a comet arises. The sun's heat drives vapour off the head, and it streams away from the sun like smoke from a chimney — renewed at one end as fast as it disperses at the other.]

The tail of a comet appears to develop under the influence of the sun. As the wandering body approaches that central source of heat it grows warm; and as it gets closer and closer the fervour grows greater and greater, until sometimes the comet experiences a heat more violent than anything we could produce in our furnaces. The most infusible substances, such as stone or earth, would be heated white-hot and melted, and even driven off as vapour, in the intense heat a comet is sometimes exposed to. Comets have been known to sweep round the sun so closely as to pass within a seventh part of its radius of the surface.

It seems that certain materials in the comet, heated to this extraordinary temperature, are driven away from the head and so form the tail (Figure 76). The tail therefore consists of a stream of vaporous particles rushing away from the sun, as if the heat that called them into being were a torment they were trying to escape.

The tail of a comet is not, then, a permanent part of the body. It is more like the smoke from a great chimney, incessantly renewed at one end while the column disperses into the air at the other. As the comet retreats, the sun's heat loses its power; in the chill of space no tail-making goes on, and the comet's small mass leaves it unable to gather back by its own attraction the material that has been driven off.

If the comet moves in an elliptical orbit and so comes back time after time to be invigorated by a good roasting from the sun, it will of course try to manufacture a tail on each approach. But the quantity of material available for making tails is limited to what the comet started with; no fresh supply can be added. If, then, it spends a portion every time it comes round, an inevitable consequence follows.

Suppose a boy is given a sovereign when he goes back to school, and that every time he passes the pastry-cook's shop some of his money disappears in a manner I dare say you can guess. I need not tell you that before long the sovereign will have vanished entirely. In just the same way comets cannot escape the natural consequences of their extravagance. Their store of tail-making substance must gradually diminish; at each successive return the tails must generally decline in size and magnificence; until at last the necessary material has all been squandered, and we have the pitiful spectacle of a comet with no tail at all.

The gigantic size of comets must astonish us. A pebble tossed into a river would not be more completely engulfed than our whole earth is when it enters the tail of one of these bodies. But now we pass by a sudden transition to the very smallest bodies of all — little objects so minute that you could carry them in your waistcoat pocket. You will perhaps be surprised that such things can play an important part in our system, and have a momentous connection with mighty comets.

Meteors

If you look out of your window at the midnight sky, or take a walk on a fine clear night, you will occasionally see a streak of light dash across the heavens, making what is called a falling star, or a shooting star (Figure 77).

It is not really one of the regular stars that has darted from its place. The objects we are now talking about are quite different from stars proper. To begin with, shooting stars are comparatively close to us when we see them, and they are very small — whereas the stars themselves are enormous globes far bigger than our earth, often bigger even than the sun.

Sometimes a great shooting star is seen which makes a tremendous blaze of light, as bright as the moon or brighter still. These we call meteors, and you will be very fortunate if you ever see a really fine one. Astronomers cannot predict them as they predict the appearances of the planets; bright meteors come quite unexpectedly, and it is a matter of chance who has the privilege of seeing them. But it is not the great meteors we are going to speak of particularly. They are often not as interesting as the small ones.

[Figure 77: A brilliant meteor — a great blaze of light drawn right across the night sky, as bright as the moon or brighter.]

These little meteoroids, as we shall call them, have a curious history. They become visible to us only at the very last moment of their existence — in fact the streak of light that makes a shooting star is simply the destruction of a meteoroid.

You must always remember that we live here at the bottom of a great ocean of air, and that above the air stretches empty space. Air is a great hindrance to motion: a large part of a locomotive's power has to be spent purely in pushing the air out of the way so the train can get through, and the faster the speed the heavier the tax the air imposes on the moving body. A cannon-ball loses an immense amount of its speed, and so of its power, in boring its way through the air.

Out in space beyond the limits of this atmosphere a freedom of movement can be enjoyed that we know nothing of down here. I spoke of this when discussing the movements of Encke's comet: even that very unsubstantial body could dash along without appreciable resistance until it entered the atmosphere surrounding the sun.

But now we have to speak of the motion of a little object both small and dense — something like a pebble, perhaps, or a fragment of iron, or some substance of that sort. It is a little body of this kind that produces a shooting star.
