Lecture Five: Comets and Shooting Stars

(Part 5 of 6)

[Figure 78: How to find the height of a meteor. Two observers far apart — one at London, one at York — each note how high above their own horizon it appeared, and a little Euclid does the rest.]

The chief thing to determine is the height of the meteor above the earth, and for that we must have at least two observations made as far apart as possible.

Suppose an observer at London and an observer at York both witnessed a splendid meteor. If they find on later comparison that their observations were made at the same moment, there is no reasonable doubt that they both saw the same object. The observer at York describes the meteor as lying to the south, halfway down from the point directly overhead towards the horizon. The London observer speaks of it as being to the north — and to him too it appeared halfway down towards his horizon from the point directly overhead. If you know a little Euclid you can easily show from these facts that the height of the meteor must have been half the distance between London and York, that is, 85 miles (Figure 78).

I do not say that finding a meteor's height will always be quite as simple as it was with the London and York observations. The principle, however, is the same: whenever the direction of the meteor has been observed from two sufficiently distant positions, its path is known — just as we found the height of the suspended ball in the first lecture from observations at either end of the table.

Generally speaking, bright meteors begin at a height of between fifty and one hundred miles, and are extinguished before they come within twenty miles of the ground.

Sometimes a tremendous explosion takes place as a meteor passes through the air. There was a celebrated instance in America on the 21st of December 1876, which will give you an idea of one of these objects at its most magnificent.

It began over Kansas at about seventy-five miles up, and flew from there for a thousand miles at ten or fifteen miles a second, until it disappeared somewhere near Lake Ontario. Over a certain region between Chicago and St Louis the great ball of fire burst into a number of pieces, forming a cluster of glowing stars that seemed to chase one another across the sky. That cluster must have been about forty miles long and five miles wide; and when the explosion happened a most terrific noise was produced, so loud that many thought it was an earthquake.

A remarkable circumstance shows the tremendous height at which the explosion took place. The meteor had burst into pieces, the display was all over and beginning to be forgotten — and yet nothing had been heard. It was not until a quarter of an hour after the explosion had been seen that a fearful crash was heard at Bloomington. The explosion had actually occurred 180 miles from the spot; and since sound takes five seconds to travel a mile, you can easily calculate that the noise needed a quarter of an hour for its journey. What a tremendous noise it must have been!

Shooting stars come in every grade of brightness. Beginning with the more gorgeous objects, which have been compared to the moon or even to the sun himself, we come down to others as bright as Venus or Jupiter, and others again as bright as stars of various degrees. The fainter shooting stars are far more numerous than the conspicuous ones; indeed there are multitudes so extremely feeble that the unaided eye cannot show them at all, and they only become visible in a telescope. It is not uncommon, while watching the heavens at night, to notice a faint streak of light dashing across the field of the instrument. That is a shooting star invisible except through the telescope.

The Great November Showers

[Figure 79: A great shower of shooting stars — meteors falling in dozens, in scores, in hundreds, all seeming to stream out from one point in the sky.]

Occasionally we have the superb spectacle of a shower of shooting stars. None of you, my young friends, can yet have had the good fortune to see one of the specially grand displays; but you may live in hope, for there are showers still to come. Astronomers have ventured on the prophecy that in or about the year 1899 you will have the chance of seeing a magnificent exhibition of the kind. There is only one ground for anxiety, and that is whether the clouds will keep out of the way for the occasion.

I think I cannot explain my subject better than by taking you into my confidence and showing you the reasons this prediction is based on.

The last great shower of shooting stars took place in the year 1866 — or perhaps I should say that was the last display from the same shooting-star system we are about to speak of. On the night of the 13th of November 1866 astronomers everywhere were delighted by a superb spectacle; and the enjoyment of that wondrous sight was not for astronomers alone. Everyone who loves to see the great sights of nature has good reason to remember that night. I certainly shall never forget it.

It was about ten o'clock when a brilliant meteor or two first flashed across the sky. Then presently they came in twos and threes, and later in dozens, in scores, in hundreds. These were brilliant objects, any one of which would have drawn admiration on an ordinary night. What, then, was the splendour of the display when they came on in multitudes? For two or three hours the great shower lasted, and then gradually died away.

We were not taken unawares on that occasion, for the shower was expected and had in fact been awaited with eager anticipation.

It should first be noticed that every year some shooting stars may always be looked for on or about the 13th of November; and that every thirty-three years or thereabouts the ordinary spectacle breaks out into a magnificent display. It has also been found that for nearly 1000 years there have been occasional grand showers of meteors at that time of year, and all these incidents fit the supposition that they are simply repetitions of the regular thirty-three-year shower.

The first was in the year A.D. 902, which an old chronicle calls the "year of the stars", from the extraordinary display that took place then. I do not think the good people of 1000 years ago fully appreciated the astronomical interest of such spectacles; they were often frightened out of their wits and thought the end of the world had come. Doubtless many ancient showers took place of which we have no record at all.

In more modern times we have had somewhat fuller information. On the night between the 12th and 13th of November 1833, for instance, a shower was magnificently seen in America. Mr Kirkwood tells us that a gentleman of South Carolina described its effect on the enslaved people of his plantation as follows:

"I was suddenly awakened by the most distressing cries that ever fell on my ears. Shrieks of horror and cries for mercy I could hear from most of the enslaved people of the three plantations, amounting in all to about 600 or 800. While earnestly listening for the cause, I heard a faint voice near the door calling my name. I arose, and taking my sword, stood at the door. At this moment I heard the same voice still beseeching me to arise, and crying out that the world was on fire. I then opened the door, and it is difficult to say which excited me the most — the awfulness of the scene, or the distressed cries of the enslaved people. Upwards of a hundred lay prostrate on the ground, some speechless, and some with the bitterest cries, but with their hands raised praying for mercy. The scene was truly awful, for never did rain fall much thicker than the meteors fell towards the earth."

By studying many records of great showers it was learnt that the interval between these grand displays was about thirty-three years; and remembering that the last great shower had been in 1833, it was confidently expected that another would take place in 1866. This was fully borne out. Yet another thirty-three years brings us to 1899, when we have good reason to look forward to a grand shower of these bodies. It may be expected on November 14 or November 15 — though it may possibly be that a shower will come on the same days of the following year.

[Figure 80: The earth crossing the track of the meteors. The long ellipse the shoal travels must actually cut the earth's own path, not merely pass inside it like the links of a chain; otherwise we should never meet them at all.]

We now know a good deal about the movements of these little objects. I want you to think of a vast swarm, something like a flock of birds such as you have often seen flying high in the air — except that the flock of meteors is enormously greater than any flock of birds ever was, and the meteors are scattered so widely that each may be miles from its nearest neighbours. Usually the meteoric shoal is many millions of miles long and perhaps a hundred thousand miles wide.

The great flock travels through space along a definite track. We have learnt how the sun guides a planet and compels it to move round him in an ellipse; but our sun will also condescend to guide an object no bigger than a shooting star. A bullet, a pea, even a grain of sand will be held to an elliptical course round the sun as carefully as great Jupiter himself. The whole shoal may therefore pursue its common journey round the sun as though inspired by a common purpose — though every individual member of the host is guided by the sun and follows its own path in real independence of its neighbours.

The orbit this shoal follows is enormously large and wide. Here is a sketch of the path (Figure 80), and I have drawn in the position of the earth's orbit, though not on the same scale. The ellipse is elongated, so that while the shoal comes comparatively close to the sun at one end of its journey, at the other it goes out to an enormous distance, far beyond the orbit of the earth — beyond, indeed, the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, reaching out to the path of Uranus. To accomplish so vast a journey, thirty-three years and a quarter are required; and now you will easily see why we get periodical visits from the shoal.

It is, however, a mere piece of good fortune that we ever meet the November meteors at all. Probably there are numerous other shoals quite as important that we never see — just as there are many shoals of fish in the sea that never come into our net.

The earth moves round the sun in a path very nearly a circle, and the shoal moves round in this long oval. We cannot easily show the true state of things with mere diagrams that put all these objects in one plane; that does not give an accurate representation of the orbits. I think you will understand better with a pair of wire rings. Make a round one for the path of the earth and a long oval one for the path of the meteors, with a small opening in the circular ring so that we can slip one orbit inside the other.

If we are to see the meteors they must of course strike the earth's atmosphere, for they are not visible to us at distances like that of the moon or the planets. There must be a collision between the earth and the shoal. But there could never be a collision between two trains unless the lines they run on actually met; so this long ellipse must genuinely cross the earth's track. It will not do for it to pass inside like the two links of a chain — our earth would then miss the meteors altogether and we should never see them. Very likely there are many such shoals revolving in that way and escaping our notice entirely.

You will also understand why there is no use looking for these showers except on one particular day in November. On that day, and that day alone, the earth is at the particular point of its route where it crosses the shoal's track. On the 1st of November, for instance, the earth has not yet reached the point where it could meet these bodies; by the end of November it has passed too far.

But even supposing the earth is crossing the track of the meteors on the 13th of November, it is still possible that only a few will be seen, or none at all; for the shoal may not happen to be at that spot at the right time. For a display to occur, the shoal must be passing that particular stage of its journey on the 13th of November. In 1866 the earth dipped through the shoal and caught a great many of the meteors in its net. For a few hours the earth was busy with the capture, until it came out on the other side of the shoal and the display was over.

Sometimes grand showers are seen in two successive years. The reason is that the shoal is very long and thin, so that if the earth passes through the beginning of it one year, it may come back to the same point the next before the whole length of the shoal has gone by. In that case we have two great showers in consecutive years. A very fine display was seen in America on the proper day in 1867, and many stragglers were also observed on the three following recurrences of the date.

Whenever the 13th of November comes round we generally meet at least five shooting stars belonging to this same system, and we must explain how that happens.

Suppose there is a small racecourse, so that the competitors have to run round it a great many times before the race is over. Let there be a very large number of entries; let the majority of the athletes be fairly good runners, while a few are exceptionally good in varying degrees and a few are very bad, some worse than others.

The whole group starts together in a cluster at the signal, and for the first round or two they may keep tolerably well together. But you will notice the cluster beginning to stretch out as one circuit follows another: the better runners draw out to the front and the slower ones lag further and further behind. At last it may happen that those at the head have gained a whole lap on those at the tail, while the runners of intermediate speeds are scattered all round the course — the majority, being of nearly equal speed, still going on in a fairly dense group.
