Lecture Five: Comets and Shooting Stars

(Part 6 of 6)

Precisely the same has happened in the great celestial race these meteors are running. They started on their grand career centuries ago, and ever since have been flying round and round their mighty course. The greater part of them still stay close together and their pace is nearly uniform; but the exceptionally quick ones have shot ahead and the exceptionally slow have lagged behind. So it happens that after fifty or more revolutions the shape of the original swarm has been considerably modified: its length has been drawn out, and the stragglers and the fastest runners are scattered all round the path.

Across this course our earth carries us every November; and there we usually meet some members of the swarm that have strayed from the great host. They flash into our air — and that is why some of these bodies are generally seen every November.

[Figure 81: The radiant. Trace the luminous trails backwards and they all converge on one point of the sky; for the November shower that point lies in the constellation Leo, which is why we call them the Leonids.]

During a shower of shooting stars it is interesting to notice that all the meteors seem to diverge from a single point. In the figure alongside (Figure 81), which shows the directions of a number of meteor tracks, you will notice that every one seems to radiate from a certain point in the sky. For the shower of the 13th to 15th of November, that point lies in the constellation Leo. I must refer you to the closing chapter for a description of how to find Leo, the Lion; the radiant point, as we call it, of this system of meteors is situated there.

It is true that the meteors themselves do not generally seem to come all the way from that place. It is the direction of their luminous trails, produced backwards, that carries the eye to the radiant (Figure 81). If a meteor were actually seen at the radiant it would certainly be coming straight towards us, and would not appear as a streak of light at all; it would merely look like a star suddenly blazing into splendour and then sinking back into invisibility. Every meteor appearing near that point is aimed very nearly at the observer, and its path therefore seems greatly foreshortened.

I can illustrate this with a long straight rod. If I point it directly at you, you can only see the end; if I point it nearly at you, it seems very much shortened. During the great shower of 1866 many meteors could be seen so close to the radiant in Leo that they seemed merely short marks in the sky; and some, indeed, seemed nothing but star-like points swelling into brilliance and then going out.

This is why we call this system of shooting stars the Leonids. They bear the name because their radiant lies in the constellation Leo; and unless the direction of a shooting star comes from that point it is not a Leonid. Even then it would not be a Leonid unless the date were right — the 13th of November, or within a day of it. So we have two characteristics belonging to a system of shooting stars: the date on which they occur, and the point they radiate from.

Other Great Showers

To illustrate what I have said, let us speak of another system of shooting stars. They are due every August, from the 9th to the 11th, and their directions diverge from a point in the constellation Perseus. I may remind you of the dates of this shower, as well as of the November meteors we have just spoken of, by quoting the following production:

    If you November's stars would see,
    About the fourteenth watching be.
    In August, too, stars shine through heaven,
    On nights between nine and eleven.

It may be worth your while to remember those lines, and always to keep a look-out on the days named.

The August meteors — the Perseids, as we often call them — do not make gorgeous displays in particular years with the regularity of the Leonids. There have no doubt been some exceptionally grand showers between the 9th and the 11th of August, but we cannot predict when the next splendid one is due. There are vast numbers of stragglers all round the track of the Perseids. It would seem as if the great race had gone on so long that the cluster has largely broken up, and a large proportion of the meteors are now scattered the whole way round the course with tolerable uniformity. That being so, every time we cross the track we are nearly certain to fall in with a few stragglers — though we may never enjoy the tremendous spectacle of a plunge through a dense host of them.

There are many other showers besides the two I have mentioned. Some shooting stars are to be seen on almost every fine night, and astronomers who pay particular attention to the subject can make out scores of small showers that might not interest you. Each is fully defined by the night of the year it occurs on and the position of the point in the heavens the meteors radiate from. Of these I must mention one. It is not usually very attractive, but it has a particular interest, as I shall explain.

On the 27th of November 1872 a beautiful meteoric shower took place. You will notice that although the month is the same, the day is entirely different from the Leonids'. This shower of the 27th is called the Andromedes, because the lines of direction of the shooting stars composing it seem to diverge from a point in the constellation Andromeda.

Ordinarily there is no special display of meteors connected with the annual return of that day; but in 1872 astronomers were astonished by an exhibition of shooting stars belonging to this system. They were not at all bright compared with the Leonids, but they were numerous enough to catch the attention of a great many people, even among those who do not usually pay much attention to the heavens.

The chief interest of the Andromedes shower lies in a remarkable discovery connecting meteors with comets.

There is a comet discovered by the astronomer Biela. It is a small object, needing a telescope to show it, and it completes each revolution in about seven years — or rather, I should say, that used to be the time the comet spent on its journey, for a life of trouble and disaster seems lately to have all but extinguished the unfortunate object.

In 1872 the comet was due in our neighbourhood; and on the night of the 27th of November that same year the earth crossed its track, and in doing so the shower of shooting stars was seen. This was a remarkable coincidence. We crossed the comet's path at the very time we knew the comet ought to be there; and though we did not see the comet, we saw a shower of shooting stars — and a wonderful shower too.

So peculiar a circumstance suggested at once that the comet and the shooting stars must somehow be connected. And this is a suggestion we can test another way. We know the comet's history, and we know that at the very time of the shower it was approaching from the direction of the constellation Andromeda — from the very quarter, in fact, that the shooting stars had themselves travelled from. Taking all these things together, it seems impossible to doubt that the shoal of shooting stars was, if not the comet itself, something closely connected with that famous body.

Meteorites

Some years ago a farmer living near Rowton in Shropshire noticed a hole on a path in one of his fields, made suddenly by some mysterious and unknown agent. The labourers nearby told him they had just heard a remarkable noise; and when the farmer put his hand down into the hole he felt something hot at the bottom of it. He took a spade and dug the strange body up, and found it to be a piece of iron weighing about seven pounds. He was naturally amazed at such an occurrence, and brought the body home with him.

Where did that piece of iron come from? It is plain it cannot always have been in the ground: the noise and the freshly made hole show that, and so does the fact that the iron was hot — a piece of iron a few feet below the earth's surface cannot stay warm for any length of time. It is therefore clear that the iron must have fallen from the sky.

This is a marvellous notion. Indeed it seemed so incredible that at first people refused to believe that stones, or solid lumps of iron, could fall from the heavens to the earth. But they had to believe it; the evidence was too conclusive.

Fortunately the occurrence is comparatively rare. Our life on this globe would have an intolerable anxiety added to it if showers of iron hailstones like the one at Rowton happened at all often; we should want umbrellas of a rather more substantial description than those that suffice for the rain we actually get. There are indeed instances on record of people being killed by the fearful blows these bodies give in falling.

The Rowton siderite is a comparatively small one. Pieces weighing hundredweights, and even tons, have been collected in our museums. I recommend you to pay a visit to that interesting room in the British Museum where the meteorites are exhibited. There we see actual specimens of celestial bodies which we can handle and weigh and which our chemists can analyse — and it may be noticed that they contain only substances we already know on this earth.

This celestial iron was often used in primitive times, before man understood how to smelt iron from its ore and how to turn cast iron into wrought. Nature seems to have taken note of their wants and occasionally thrown down a lump or two for the benefit of those fortunate enough to secure it.

That these stones and irons drop from the sky is absolutely certain; but when we try to trace their earlier history we run into not a few difficulties. Nobody really knows the true story of these objects. The view of their origin which seems to me to have fewer difficulties than any other is the one we may call the Columbiad Theory.

I use that expression because every boy and girl listening to me ought to have read Jules Verne's wonderful book From the Earth to the Moon — and if any of you have not read it, the sooner you do the better. It tells how the gun club of Baltimore designed a magnificent cannon, sunk deep into the ground, which then received a terrific charge of guncotton, on top of which a great hollow projectile was carefully lowered with three adventurous explorers inside, wishing to visit the moon. Calculations were produced to show that by firing on a particular day the explosion would drive the projectile up to the moon.

There was, however, one necessary condition: the speed of projection had to be great enough. The gun club were accurate in saying that if the cannon could discharge the projectile at twenty or thirty times the speed ever obtained from any other cannon, then the missile would go up and up for ever if no further influence acted on it. No doubt we have to overlook the resistance of the air and a few other little difficulties; but to this extent at least the gun club were right — a velocity of about six or seven miles a second would be enough to carry a body clear of the earth's gravitation.

Nobody supposes there were ever Columbiad cannon on our globe firing projectiles into space. But it seems possible that in very ancient days there were volcanoes on the earth with a shooting power as great as the one President Barbicane designed his big cannon for.

Even now we have some active volcanoes of great energy; and we know that in former days they must have been more powerful still — that the Vesuvius of today is a mere popgun beside the volcanoes that shook the earth in those primitive times when it had only just cooled from its original fiery condition. Some of those early volcanoes, in the throes of their mighty eruptions, appear to have shot out pieces of iron and volcanic material with violence great enough to carry them off into space.

Suppose a missile were thrown upwards. It would climb higher and higher, and gravity would of course tend to drag it back down to the earth. But it can be shown that with an initial speed of six or seven miles a second the missile would never return to the earth, if the earth's attraction were the only influence on it. The later history of such a projectile would then be governed by the laws a planet moves by.

The body is understood to miss the destination the Columbiad aimed at — I mean, of course, that it is not supposed to hit the moon. That might conceivably happen; but most of the projectiles would go quite wide of the mark and travel off into space.

Though the earth would be unable to recall the projectile, the sun's attraction would still guide it, whether it were as big as a paving stone or a great deal larger or smaller. The body would be obliged to follow a path round the sun like a little planet, and would steadily pursue that track for ages.

The wanderer would, however, cross the earth's track once in every revolution, at the point it was thrown from. Generally the earth will not be there when the meteorite crosses, and the meteorite will not be there when the earth crosses; nothing will happen, and the object goes off again on its long rounds. But sometimes it must happen that a meteor does not get past the junction without coming so close to the earth that it plunges into our air, often making a noise and drawing a streak of light like a shooting star. Then it tumbles down and is restored to the earth it originally came from.

If this is the true view — and I think there are less weighty objections to it than to any other I know of — then the history of that piece of iron found in Shropshire would be something like this. Many millions of years ago, when the fires of our earth were far more vigorous than they are in these dull times, a terrific volcanic outbreak took place and vast quantities of material were shot into space, of which this is one fragment. Through all the ages since, this piece of iron has followed its lonely track. Had it lain on the earth, rust and decay would have destroyed it in a thousandth part of the time; but in the solitudes of space there was neither air nor damp to corrode it. And at last, its long travels finished, it crashed down on the earth again.

We have now briefly surveyed the extent of the solar system. We began with the sun, which presides over all; then we discussed the various planets with their satellites; next we considered the eccentric comets; and finally the minute bodies which, as shooting stars or meteorites, must be reckoned part of the sun's system too. In our closing lecture we shall have to deal with objects of a far more magnificent character.
