Lecture Six: The Stars

(Part 1 of 6)

The group of bodies clustered round our sun forms a little island, so to speak, in the extent of infinite space. We can illustrate this with a map in which we try to set the stars at their proper relative distances.

First open the compasses one inch and draw a little circle for the path of the earth. We are not going to put in all the planets; we take Neptune, the outermost, at once. To draw its path I open the compasses to thirty inches and draw a circle of that radius. That will do for our solar system — though the comets no doubt roam beyond those limits.

To complete our map we ought of course to put in some stars. There are a hundred million to choose from, and we shall begin with the brightest. It is often called the Dog Star, but astronomers know it better as Sirius. Let us see where it must go on our map.

Sirius is beyond Neptune, so it must be outside somewhere. Indeed it is a good deal further off than Neptune, so I try the edge of the drawing board. I have a way of making a little calculation which I do not intend to trouble you with, but I can assure you its results are quite correct; and it shows me that this board is not big enough.

But could a board that was big enough fit into this lecture theatre? Here again I make my little calculation, and I find there would not be room for a board large enough. If I put the sun here at one end with its planets around it, Sirius would still be too near if it were at the furthest corner. The board would have to go out through the wall of the theatre and out through London — and big as London is, it would not be large enough to hold the drawing board I need. It would have to stretch about twenty miles from where we are sitting now.

We may therefore give up any hope of making a practical map of our system on this scale if Sirius is to have its proper place. Let us take some other star, then; and we shall naturally try the nearest of all. It is one we do not know in this part of the world, but people living in the southern hemisphere are well acquainted with it. Its name is Alpha Centauri. Even for this star we should need a drawing three or four miles long, if the distance from the earth to the sun is to be one inch.

You see what an isolated position our sun and his planets occupy. The members of the family are all close together, and the nearest neighbours are at enormous distances.

There is a good reason for this separation. The stars are very pretty, and perfectly harmless to us where they are; but they might be very troublesome neighbours if they were much closer to our system. It is well that they are so far off. They would be constantly making disturbances in the sun's family if they were near at hand — sometimes dragging us into unpleasantly great heat by bringing us too close to the sun, sometimes producing a coolness by pulling us away from him, which would be quite as disagreeable.

The Stars Are Suns

We are about to discuss one of the grandest truths in the whole of nature.

We have seen that this sun of ours is a magnificent globe immensely larger than the greatest of his planets, and that the greatest of those planets is immensely larger than this earth. But now we are to learn that our sun is only a star — and not nearly so bright a star as many of those that shine over our heads every night.

We are comparatively close to the sun, so we are able to enjoy his beautiful light and cheering heat. Each of those other myriad stars is a sun too, and the splendour of those distant suns is often far greater than our own; but we are so enormously far from them that they appear dwindled into insignificance.

To judge fairly between our sun and a sun like Sirius, we should have to stand halfway between the two. It is impossible to make an impartial estimate when we find ourselves close beside one star and a million times as far from the other. Once we allow for the imperfection of our point of view, we can grasp the majestic truth that the sun is no more than a star, and that the other stars are no less than suns.

This gives us an imposing idea of the extent and magnificence of the universe we are placed in. Look up at the sky at night: you see a host of stars. Try to think that every one of them is itself a sun. It may well be that those suns have planets circling round them; but it is hopeless for us to expect to see such planets.

If you were standing on one of those stars and looking back towards our system, you would not see the sun as the brilliant and gorgeous object we know so well. If you could see him at all, he would look merely like a star, not nearly as bright as many you can see at night. Even with the biggest of telescopes to help you, you could never make out from one of those bodies the planets that surround the sun. No astronomer among the stars could see Jupiter, even if his sight were a thousand times as good and his telescope a thousand times as powerful as any sight or telescope we know. An object as minute as our earth would of course be still more hopelessly beyond any possibility of vision.

The Numbers of the Stars

To count the stars is a task beyond the power of man to accomplish.

Even without a telescope we can see a great multitude of stars from this part of the world; and there are many constellations in the southern hemisphere that never rise above our horizon. If we went to the equator and waited there for twelve months, all the stars in the heavens would in turn have come into view. An astronomer, Houzeau, who had the patience to count them, made the number about 6000. That is the naked-eye estimate of the star population of the heavens. But if instead of relying on unaided sight you get the help of a little telescope, you will be astounded at the enormous multitude of stars it discloses.

[Figure 82: The Great Bear and the Pole. Four stars form the oblong and three the tail; count the faint stars inside the oblong with your eye and you may see ten, and with an opera glass fully 200.]

An ordinary opera glass or binocular is a very useful instrument for looking at the stars. Use one and you will be amazed to find the heavens teeming with additional hosts of stars your unaided sight would never have told you about.

Any part of the sky will do; but just for an illustration I shall take one particular region, that of the Great Bear (Figure 82). The seven well-known stars are shown here, four of them forming a sort of oblong and the other three the tail.

I would like you to make this little experiment. On a fine clear night, count how many stars there are inside the oblong. They are all very faint, but you will be able to see a few — and with good sight on a clear night you may see perhaps ten. Next take your opera glass and sweep it over the same region; count the stars it shows carefully and you will find fully 200. So in this part of the sky the opera glass has revealed nearly twenty times as many stars as could be seen without it.

Since 6000 stars can be seen by the eye over the whole heavens, we may fairly expect that twenty times that number — 120,000 stars — could be shown by the opera glass over the entire sky.

Let us go a step further and use a telescope whose object glass is three inches across. This is a useful telescope to own, and a good one will show multitudes of pleasing objects, though an astronomer would not consider it very powerful. An instrument like this, small enough to be carried in the hand, has been applied to the task of counting the stars in the northern half of the sky, and 320,000 stars were counted. The actual number that might have been seen with it is considerably greater, for when the astronomer Argelander made this memorable investigation he was unable to reckon many of the stars in places where they lay very close together.

This grand count covered only half the sky; and assuming the other half is as richly inlaid, we see that a little telescope of the kind we have supposed will, swept over the heavens, reveal more stars than the population of any city in England except London. It shows more than a hundred times as many stars as our eyes could possibly reveal.

Still, we are only at the beginning of the count. The very great telescopes add largely to the number. There are multitudes of stars we cannot see in small instruments which are distinctly visible from our great observatories. A telescope would still be a comparatively small one that showed as many stars in the sky as there are people living in this mighty city of London; and with the greatest instruments the tale of stars has risen to a number far greater than the whole population of Great Britain.

Besides the stars the largest telescopes show us, there are myriads which make their presence known in a wholly different way. Only in quite recent times has an attempt been made to develop the full powers of photography for representing celestial objects. On a photographic plate that has been exposed to the sky in a great telescope, the stars are recorded by thousands. Many of them may of course be seen with a good telescope; but there are not a few others that no one ever saw in a telescope, and that apparently no one ever could see, which the photograph is able to show.

We do not, however, use a camera like the photographer's who is going to take your portrait. The astronomer's plate is put into his telescope, and the telescope is turned to the sky; and on that plate the stars make their images, each by its own light.

Some of these images are exceedingly faint, so we give a very long exposure — an hour, or two hours; sometimes as much as four hours' exposure is given to a plate so sensitive that a mere fraction of a second would be enough to expose it in the ordinary practice of daylight photography. We thus allow time enough for the fainter objects to record their presence on the sensitive film.

Even with an exposure of a single hour, a picture showing 16,000 stars has been taken by Mr Isaac Roberts of Liverpool — and the portion of sky it represents is only one ten-thousandth part of the entire heavens. It should be added that the region Mr Roberts photographed is supplied with stars in rather exceptional profusion.

Here at last we have some conception of the sublime scale on which the stellar universe is built. Yet even these plates cannot show all the stars the heavens contain. We have every reason to know that with larger telescopes, more sensitive plates and longer exposures, fresh myriads of stars will always be brought into view.

You must remember that every one of these stars is truly a sun — a lamp, as it were, which doubtless gives light to other objects in its neighbourhood, as our sun sheds light on this earth and the other planets. Indeed, to grasp the glories of the heavens you should try to think of the brilliant points you see as merely the luminous points of an otherwise invisible universe.

Standing one fine night on the deck of a Cunarder, we passed another great Atlantic steamer in the open ocean. The vessel was near enough for us to see not only the light at her masthead but the little beams from the several cabin ports; and we could see nothing of the ship herself. Her very existence was known to us only by the twinkle of those lights. Doubtless her passengers could see, and did see, the same kind of lights from our own vessel, and probably drew the correct inference that they indicated a great ship.

Consider the multiplicity of beings and objects in a ship: the captain and the crew, the passengers, the cabins, the engines, the boats, the rigging, the stores. Think of all the varied interests gathered there — and then reflect that out on the ocean at night the sole indication of this elaborate structure's existence was the few beams of light that happened to shine out of it.

Now raise your eyes to the stars. There are the twinkling lights. We cannot see what they illuminate; we can only guess what untold wealth of non-luminous bodies may lie near them. But we may feel certain that just as the few gleaming lights of a ship are utterly inadequate to give a notion of the nature and contents of an Atlantic steamer, so the twinkling stars are utterly inadequate to give even the faintest conception of the extent and the interest of the universe.

We merely see the self-luminous bodies. Of the multitudes of objects, and the elaborate systems of which those bodies are only the conspicuous points, we see nothing and we know very little. We are, however, entitled to infer from an examination of our own star — the sun — and of the beautiful system surrounding it, that these other suns may be splendidly attended too. That is quite as reasonable a supposition as that a set of lights seen at night on the Atlantic indicates the existence of a fine ship.

The Clusters of Stars

On a clear night you can often see a track of faint light stretching across the sky, which astronomers know as the Milky Way. It runs down below the horizon and on round the earth, forming a girdle about the heavens.

When we examine the Milky Way with a telescope we find, to our amazement, that it consists of myriads of stars, so small and so faint that we cannot distinguish them individually; we merely see the glow made by their collected rays. And remembering that our sun is a star, and that the Milky Way surrounds us, it would almost seem that our sun is itself one of the host of stars forming this cluster.
