Lecture Six: The Stars

(Part 2 of 6)

[Figure 83: The globular cluster in the Centaur — a ball of suns so far off that each has dwindled to the finest point of light, heaped thick at the centre and scattering loosely towards the edge.]

There are other clusters of stars too, some of them exquisitely beautiful telescopic spectacles. I may mention a celebrated pair of them lying in the constellation Perseus. The sight of them in a great telescope is so imposing that nobody fit to look through a telescope at all could resist a shout of wonder and admiration when they first burst into view.

But there are other clusters. Here is a picture of one known as the Globular Cluster in the Centaur (Figure 83). It is a ball of stars so far away that, however large those several suns may really be, they have dwindled to extremely small points of light.

A homely illustration may show what a globular cluster looks like in a good telescope. I take a pepper pot and shake it out over a sheet of white paper until there is a little heap at the centre with other grains scattered loosely about. Now imagine every one of those grains of pepper turned into a tiny electric light, and you have some idea of what a cluster of stars looks like through a telescope of sufficient power.

There are multitudes of such groups scattered through the depths of space, and they need our biggest telescopes to show them properly. We have seen that our sun is a star, only one of the magnificent cluster forming the Milky Way; and we have seen that there are other groups scattered through the length and depth of space. This is how we get a notion of the rank our earth holds in the scheme of celestial things.

The Rank of the Earth as a Globe in Space

Let me give an illustration to explain more fully the relation the earth bears to the other globes that abound through space — and you must allow me to draw a little on my imagination.

I shall suppose that Her Majesty's mails extend not only over this globe but communicate with other worlds; that postal arrangements exist between Mars and the earth, between the sun and Orion — in fact everywhere throughout the whole extent of the universe. Let us consider how our letters ought to be addressed.

Take the case of Mr John Smith, merchant, who lives at 1001 Piccadilly; and let us suppose Mr Smith's business is so extensive that it reaches not only all over this globe but away through space. Suppose the firm has a correspondent living — let us say — in the constellation of the Great Bear. When that man of business wants to write to Mr Smith from those remote regions, what address must he put on the letter, so that the Postmaster-General of the universe shall make no mistake about delivering it? He will write as follows:

    Mr John Smith,
        1001 Piccadilly,
            London,
                England,
                    Europe,
                        Earth,
                            Near the Sun,
                                Milky Way,
                                    The Universe.

Now let us see what each line of this address means.

We put down Mr John Smith's name in the first line, of course, and then add "1001 Piccadilly" for the second. But as the people in the Great Bear are not likely to know where Piccadilly is, we shall put "London" underneath. And as even London cannot be well known everywhere, it is better to write "England". That would surely find Mr Smith from any post office on this globe.

From other globes, however, the supreme importance of England may not be so immediately recognised, so it is as well to add another line, "Europe". This ought to be enough, I think, for any post office in the solar system: Europe is big enough to be visible from Mars or Venus, and should be known to the post office people there, just as we know and have names for the continents on Mars.

But further away there might be a little difficulty. From Uranus and Neptune the different regions of our earth can never have been distinguished, so we must add another line to say which globe of the solar system contains Europe.

Mark Twain tells us there was always one thing in astronomy that particularly puzzled him, and that was how we found out the names of the stars. We are of course in hopeless ignorance of the name this earth goes by among other intelligent beings who can see it. I can only adopt the title "Earth", so I add that line. Now our address is so complete that from anywhere in the solar system — from Mercury, from Jupiter, from Neptune — there ought to be no mistake about the letter finding its way to Mr John Smith.

But from his correspondent in the Great Bear the address would still be incomplete. They cannot see our earth from there, and even the sun himself looks only like a small star — one, in fact, of thousands of stars elsewhere. Still, each star can be distinguished, and our sun may be recognised from the Great Bear by some designation. We shall add the line "Near the Sun", and then I think that from that constellation, or from any of the other stars around us, Mr John Smith's address may be regarded as complete.

But Mr Smith's correspondence may be wider still. He may have an agent living in the cluster of Perseus, or on some object fainter and more distant yet. Then "Near the Sun" is utterly inadequate as a final line, for the sun — if it can be seen from there at all — will have the significance of an exceedingly minute star, no more to be given a special name than each of the several leaves on the trees of a forest.

What that distant correspondent will know is not the earth, nor the sun, but only the cluster of stars in which the sun is a single unit. Again we use our own name for the cluster and call it the "Milky Way"; and when we have added that line, Mr John Smith's address is as complete as circumstances will permit. I think a letter posted to him anywhere ought now to reach its destination. To perfect it, however, we shall finish with one line more: "The Universe."

The Distances of the Stars

I must now tell you something about the distances of the stars. I shall not attempt to explain fully how astronomers make such measurements, but I will give you some notion of how it is done.

You may remember I showed you how we found the distance of a ball hung from the ceiling. The principle of the method for finding a star's distance is much the same, except that we make the two observations not from the two ends of a table, nor even from opposite sides of the earth, but from two opposite points of the earth's orbit — which are therefore 186,000,000 miles apart.

Imagine that on Midsummer Day, standing on the earth here, I measure with a piece of card the angle between the star and the sun. Six months later, on Midwinter Day, when the earth is at the opposite point of its orbit, I again measure the angle between the same star and the sun; and now we can determine the star's distance by making a triangle.

I draw a line a foot long, and we shall let that foot stand for the 186,000,000 miles between the two stations. Placing the cards at the corners, I rule the two sides and complete the triangle, and the star must be at the remaining corner. Then I measure the sides of the triangle and find how many feet they contain; and remembering that each foot corresponds to 186,000,000 miles, we discover the distance of the star.

If the stars were comparatively near us the process would be a very simple one. Unfortunately they are so extremely far off that this triangle, even with a base of only one foot, must have sides many miles long. Indeed, astronomers will tell you there is no more delicate or troublesome work in the whole of their science than finding the distance of a star.

In all such measurements we take the distance from the earth to the sun as a conveniently long measuring rod to express the results in. The nearest stars are still hundreds of thousands of times as far off as the sun.

Let us ponder a little on the vastness of these distances. We shall first put them in miles. Taking the sun's distance as 93,000,000 miles, the distance of the nearest fixed star is about twenty millions of millions of miles — which we express by putting down a 2 and then writing thirteen noughts after it.

It is easy enough to speak such figures; it is a very different matter to imagine the awful magnitude such a number stands for. I must try to give some illustrations that will let you form a notion of it. At first I was going to ask you to count this number; but when I found it would take at least 300,000 years, counting day and night without stopping, before the task was over, it became necessary to adopt some other method.

When on a visit to Lancashire I was once kindly allowed to go over a cotton mill, and I learnt that the cotton yarn produced there in a single day would be long enough to wind round this earth twenty-seven times at the equator. It appears that the total production of cotton yarn every day in all the mills together averages about 155,000,000 miles. In fact, if they would only spin about a fifth more, we could say that Great Britain produced enough cotton yarn every day to stretch from the earth to the sun and back again.

It is not hard to work out from these figures how long it would take all the mills of Lancashire to produce a piece of yarn long enough to reach from our earth to the nearest of the stars. If the spinners worked as hard as ever they could for a year, and all the pieces were then tied together, they would stretch only a small fraction of the distance. Nor would the task be finished if they worked for ten years, or for twenty. Upwards of 400 years would be needed before enough cotton could be grown in America and spun in this country to stretch over so enormous a distance. All the spinning that has ever yet been done in the world has not made a long enough thread.

There is another way of forming some notion of the immensity of these distances between the stars. You will recall that when we were speaking of Jupiter's moons I told you of the beautiful discovery their eclipses allowed astronomers to make. It was thus found that light travels at the enormous speed of about 185,000 miles a second. It moves so fast that within a single second a ray would flash two hundred times from London to Edinburgh and back.

We said that a meteor travels a hundred times as fast as a rifle bullet; but even that great speed seems almost nothing beside the speed of light, which is 10,000 times as great.

Suppose some brilliant outbreak of light took place in a distant star — an outbreak so intense that the flash from it would reach far and wide through the universe. The light would start on its voyage at terrific speed. Any neighbouring star less than 185,000 miles away would of course see the flash within a second of its being produced, and more distant bodies would get the news after intervals proportional to their distances. If a body were 1,000,000 miles off the light would reach it in five or six seconds; over a distance as great as that between the earth and the sun the news would be carried in about eight minutes.

We can calculate how long must pass before light travels a distance as great as that between a star and our earth. You will find that from the nearest of the stars the journey takes over three years.

Ponder on all that this involves. An outbreak in that star might be great enough to be visible here — yet we could never learn of it until three years after it happened. When we look at such a star tonight we do not see it as it is now; the light entering our eyes at this moment has travelled so far that it has been three years on the way. So when we look at the star now, we see it as it was three years ago.

Indeed, if the star were to go out altogether we should still go on seeing it twinkle for three years longer, because a certain amount of its light was already on the way to us at the moment of extinction; and so long as that light keeps arriving, so long shall we see the star shining as brightly as ever. When you look at the thousands of stars in the sky tonight, then, there is not one that you see as it is now, but only as it was years ago.

I have been speaking of the stars nearest us, but there are others far more distant. It is true we cannot find the distance of these remoter objects with any accuracy; but we can convince ourselves how great it is by the following reasoning.

Look at one of the brightest stars. Try to conceive it carried away further into the depths of space until it was ten times as far from us as it is now: it would still be bright enough to be picked out in quite a small telescope. Even taken to a hundred times its present distance it would not have withdrawn beyond the view of a good telescope; and if it retreated a thousand times as far as it is at first, it would still be a recognisable point in our mightiest instruments.

Among the stars we can see with our telescopes, we feel confident there must be many whose light has spent hundreds of years, or even thousands of years, on the journey. When we look at such objects, then, we see them not as they are now but as they were ages ago. A star might have ceased to exist thousands of years ago and still be seen by us every night as a twinkling point in our great telescopes.

Remembering these facts, I think you will look at the heavens with a new interest.

There is a bright star, Vega, or Alpha Lyrae, a beautiful gem, so far off that the light from it now reaching our eyes started before many of my audience were born. Suppose there are astronomers living on worlds among the stars, with telescopes powerful enough to view this globe — what do you think they would see? Not our earth as it is now, but as it was years, and sometimes many years, ago.

There are stars from which, if England could be seen now, the whole country would at this present moment be observed in a great state of excitement at a most auspicious event. Distant astronomers might notice a great procession in London, and watch the coronation of a youthful queen amid the enthusiasm of a nation.

There are other stars further off still, from which, if the inhabitants had good enough telescopes, they would now see a mighty battle in progress not far from Brussels. One splendid army could be seen hurling itself time after time against the immovable ranks of the other. They would not be able to hear the ever-memorable "Up, Guards, and at them!" — but there can be no doubt that there are stars so far away that the rays of light which left the earth on the day of the battle of Waterloo are only just arriving there.

Further off still there are stars from which a bird's-eye view could be taken at this very moment of the signing of Magna Charta. And there are stars from which England, if it could be seen at all, would now appear not as the great England we know but as a country covered with dense forest and inhabited by painted Britons, waging incessant war on the wild beasts that roamed the island.

The geological problems that puzzle us now would be quickly solved if we could only go far enough out into space and had powerful enough telescopes. We should be able to view our earth through the successive epochs of past geological time. We should actually see those great animals whose fossil remains are treasured in our museums tramping about over the earth's surface, splashing across its swamps, or swimming with broad flippers through its oceans. Indeed, if we could view our own earth reflected from mirrors among the stars, we might still see Moses crossing the Red Sea, or Adam and Eve being driven out of Eden.
