Lecture Six: The Stars

(Part 3 of 6)

The subject of star distance is so important that I am tempted to give one more illustration, to bring home to you how vast these distances are. I shall take, as before, the nearest of the stars known to us; and I hope to be forgiven for choosing an illustration of a practical and commercial kind rather than a purely scientific one.

Suppose a railway is about to be built from London to Alpha Centauri. We have already given the length of that railway: it is twenty billions of miles. So now I ask your attention to the simple question of what fare it would be reasonable to charge for the journey.

We shall choose a very cheap scale for reckoning the price of a ticket. The parliamentary rate here is, I believe, a penny a mile; we shall make our interstellar fares much less even than that, and arrange to travel at a hundred miles for every penny. That surely is moderate enough. If charges were so low that the journey from London to Edinburgh cost only fourpence, even the most unreasonable passenger would be contented.

On those terms, how much do you think the fare from London to this star ought to be? I know of one way to make the answer intelligible.

There is a National Debt with which your fathers are unhappily only too well acquainted, and which you will know quite enough about yourselves in the days when you have to pay income tax. This debt is so vast that the interest on it is about sixty thousand pounds a day, the whole amount being six hundred and thirty-eight millions of pounds (April 1898).

Now suppose you went to the booking office with that whole mighty sum in your pocket. But stop a moment — could you carry it in your pocket? Certainly not, if it were in sovereigns. You would find that after you had taken as many sovereigns as you could conveniently carry, there would still be some left — so many, indeed, that you would need a cart to help you on with the rest. And when the cart had as great a load of sovereigns as the horse could draw, there would still be more, and you would have to get another cart. But ten carts, twenty carts, fifty carts would not be enough: you would want five thousand of them before you could move off towards the station with your money.

And when you did get there and asked for a ticket at a hundred miles for a penny, do you think you would get any change? No doubt it would take some little time to count the money; but when it was counted, the clerk would tell you there was not enough — that he must have nearly two hundred millions of pounds more.

That will give some notion of the distance of the nearest star. And we may multiply it by ten, by a hundred, even by a thousand, and still not reach the distance of some of the remoter stars the telescope shows us.

Because the stars are so immensely far away, we can only see them as mere points of light. We can never see a star as a globe with markings on it like the moon or one of the planets. Indeed the better the telescope, the smaller the star appears — though of course its brightness increases with every addition to the light-grasping power of the instrument.

The Brightness and Colour of Stars

Another thing to notice is the way stars are arranged in classes according to their lustre. The brightest, of which there are about twenty, are said to be of the first magnitude. Those just below the first rank as the second; those just below the second are reckoned the third; and so on. The smallest points your unaided eyes will show you are of about the sixth magnitude. The telescope then reveals stars fainter and fainter, down to what we call the seventeenth or eighteenth magnitude, and even lower. The number of stars in each class increases greatly among the small ones.

Most of the stars are white, though many are of a somewhat ruddy hue. There are a few telescopic points that are intensely red; some show beautiful golden tints; and others are blue or green.

There are some curious stars that change their brilliance regularly. Let me try to illustrate the nature of these variables.

Suppose you were looking at a street gas lamp from a very long way off, so that it seemed a little twinkling light; and suppose somebody were preparing to turn the gas-cock up and down. Better still, imagine a little machine that would work regularly, keeping the light at full brightness for two days and a half, then gradually turning it down until in three or four hours it had sunk to a feeble glimmer. In that low state the light stays for twenty minutes; then over three or four hours the gas is slowly turned up again to full, and stays full for two days and a half, when the same series of changes begins over again.

This would be a very odd form of gas lamp. There would be periods of two days and a half when it stayed at its full, separated by intervals of about seven hours in which the gradual turning down and turning up went on.

[Figure 84: Perseus and its neighbouring stars, with Algol marked — the star the ancients took for the eye of a Demon, which dims and recovers with marvellous regularity.]

This imaginary gas lamp is exactly paralleled by a star called Algol, in the constellation Perseus (Figure 84), which goes through the very series of changes I have described. Ordinarily it is a bright star of the second magnitude; and whatever the cause may be, it performs its variations with marvellous uniformity. Algol has always arrested the attention of those who watched the heavens, and in early times it was looked on as the eye of a Demon.

There are many other stars that change in brightness. Most of them need much longer periods than Algol; and sometimes a new star that nobody has ever seen before will suddenly kindle into brilliance. It is now known that the bright star Algol is attended by a dark companion, and that this dark star sometimes comes between Algol and the observer and cuts off the light. That is how the loss of brightness is produced.

Double Stars

Whenever you get a chance of looking at the heavens through a telescope, you should ask to be shown what is called a double star.

There are many stars in the heavens which look quite unremarkable to the unaided eye but which a good telescope shows at once to be of a complex nature. These are what we call double stars: two quite distinct stars placed so close together that the unaided eye cannot separate them, though under the magnifying power of the telescope they are seen apart. To give you some notion of what these objects are like, I shall briefly describe three of them.

The first lies in that best known of constellations, the Great Bear. If you look at his tail, which is made of three stars, you will see a small star near the middle one of the three. We call that little star Alcor; but it is the brighter star near Alcor that I want to draw your attention to. The sharpest eye would never suspect that it is composed of two stars close together. Even a small telescope, however, shows that it is; and this is the easiest observation, and the first, that a young astronomer should make on turning a telescope to the heavens. You will not, of course, imagine that I mean Alcor to be the second component of the double star. It is the bright star near Alcor that is the double.

Here are two marbles, fastened an inch apart. You can see them as separate, of course; but if the pair were moved further and further away, you would soon be unable to distinguish between them, though the actual distance between the marbles had not altered at all.

Look at these two wax tapers, now lit: the little flames are an inch apart. You would have to view them from a third of a mile away for the distance between the two flames to look the same as the distance between the two components of this double star. Your eye could never distinguish two lights an inch apart at so great a distance; but a telescope will let you do it — and that is why we need telescopes to show us double stars.

You might look at that double star year after year through the course of a long life without finding any appreciable change in the relative position of its components. But we know there is no such thing as rest in the universe. Even if you could balance a body so as to leave it for a moment at rest, it would not stay there, for the simple reason that all the bodies round it in every direction are pulling at it, and the pull in one direction is certain to preponderate — so move it must.

This is especially true of two suns like those forming a double star. Placed comparatively near one another, they could not stay permanently in that position; they would gradually draw together and come into collision with an awful crash. There is only one way such a disaster could be averted, and that is by one of the stars revolving around the other, just as the earth revolves round the sun or the moon round the earth. Some motion must therefore be going on in every genuine double star, whether we have been able to see it or not.

Now let us look at another double star of a different kind, this time in the constellation Gemini. The heavenly twins are called Castor and Pollux; and Castor is a very beautiful double star of two bright points a great deal closer together than the pair in the Great Bear, so that a better telescope is needed to show them separately.

Castor has been watched for many years, and it can be seen that one of these stars is slowly revolving round the other — though it takes a very long time, amounting to hundreds of years, to complete a circuit. This seems very astonishing; but when you remember how exceedingly far away Castor is, you will see that a pair of stars appearing so close together that a telescope is needed to part them must in fact be separated by hundreds of millions of miles.

Let us try to conceive our own system transformed into a double star. Take our outermost planet, Neptune; enlarge him a good deal, and heat him enough to make him glow like a sun. He would still go on revolving round our sun at the same distance, and so a double star would be produced. An inhabitant of Castor turning his telescope on us would see the sun as a star. He would not, of course, be able to see the earth; but he might see Neptune as another small star close beside the sun. If generations of astronomers on Castor kept up their observations of our system, they would find a binary star of which one component took a century and a half to go round the other. Need we be surprised, then, that when we look at Castor we see movements that seem very slow?

There is often so much diffused light around the bright stars seen in a telescope, and so much twinkling in certain states of the atmosphere, that stars appear to dance about in a rather puzzling fashion — especially to someone unused to astronomical observation. I remember hearing of a gentleman who once came to visit an observatory. The astronomer showed him Castor through a powerful telescope as a fine specimen of a double star; and then, by way of improving his little lesson, mentioned that one of these stars was revolving round the other. "Oh, yes," said the visitor, "I saw them going round and round in the telescope." He would, however, have had to wait a few centuries with his eye at the instrument before he was entitled to say so.

Double stars also frequently delight us with beautifully contrasted colours. I dare say you have often noticed the red and green lights used in railway signal lamps. Imagine one of those red lights and one of those green ones far up in the sky and placed close together, and you have some idea of what a coloured double star looks like — though perhaps I should add that the hues in the heavenly bodies are not as vividly different as our railway people find necessary.

There is a particularly beautiful double star of this kind in the constellation of the Swan. You could make an imitation of it by boring two holes with a red-hot needle in a piece of card and covering one of them with a small bit of the topaz-coloured gelatine that Christmas crackers are made with, colouring the other with blue gelatine. A slide made on this principle, put into the lantern, gives a very good representation of the two stars on the screen. There are many other coloured doubles besides this one; and indeed it is noteworthy that we hardly ever find a blue or a green star by itself in the sky. It is always a member of one of these pairs.

How We Find What the Stars Are Made Of

Here is a piece of stone. If I wanted to know what it was made of, I should ask a chemist. He would take it into his laboratory, crush it to powder, and then, with his test tubes and the liquids in his bottles and his weighing scales and his other apparatus, tell me all about it: so much of this, so much of that, plenty of this, none at all of that.

But now suppose you ask this chemist to tell you what the sun is made of, or one of the stars. You have no sample of it to give him — how then can he possibly find out anything about it? Well, he can tell you a good deal; and this is the wonderful discovery I want to explain to you.

We now turn the gas down and I kindle a brilliant red light. Perhaps some of those I see before me have occasionally ventured on the somewhat dangerous practice of making fireworks. If there is any boy here who has ever built a sky-rocket, and put in the little balls at the top that burn with such vivid colours when the explosion comes, he will know that the substance which tinged that red fire must have been strontium. He will recognise it by the colour, because strontium gives a red light that nothing else will give.

Here are some of what are called lightning papers; they are very pretty and quite harmless, and they too give brilliant red flashes as I throw them. That red tint has no doubt been produced by strontium as well. You see that we recognised the substance simply by the colour of the light it gave as it burned.
