Lecture Six: The Stars

(Part 4 of 6)

Perhaps some of you have tried making a ghost at Christmas by dressing up in a sheet and carrying a ladle blazing with a mixture of common salt and spirits of wine — the effect produced being a most ghastly one. Some mothers will hardly thank me for the suggestion unless I add that the ghost must walk about cautiously, or the blazing spirit will be very apt to produce conflagrations rather more extensive than were intended.

However, through the kindness of Professor Dewar I am able to show you the phenomenon on a splendid scale and quite free of danger. I kindle a vivid flame of an intensely yellow colour, which I think the ladies will unanimously agree is not at all becoming to their complexions — while the pretty dresses have lost all their variety of colour.

Here is a nice bouquet, and yet you can hardly tell the green of the leaves from the brilliant colours of the flowers except by trifling differences of shade. Hold up a number of pieces of differently coloured ribbon in this light — pink and red and green and blue — and their beauty is gone. And yet we are told that this yellow is a perfectly pure colour; in fact the purest colour that can be produced. I think we must be thankful that the light our good sun sends us has no purity of that description.

There is one substance which will produce that yellow light: a curious metal called sodium. It is so soft that you can cut it with a knife, and so light that it will float on water; and, stranger still, it actually takes fire the moment it is dropped on water. You are only likely to meet metallic sodium itself in a chemical laboratory; but in other forms the substance is one of the most abundant in nature. Common salt is nothing but sodium closely united with a most poisonous gas, a few breaths of which would kill you — yet this strange metal and this noxious gas, once united, become simply the salt for our eggs at breakfast.

This pure yellow light, wherever it is seen — in the flame of spirits of wine mixed with salt, or in the great blaze we have just been looking at — is characteristic of sodium. Wherever you see that particular kind of light, you know sodium must have been present in the body it came from.

We have now learnt to recognise two substances, strontium and sodium, by the different lights they give out in burning. To these we may add a third.

Here is a strip of white metallic ribbon called magnesium. At first glance it seems like a bit of tin, but it is a very different substance; for look — when I hold it in the spirit lamp the strip takes fire at once and burns with a white light so dazzling that it pales the gas flames into insignificance. There is no other substance which gives that particular kind of light when kindled. I can recommend this little experiment as quite suitable for trying at home. You can buy a bit of magnesium ribbon for a trifle at the optician's; it cannot explode or do any harm, and you will get into no trouble with the authorities provided you hold it while burning over a tray or a newspaper, so as to keep the white ash off the carpet.

There are in nature a number of simple bodies called elements; and every one of them, ignited under suitable conditions, gives out a light belonging to it alone, by which it can be distinguished from every other substance. I do not say we can always try the experiment in the simple way I have shown here. Many of these materials yield light that has to be studied by far more elaborate means than have sufficed for us. But you see that the method gives us a way of finding out what substances are actually present in the sun or the stars.

There is a practical difficulty, in that each of the heavenly bodies contains a number of different elements, so that in the light it sends us the hues arising from distinct substances are blended into a single beam. The first thing to do is to find some way of splitting a beam of light up, so as to discover the components it is made of.

You might have a skein of silks of different colours tangled together; that would be like the sunbeam as we receive it, in its unsorted state. How shall we untangle the light from the sun or a star? I will show you by a simple experiment.

Here is a beam from the electric light — beautifully white and bright, is it not? It looks so pure and simple; and yet that beam is composed of all sorts of colours mingled together in such proportions as to make white light. I take a wedge-shaped piece of glass called a prism, and when I put it in the path of the beam you see the transformation that takes place (Figure 85). Instead of white light you now have all the colours of the rainbow — red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet, marked by their initial letters in the figure. These colours are very beautiful, but they are transient; the moment we take the prism away they all unite again into white light.

You see what the prism has done. It has bent all the light passing through it — but it is more effective in bending the blue than the red, and so the blue is carried much further aside than the red.

This is how we study the composition of a heavenly body. We take a beam of its light, we pass it through a prism, and immediately it is separated into its components. Then we compare what we find with the lights given by the different elements, and so we are able to discover what substances exist in the distant object whose light we have examined. I do not say the method is a simple one; all I am trying to show is a general outline of the way we have discovered the materials present in the stars.

The instrument used for the purpose is called the spectroscope. Perhaps you may remember the name by these lines, which I heard from an astronomical friend:

    Twinkle, twinkle, little star,
    Now we find out what you are,
    When unto the midnight sky,
    We the spectroscope apply.

[Figure 85: How to split up a ray of light. The wedge of glass bends the blue further aside than the red, and the beam that looked so pure and simple opens out into the whole rainbow.]

I am sure it will interest everybody to know that the elements the stars contain are not altogether different from those our earth is made of. It is true there may be substances in the stars that we know nothing of here; but it is certain that many of the commonest elements on earth are present in the most distant bodies. I shall mention only one, the metal iron. That useful substance has been found in some of the stars which lie at almost incalculable distances from the earth.

The Nebulae

As we draw towards the close of these lectures I must say a few words about some dim and mysterious objects we have not yet mentioned. They are what are called nebulae, or little clouds; and in one sense they are justly called little, for each of them takes up only a very small spot in the sky compared with what an ordinary cloud in our own air would fill.

The nebulae are, however, objects of the most stupendous proportions. If our earth and thousands of millions of bodies quite as big were all put together, they would not be nearly as great as one of these nebulae.

Astronomers reckon the nebulae by thousands, though I must add that most of them are apparently faint and uninteresting. A nebula is sometimes liable to be mistaken for a comet; but a comet, as I have explained, is at once distinguished by the fact that it moves and changes its appearance from hour to hour, whereas scores of years may pass without any change in the look or the position of a nebula.

The most powerful telescopes are used for observing these faint objects. I take this opportunity of showing you a picture of an instrument suitable for such work: the great reflector of the Paris Observatory (Figure 87).

[Figure 86: The Ring Nebula in Lyra as it appears under different telescopic powers — a gigantic ring of glowing gas, more of it revealed as the power increases.]

There are such multitudes of nebulae that I can show you only a few of the more remarkable kinds. In Figure 86 you will see pictures of a curious object in the constellation Lyra as it appears under different telescopic powers. It is a gigantic ring of luminous gas.

To judge of the size of this ring, suppose a railway were laid across it, and that the train you got into at one side would not stop until it reached the other. How long do you think that journey would take?

I recollect a picture in Punch some time ago showing a train about to leave London for Brighton, with the guard walking up and down announcing to the passengers the alarming fact that "this train stops nowhere." An old gentleman was seen gesticulating vainly out of the window and imploring to be let out before the frightful journey began. On the nebular railway the passengers would almost need such a warning.

[Figure 87: A great reflecting telescope — the giant instrument of the Paris Observatory, of the kind needed to observe objects as faint as these.]

Let the train start at a mile a minute. Surely, you would think, it must soon cross the ring. But the minutes pass; an hour goes by, so the distance must be sixty miles at the very least. The hours creep on into days, the days lengthen into years, and still the train goes on. The years stretch out into centuries; and even when the train has been rushing on for a thousand years at an unabated mile a minute, the journey would certainly not be over. Nor do I venture to say how many ages must pass before the terminus on the far side of the ring nebula was reached.

A cluster of stars seen in a small telescope will often look like a nebula, because the rays of the stars blend together; a powerful telescope, however, dispels the illusion and reveals the separate stars. It was therefore thought that all the nebulae might merely be clusters so exceedingly remote that even our mightiest instruments failed to resolve them into stars. But this is now known not to be so. Many of these objects really are masses of glowing gas — the ring nebulae I have just spoken of, for instance; and their form I can imitate with a pretty experiment.

[Figure 88: How to make the smoke-rings. A box with a round hole in one face and a canvas back to strike; the fumes of hydrochloric acid and ammonia from the two retorts fill it with dense white smoke.]

We take a large box with a round hole cut in one face and a canvas back on the opposite side. First I fill the box with smoke, and there are various ways of doing it. Burning brown paper does not answer well, because the supply of smoke is too irregular and the paper is apt to blaze. A little bit of phosphorus set alight yields copious smoke, but it would be apt to make people cough; and besides, phosphorus is a dangerous thing to handle incautiously, and I do not want to suggest anything that might lead to disaster if the experiment were repeated at home. A little wisp of hay, slightly damped and lit, will safely give a sufficient supply.

Nor need you have an elaborate box like this. Any old packing case, or even a bandbox with a duster stretched over its open top and a round hole cut in the bottom, will answer capitally.

While I have been speaking, my assistant has kindly filled this box with smoke; and to get a good supply, as little disagreeable as possible, he has mixed the fumes of hydrochloric acid and ammonia from the two retorts shown in Figure 88. A still simpler way of doing the same thing is to put a little common salt in a saucer, pour a little oil of vitriol over it and set it in the box, and scatter common smelling salts over the floor of the box.

You see there are dense volumes of white smoke escaping from every corner. I uncover the opening and give the canvas a push — and you see a beautiful ring flying across the room; then another, and another. If you were near enough to feel the ring you would notice a little puff of wind; I can show this by blowing out a candle at the other end of the table.

These rings are made by the air, which goes into a sort of eddy as it passes through the hole; all the smoke does is to make the air visible. The smoke-ring is quite elastic. If we send a second ring hurrying after the first we can produce a collision, and you see that each of the two rings stays unbroken, though both are left quivering from the blow. They show beautifully along the beam of the electric lamp — or better still, along a sunbeam.

We can make many experiments with smoke-rings. Here, for instance, I take a box that is empty so far as smoke goes; but air-rings can still be driven out of it. You cannot see them, but you can feel them even at the other side of the room, and, as you see, they will blow out a candle.

I can also shoot invisible air-rings at a column of smoke; and when the missile strikes the smoke it makes a little commotion and comes out on the other side, carrying enough smoke with it to make itself visible, with the solid black-looking ring of air seen inside.

More striking still is another way of producing these rings. I charge this box with ammonia, and you cannot see the rings that come from it. There is a column of the vapour of hydrochloric acid, which you cannot see either. But when the invisible ring enters the invisible column, a sudden union takes place between the vapour of the ammonia and the vapour of the hydrochloric acid; the result is a solid white substance in extremely fine dust, which renders the ring instantly visible.

What the Nebulae Are Made Of
