Lecture Six: The Stars

(Part 5 of 6)

There is a fundamental difference between the illumination of the little rings I have shown you and that of the great rings in the heavens. I had to light our smoke with the electric lamp, for otherwise you would not have been able to see it. The white substance formed by the union of ammonia and hydrochloric acid has of course no more light of its own than a piece of chalk; it needs light falling on it from elsewhere to make it visible. If the ring nebula in Lyra were made of such material, we could not see it at all.

The sunlight which lights the planets might of course light up an object like the ring, if it were comparatively near us; but Lyra is at such a stupendous distance that any light the sun could send out there would be as feeble as the light we receive from a fixed star. Could we show our smoke-rings, for instance, if instead of the electric lamp I merely cut a hole in the ceiling and let the feeble twinkle of a star in the Great Bear shine through? In just the same way, sunbeams would be utterly powerless to light anything at those stellar distances.

If the sun were extinguished altogether, the calamity would no doubt be a very dire one so far as we are concerned; but the effect on the other celestial bodies — moon and planets excepted — would be of the very slightest description. All the stars of heaven would go on shining as before. Not a point in one of the constellations would be altered; not a variation in brightness, not a change in the hue of any star could be noticed. The thousands of nebulae and clusters would be absolutely unchanged.

In fact the total extinction of the sun would hardly be remarked on in the newspapers published in the Pleiades or in Orion. There might possibly be a little line somewhere in an odd corner to the effect that "Mr So-and-So, our well-known astronomer, has noticed that a tiny star, inconspicuous to the eye and of absolutely no importance whatever, has now become invisible."

If, then, it is not the sun that lights this nebula, where else can the source of its illumination be? There can be no other star in the neighbourhood equal to the task; for such an object would of course be brilliant to us if it were large enough and bright enough to give the nebula sufficient light. It would be absurd to say you could see a man's face by the light of a candle while the candle itself was too faint or too distant to be seen. The facts are of course the other way round: the candle might be visible when it was impossible to make out the face it lit.

So we learn that the ring nebula must shine by some light of its own; and now we have to consider how such material can possibly be self-luminous.

The light of a nebula does not seem to be like flame. Perhaps it can be better represented by the pretty electrical experiment with Geissler's tubes. These are glass vessels of various shapes, and they are all very nearly empty, as you will understand when I tell you how they are prepared: a little gas was let into each tube, and then almost all the gas was taken out again, so that a mere trace was left.

I pass a current of electricity through these tubes, and now you see them glowing with beautiful colours. The different gases give lights of different hues, and the optician has exercised his skill to make the effect as beautiful as possible. The electricity, passing through the tubes, heats the gas they contain and makes it glow. And just as that gas can give out light when it is sufficiently heated, so the great nebula — a mass of gas poised in space — becomes visible by virtue of the heat it contains.

We are not left entirely in doubt about the constitution of these gaseous nebulae, for we can pass their light through the prism in the way I explained when we were speaking of the stars. Distant as that ring in Lyra may be, it is interesting to learn that the ingredients it is made of are not entirely different from substances we know on our own earth.

The water in this glass, and every drop of water anywhere, is formed by the union of two gases, one of which is hydrogen. This is an extremely light material, as you can see from the little balloon that rises so prettily when filled with it. Hydrogen also burns very readily, though the flame is almost invisible; and when I blow a jet of oxygen through the hydrogen I produce a little flame of very intense heat. I hold a steel pen in that flame, for instance, and it glows and sputters and falls away in white-hot drops.

It is needless to say that, as a constituent of water, hydrogen is one of the most important elements on this earth. It is therefore of interest to learn that hydrogen, in one form or another, is a constituent of the most distant objects in space the telescope has revealed.

Photographing the Nebulae

In recent years we have learnt a great deal about the nebulae through the help photography has given us.

Look at this group of stars forming the beautiful little configuration known as the Pleiades (Figure 89). It looks like a miniature of the Great Bear; indeed it would be far more appropriate to call the Pleiades the Little Bear than to give that title to a quite different constellation, as has unfortunately been done.

The Pleiades form a group containing six or seven stars visible to the ordinary eye, though people with exceptionally good sight can usually see a few more. In an opera glass the Pleiades become a beautiful spectacle, though in a large telescope the stars appear too far apart to make a really effective cluster.

When Mr Roberts photographed the Pleiades he put a highly sensitive plate in his telescope, and on that plate the Pleiades engraved their own picture by their own light. He left the plate exposed for hours; and on developing it, not only were the stars seen, but there were also patches of faint light due to the presence of nebula. It could not be said that these objects on the plate were illusory, for another photograph was taken and the same appearances came out again.

[Figure 89: The Pleiades — six or seven stars to the ordinary eye, but on a plate exposed for hours the bright points are seen to lie in patches of faint nebula which no telescope had shown.]

When we look at that pretty group of stars which has drawn admiration through all time, we must now think of some of those stars as merely the bright points of a vast nebula — invisible to our unaided eyes, and even to our mightiest telescopes, but able to record its trace on a photographic plate. Does this not greatly enlarge our notion of the extent of the universe, when we reflect that photography lets us see much that the greatest of telescopes had failed to disclose?

Of all the nebulae, now numbering some thousands, there is only one that can be seen without a telescope. It is in the constellation Andromeda, and on a clear dark night it can just be made out with the unaided eye as a faint stain of light on the sky. It has happened before now that people noticing this nebula for the first time have thought they had discovered a comet. I would like you to try to find it for yourselves.

Looked at with an opera glass it appears distinctly elongated. You can see more of its structure in larger instruments; but its nature was never made clear until some beautiful photographs were taken by Mr Roberts (Figure 90).

Unfortunately the nebula in Andromeda is not placed in the best position for its portrait from our point of view. It seems to be a rather flat object turned nearly edge-on towards us. To look at the pattern on a plate you would naturally hold the plate so as to see it squarely; the pattern would not show well if the plate were tilted so that its edge was towards you. That is very nearly how we are obliged to view the nebula in Andromeda.

In the photograph we can trace some divisions running right round the nebula, showing that it seems to be formed of a series of rings; and there are outlying portions belonging to the same system. Truly this is a marvellous object. It is impossible for us to form any conception of its true dimensions; it is so far off that we have never yet been able to determine its distance. Indeed, I may take this opportunity of remarking that no astronomer has yet succeeded in finding the distance of any nebula. Everything, however, points to the conclusion that they are at least as far away as the stars.

[Figure 90: The Great Nebula in Andromeda, from Mr Roberts's photograph — a flat object turned nearly edge-on to us, with divisions running right round it that show it to be built of a series of rings.]

It is almost impossible to apply the methods we use for finding the distance of a star to finding the distance of a nebula. These flimsy bodies are usually too ill-defined to be measured with the precision and delicacy that determining a distance requires: the necessary measurements can only be made from one star-like point to another similar point.

If we could pick a star in the nebula and determine its distance, we should of course have the distance of the nebula itself. But the difficulty is that in general we have no way of knowing whether the star really does lie in the object. For all we can tell it may lie billions of miles nearer to us, or billions of miles further off, and merely happen to lie in the line of sight and so appear to glimmer in the nebula.

[Figure 91: To show how small the solar system is compared with a great nebula. The whole of our system, out to the boundary Neptune traces, is the dot beside it.]

If we have some assurance that a star really is surrounded by a mass of this glowing vapour, then it may be possible to measure the nebula's distance. Occasionally grounds can be found for believing that a star which appears to be in the glowing gas truly does lie there, and is not merely seen in the same direction.

There are hundreds of stars visible on a good drawing or a good photograph of the famous object in Andromeda, and doubtless large numbers of them merely happen to lie in the same line of sight. But the peculiar circumstances in the history of one star seem to warrant the assumption that it certainly was in the nebula, and the history of that star is a remarkable one. It suddenly kindled from invisibility into brilliance.

How is so rapid a change in a star's lustre to be accounted for? In a few days its brightness had undergone an extraordinary increase. This does not tell us for certain that the star lay in the glowing gas; but the most rational explanation I have heard offered is one due, I believe, to my friend Mr Monck. He has suggested that the sudden outbreak of brilliance might be accounted for on the same principles by which we explain the ignition of meteors in our own atmosphere. If a dark star, moving at terrific speed through space, were suddenly to plunge into a dense region of the nebula, heat and light must be given off in abundance enough to transform the star into a brilliant object.

If, therefore, we knew the distance of that star at the time it was in Andromeda, we should of course learn the distance of that interesting object. This has been attempted; and it has been shown that the Great Nebula must be very much further from us than the star whose distance I tried a little while ago to give you some notion of.

We thus realise the enormous size of the Great Nebula. It appears that if we laid down on a map of this object, accurately to scale, a map of the solar system — the sun in the centre and all the planets round it in their true proportions, out to the boundary traced by Neptune — that area, vast as it is, would be a mere speck on the drawing. Our system would have to be enormously bigger before it covered anything like the area of sky one of these great objects takes in. Here is a sketch of a nebula (Figure 91), and beside it I have marked a dot to indicate our solar system. We may feel confident that the Great Nebula is at the very least as mighty as that proportion suggests.

Conclusion

And now, my young friends, I am drawing near the close of this course of lectures, which has occupied us — not unprofitably, I hope you will think — for part of our Christmas holidays.

We have spoken of the sun and the moon, of comets and of stars, and I have frequently had occasion to mention the relative position of our earth in the universe. It is no doubt a noble globe we inhabit; but I have failed in my purpose if I have not shown you how insignificant this earth is beside the vast extent of some of the other bodies that abound in space.

We have, however, been given a feeling of curiosity that makes us long to know of things beyond the confines of our own earth. Astronomers can tell us a little — too often only a little. That is a star, they will say, and That is a planet, and That is so big, and That so far: such is the meagre style of information we often have to be content with.

The astronomers who live on other worlds, if their faculties are in any degree comparable with ours, must be equally ignorant about this earth. The inhabitants of our fellow planets can hardly know more than that the earth we live on is a globe 8000 miles across with a good many clouds about it. Some of the planets would not even pay us the compliment of recognising our existence; while from the other systems — the countless other systems — of space, we are absolutely imperceptible and unknown.

Out of all the millions of bodies we can see, you could very nearly count on your fingers those from which our earth would be visible. This reflection is calculated to show us how vast the real extent of the universe around us must be.

Here is our globe, with its inhabitants, its great continents, its oceans, its empires and kingdoms, its arts, its commerce, its literature, its sciences — and yet it would seem that all these things are absolutely unknown to any inhabitants that may exist elsewhere.

I do not think any reasonable person will doubt that there must be inhabitants elsewhere. There are millions of globes, many of them more splendid than ours. Surely it would be presumptuous to say that this is the only one of all the bodies in the universe on whose surface life, with everything life involves, is displayed. You will rather think that our globe is but one in the mighty fabric, and that other globes may teem with interest just as ours does. We can of course make no conjecture as to what the nature of life elsewhere may be.

If a traveller could visit some other globe and bring back specimens of the natural objects he found there, no collection the world has ever seen could rival them for interest. When I go into the British Natural History Museum and look round that marvellous collection, it awakens in me a feeling of solemnity. I see there the remains of mighty extinct animals that once roamed over this earth; objects dredged from the bottom of the sea some miles down; crystals that have needed incalculable ages to form; and meteorites that have travelled from the heavens above down onto the earth beneath. Such sights, and the reflections they awaken, bring the phenomena of our earth before us in an imposing way, and the extent and interest of its past history.

Oliver Wendell Holmes said that the only way to see the British Museum was to take lodgings close by when you were a boy and stay in the Museum from nine to five every day until you were an old man; then you would begin to have some notion of what the Institution contains. Think how many millions of British Museums would be needed if the universe were to be adequately illustrated — one museum for the earth, another for Mars, another for Venus. But it would be useless to try to count them.
