Lecture Six: The Stars

(Part 6 of 6)

Most of us must be content with acquiring the merest shred of information even about our own earth. Perhaps a schoolboy will think it fortunate that we are so ignorant about the celestial bodies: what an awful vista of lessons to be learnt would open before him if we had a competent knowledge of the other globes surrounding us in space!

I should like to illustrate the extent of the universe by following that reflection a little further. Let me ask you to join me in a small calculation as to how many lessons you would have to learn if astronomers succeeded in discovering some of the things they want to know.

All of us learn geography and history, of course. We must know the geography of the leading countries of the globe, and something of their inhabitants, their government, their resources and their civilisation. It would seem shockingly ignorant not to know something about China, or to have no ideas on the subject of India or Egypt; and the discovery of the New World also involves matters every boy and girl has to be taught.

Now suppose we knew the other globes scattered through space well enough to gain an adequate knowledge of their geography and natural history, of the creatures that inhabit them, of their various products and climates. Everybody would be anxious to learn those particulars; and even when the novelty had worn off it would still be right for us to know something about countries perhaps more populous than China, about nations more opulent than our own, about battles mightier than Waterloo, about animals and plants far stranger than any we have ever dreamt of. An outline of all such matters ought of course to be learnt; and as the amount of information would be rather extensive, we shall try to condense it as much as we possibly can.

To help us realise the full magnificence of that scheme in the heavens of which we form a part, let me venture on an illustration. Let us try to form some slight conception of the number and the bulk of the books that would be needed to give an adequate description of the marvellous universe of stars around us.

These stars being suns, and many of them brighter and larger than our own sun, it is reasonable to presume they may be attended by planetary systems. I do not say we have any right to infer that such systems are like ours. It is not improbable that many of the suns around us have a much poorer retinue than the one that dignifies our sun. On the other hand, it is just as likely that many of them are the centres of systems far more brilliant and interesting, with far greater diversity of structure, and far more intensity and variety of life and intelligence, than are found in the system we belong to. It is only reasonable to suppose that, as our earth is an average planet, so our sun is an average star, both in size and in the importance of its attendants.

We may take the number of stars in the sky at about one hundred millions. So the books that are to describe the entire universe — or rather, I should say, the entire universe that we can see — must describe 100,000,000 times as much as is contained in our single system. We know next to nothing of what those books should contain; but we can form some conjecture as to their number, and that is the notion I now ask your attention to.

The field of knowledge to be covered is so vast that we should have to compress our descriptions into the narrowest compass.

We begin with a description of our earth — for nearly all the books in all the libraries that exist at this moment are devoted to subjects connected with this earth. They include the various branches of history, innumerable languages and literatures and religions, everything relating to life on this globe, to its history in past geological times, to its geography, to its politics, to every variety of manufacture and agriculture, and to all the innumerable matters that concern our earth's inhabitants past and present.

But this tremendous body of knowledge must be greatly condensed before it will be small enough to take its just place in the great celestial library. I can allow the earth one volume of about 500 pages. Everything that has to be said about our earth must be packed within that compass; all terrestrial languages, histories and sciences that cannot be got between its covers can find no other place on our shelves. I cannot spare any more room — our celestial library will be big enough, as you shall presently see.

I am claiming a good deal for our earth in regarding it as one of the most important bodies in the solar system. It is certainly not the biggest — very far from it; but it seems as though the big planets and the sun are not likely to be inhabited. So if we allow one other volume for the rest of the solar system, that will perhaps be enough — though it must be admitted that Venus, of which we know next to nothing except that it is as large as the earth, may be quite as full of life and interest, and that Mars and Mercury are also among the planets with possible inhabitants.

We are therefore restricting the importance of the solar system as much as possible, perhaps even too much, by allowing it two volumes. Within those two, everything conceivable about the entire solar system — sun, planets great and small, moons, comets and meteors — must be included, or it will not be represented in the great celestial library at all.

We shall deal with the other systems through space on the same principle. Each of the 100,000,000 stars shall have two volumes allotted to it, and within those two we must compress our description of the body itself and of the system surrounding it: the planets, their inhabitants, histories, arts, sciences and all other information. Remember, I am not discussing the contents, only the number of books we should have to read before we could get even the merest outline of the true magnificence of the heavens.

Let us try to estimate the kind of library needed to hold 200,000,000 volumes. Suppose a long straight hall, so lofty that there could be fifty shelves of books on each side. As you enter, you look to the right and to the left and see it packed from floor to ceiling with volumes. We have arranged them by constellation: all the shelves in one part hold the volumes for the worlds in the Great Bear, while on the other side may repose rank upon rank of volumes for the constellation of Orion.

Suppose the volumes are each about an inch and a half thick. With fifty shelves on each side, you will easily see that for every foot of its length the hall will hold 800 books.

We can now make a little calculation about the length of this library, which stretches away before us as we walk down it, a majestic corridor with books, books everywhere. Let us continue our stroll. As we pass, we find the shelves on both sides packed with their thousands of volumes; and we walk on and on, and still see no end to the vista that keeps opening before us.

In fact no building ever yet constructed would hold this stupendous library. Let the hall begin on the furthest outskirts of west London, carry it through the heart of the city and away to the utmost limits of the east — and not half the books could be accommodated. The mighty corridor would have to be fifty miles long, packed from floor to ceiling with fifty shelves of books on each side, to contain even this very inadequate description of the contents of the visible universe.

Imagine the solemn feelings with which we should enter such a library, if some miracle could create it. As we took down one of the volumes, with what mysterious awe should we open it and read of some vast world that eye had never seen! There we might learn strange problems in philosophy, astonishing developments in natural history; with what breathless interest we should read of inhabitants of an organisation utterly unknown to our merely terrestrial experience!

And notwithstanding the vast size of the library, the description of each globe would have to be very scanty. In the single book about the earth, for instance, I suppose a little chapter might be spared for an island called England, and possibly a page or so for its capital, London. The accounts of the other bodies in the universe would have to be equally meagre — and yet for this most inadequate of abstracts a library fifty miles long, closely lined with fifty shelves of books on each side, would be required.

Methuselah, we are told, lived nine hundred and sixty-nine years; but even if he had reached his thousandth birthday he would have had to read about 300 of these books through every day of his life to finish learning even the merest outline of the contents of space.

And if we were to have a competent knowledge of all these other globes — all their countries, their geographies, their nations, their climates, their plants, their animals, their sciences, languages, arts and literatures — it is not a volume, nor a score of volumes, that would be needed. Thousands of books would have to be devoted to the description of each world alone, just as thousands of volumes have been devoted to the affairs of this earth without exhausting the subjects of interest it presents. Hundreds of thousands of libraries, each as large as the British Museum, would not hold all that should be written, if we were to have anything like a detailed description of the universe we can see.

I emphasise those last words particularly; and I do so because the grandest thought of all — the thought I shall end with — brings before us the overwhelming extent of the universe we cannot see.

Our telescopes can carry our vision an immeasurable distance into the depths of space. But there are doubtless stars beyond the reach of our mightiest telescopes; stars so remote that they cannot record themselves even on the most sensitive of photographic plates.

On the blackboard I draw a little circle with a piece of chalk. I think of our earth as the centre, and this circle marks the limit our greatest telescopes can sound to. Every star we see, or that the photographic plate sees, lies within this circle. But are there no stars outside it?

It is true we can never see them; but it is impossible to believe that space is utterly void and empty where it lies beyond the view of our telescopes. Are we to say that inside this circle stars, worlds, nebulae and clusters are crowded, and that outside there is nothing? Everything teaches us that this is not so.

Occasionally we gain some accession of power — by adding perhaps an inch to the diameter of our object glass, or by putting up a telescope in a better situation on a lofty mountain peak, or by getting a photographic plate of increased sensitivity. We are then able to extend our vision a little further, to make this circle a little larger, and so to add a little more to the known inside, won from the unknown outside. And whenever this is done, we invariably find that the new region thus conquered is also densely filled with stars, with clusters and with nebulae. It is therefore unreasonable to doubt that the rest of space contains untold myriads of objects too, even though no conceivable improvement in our instruments may ever bring them within range of our observation.

Reflect how small this circle is compared with the space outside it. It took up only a small spot on this blackboard; the blackboard itself takes up only a small part of the end of this theatre; the end of the theatre is a very small area compared with London, with England, with the world, with the solar system, with the actual distance of the stars. In just the same way, the region of space open to our inspection is an inconceivably small portion of the whole extent of space.

The unknown outside is so much larger than the known inside that it is impossible to express the proportion. I write down a one in this corner, and a nought after it to make ten, and six noughts more to make ten millions, and six noughts more again to make ten billions. But I might write six more; indeed I might cover this whole blackboard with noughts, and even then I should not have a number big enough to express how greatly the extent of the space we cannot see exceeds that of the space we can.

If, then, we admit the fact — which no reasonable person can doubt — that this outside, this unknown, this unreachable and, to us, invisible space does really contain worlds and systems, just as this small portion of space we happen to be placed in does, then indeed we shall begin truly to comprehend the majesty of the universe.

What figures could express the myriads of stars that would form a suitable population for a space inconceivably greater than the one that holds 100,000,000 stars? But our imagination will reach further still. It brings before us those myriads of unseen stars with their associated worlds; it leads us to think that those worlds may be full to the brim with interests as great as the ones that exist on our own. And when we remember that for an adequate description of the worlds we can see, one hundred thousand libraries, each greater than any library on earth, would be utterly insufficient — what conception are we to form when we learn that even that would only be a description of an inconceivably small fragment of the whole universe?

Let us imagine that omniscience granted us an adequate revelation of the ample glories of the heavens, both in the universe we do see and in the infinitely greater universe we do not. Let a full inventory be made of all those innumerable worlds, with descriptions of their features and accounts of their inhabitants and their civilisations, their geology and their natural history, and all the boundless points of interest of every kind that a world, in the sense in which we understand the word, must naturally possess. Let all those things be written down, every one.

Then we may say this. Were the whole of this earth of ours covered with vast buildings, lined from floor to ceiling with bookshelves — were every one of those shelves stored full with volumes — even then this library would be inadequate to receive the books needed to contain a description of the glories of the starry heavens.
