Book Four: Friendship, Grief, and the Death of a Friend

(Part 2 of 2)

Do not be foolish, my soul, and do not let the ear of your heart go deaf with the din of your own folly. Listen, you too. The Word himself is calling you to come back; and there is the place of rest that nothing can disturb, where love is not abandoned if it does not do the abandoning itself. Look: these things pass away so that others can take their place, and so this lower universe is completed by all its parts. But do I go anywhere? says the Word of God. Fix your home there. Trust to that place whatever you have from it, my soul — now at least, when you are worn out with empty things. Entrust to Truth whatever you have from the Truth, and you will lose nothing; and what has rotted in you will bloom again, and all your diseases will be healed, and your mortal parts will be reshaped and made new and fastened round you. They will not lay you down where they themselves go down; they will stand firm with you and remain for ever before God, who remains and stands firm for ever.

Why then be twisted about and follow your flesh? Let it be turned round and follow you. Whatever you get from it a sense of is only a part; the whole, of which these are parts, you do not know — and yet the parts delight you. But if the sense of your flesh had the capacity to take in the whole, and had not itself been justly restricted, for your punishment, to a part of the whole, you would want everything that exists at this moment to pass away, so that the whole might please you better. For what we are saying now, you hear by that same sense of the flesh; and you would not want the syllables to stand still but to fly away, so that others might come and you might hear the whole. And so it always is: when one thing is made up of many that do not all exist together, the many would please more taken all together than they do separately, if they could all be taken in at once. But far better than any of this is the one who made it all; and he is our God, and he does not pass away, since nothing follows after him.

If bodies please you, praise God for them, and turn your love back on their maker, so that in the things that please you, you do not displease. If souls please you, let them be loved in God; for they too can change, but in him they are firmly settled — otherwise they would pass, and pass away. So let them be loved in him, and take along with you to him whatever souls you can, and say to them: "Let us love him, let us love him. He made these things and he is not far off. He did not make them and then leave; they are from him and in him. Look, there he is, wherever truth is loved. He is inside the very heart — and the heart has wandered away from him. Go back into your heart, you rebels, and hold fast to the one who made you. Stand with him and you will stand firm. Rest in him and you will be at rest. Where are you going, over these rough roads? Where are you going? The good thing you love is from him — but it is good and pleasant only in relation to him, and it will justly turn bitter, because anything that comes from him is unjustly loved if he is abandoned for it. Why then do you go on and on walking these hard and exhausting roads? There is no rest where you are looking for it. Look for what you are looking for, but it is not where you are looking. You are looking for a blessed life in the land of death; it is not there. How could there be a blessed life where there is no life at all?

"But our true life came down here and bore our death, and killed it out of the abundance of his own life; and he thundered, calling aloud to us to come back from here to him, into that hidden place he came out from to reach us — first into the Virgin's womb, where he was joined to the human creation, our mortal flesh, so that it should not be mortal for ever; and then coming out like a bridegroom from his chamber, rejoicing like a strong man to run his race. For he did not linger but ran, calling aloud by words, deeds, death, life, descent, ascent — crying aloud to us to come back to him. And he went out of our sight, so that we might go back into our heart and find him there. He went away, and look, he is here. He would not stay with us long, and he did not leave us; for he went back to the place he had never left, since the world was made by him. And he was in this world, and came into this world to save sinners, to whom my soul confesses, and he heals it, since it has sinned against him. Sons of men, how long will you be so slow of heart? Even now, after life has come down to you, will you not rise and live? But where are you rising to, when you are already on high and have set your mouth against the heavens? Come down, so that you may rise, and rise to God. For you fell by rising up against him." Tell them this, so that they may weep in the valley of tears, and so carry them up with you to God; because it is out of his spirit that you say this to them, if you say it burning with the fire of love.

I did not know these things then. I loved these lower beauties and I was sinking to the very bottom, and I said to my friends, "Do we love anything but the beautiful? What then is the beautiful? What is beauty? What is it that attracts us and wins us over to the things we love? If there were no grace and beauty in them, they could not possibly draw us to them." And I noticed and worked out that in bodies themselves there is one beauty that comes from their forming a kind of whole, and another that comes from a fitting correspondence with something else, as a part of the body corresponds to the whole body, or a shoe to a foot, and so on. This line of thought came up in my mind out of my inmost heart, and I wrote two or three books, I think, called On the Beautiful and the Fitting. You know, Lord; it is gone from me. I do not have them; they have strayed away from me somehow.

But what moved me, Lord my God, to dedicate those books to Hierius, an orator in Rome whom I did not know by sight, but loved for the fame of the learning he was distinguished for, and for a few words of his I had heard and liked? He pleased me more because he pleased others, who praised him highly, amazed that a Syrian, trained first in Greek eloquence, should afterwards turn into a remarkable Latin orator and a man deeply learned in philosophy. A man is praised and, unseen, is loved. Does this love pass into the hearer's heart out of the mouth of the man praising him? Not at all. But one who loves kindles another. That is why a man who is praised is loved: when the praiser is believed to be praising him with an honest heart, that is, when the man praising him loves him.

For that is how I loved men then — on other men's judgement, not on Yours, my God, in whom nobody is deceived. But then why not for qualities like those of a famous charioteer, or a beast-fighter in the arena, known far and wide by a popular fame? Because I loved this differently, and seriously, and in the way I would want to be praised myself. I would not want to be praised or loved as actors are, though I praised and loved them myself; I would rather be unknown than known that way, and even hated than loved that way. Where are all the weights of these various and different kinds of love stored up in one soul? Why, since we are equally men, do I love in another man what, if I did not hate it, I would not push away from myself? It will not do to say that a good horse is loved by a man who would not be that horse even if he could, and that the same holds of an actor, who shares our nature. So do I love in a man what I hate to be, being a man myself? Man himself is a great deep, whose very hairs You have numbered, Lord, and they do not fall to the ground without You. And yet the hairs of his head are easier to number than his feelings and the beatings of his heart.

But that orator was the kind of man I loved because I wanted to be like him. I went wrong through swollen pride and was tossed about by every wind — and still I was being steered by You, very secretly. And how do I know, and how can I confess it to You with confidence, that I loved him more for the love his admirers had for him than for the very things he was admired for? Because if he had gone unpraised, and these same men had run him down and told me exactly the same things about him with contempt, I would never have been fired up to love him. And the facts would have been no different, and he would have been no different; only the feelings of the people reporting. Look where the helpless soul lies stretched out, when it is not yet held up by the solidity of truth! Just as the gales of talk blow from the chests of people with opinions, so the soul is carried this way and that, driven forward and back, and the light is clouded over for it, and the truth goes unseen. And there it is, right in front of us. It was a great matter to me that my writing and my work should be known to that man. If he approved, I would burn all the brighter; if he disapproved, my empty heart, with none of Your solidity in it, would have been wounded. And yet the beautiful and the fitting, which I wrote to him about, I dwelt on with pleasure and looked over and admired, whether or not anybody joined me in it.

But I could not yet see where the whole weight of this matter turned in Your wisdom, all-powerful one, who alone do wonders. My mind ranged over bodily shapes; I defined and distinguished "beautiful", which is so in itself, from "fitting", whose beauty lies in corresponding to something else — and I backed this up with bodily examples. Then I turned to the nature of the mind, and the false notion I had about spiritual things would not let me see the truth. And yet the force of truth flashed into my eyes by itself, and I turned my panting soul away from incorporeal substance to outlines and colours and physical magnitudes; and being unable to see these in the mind, I concluded I could not see my mind. And whereas in virtue I loved peace, and in vice I hated discord, in the first I noticed a unity and in the second a kind of division. And I took that unity to be where the rational soul lay, and the nature of truth and of the highest good; while in the division I miserably imagined some unknown substance of irrational life, the nature of the highest evil, which should be not only a substance but real life too, and yet not derived from You, my God, from whom all things come. The first of these I called a Monad, as though it were a soul without sex, and the second a Dyad — anger, in acts of violence, and lust, in acts of disgrace — not knowing what I was talking about. For I had not learned that evil is not a substance, and that our soul is not that supreme and unchangeable good.

For just as acts of violence arise when that emotion of the soul from which forceful action springs becomes corrupted and stirs itself up insolently and out of control; and just as lusts arise when the affection by which bodily pleasures are drunk in goes ungoverned — so errors and false opinions spoil the conduct of life, if the reasoning soul itself is corrupted. And it was corrupted in me then, since I did not know that it must be lit by another light in order to share in truth, seeing it is not itself the nature of truth. For You will light my candle, Lord my God; You will lighten my darkness; and of Your fullness we have all received, for You are the true light that lights every man who comes into the world; for in You there is no variableness, neither shadow of change.

But I pressed towards You and was pushed away, so that I might taste death; for You resist the proud. And what could be prouder than for me, in a strange madness, to maintain that I was by nature what You are? For although I was subject to change — which was obvious enough to me, since my very desire to become wise was a wish to go from worse to better — I still chose rather to imagine You subject to change, and myself not to be what You are. So I was pushed back by You, and You resisted my empty stiff-neckedness; and I imagined bodily shapes, and, being flesh myself, accused the flesh; and being a wind that passes away, I did not turn back to You, but went further and further on into things that have no being at all, neither in You nor in me nor in bodies. They were not created for me by Your truth but invented by my own vanity out of bodily things. And I used to ask Your faithful little ones, my fellow citizens — from whom I stood exiled without knowing it — I used to ask them, chattering and stupid, "Why then does the soul go wrong, when God created it?" But I would not be asked, "Why then does God go wrong?" And I maintained that Your unchangeable substance went wrong under compulsion, rather than confess that my changeable substance had gone astray of its own accord, and now lay in error as its punishment.

I was some twenty-six or twenty-seven years old when I wrote those volumes, turning over inside me bodily fictions that buzzed in the ears of my heart — ears I was trying to turn, sweet truth, towards Your inward music, while I thought about the beautiful and the fitting, longing to stand still and listen to You and to rejoice greatly at the bridegroom's voice. And I could not; for I was hurried outside by the voices of my own errors, and by the weight of my own pride I was sinking into the lowest pit. For You had not made me hear joy and gladness, and the bones did not rejoice which had not yet been humbled.

And what good did it do me that when I was barely twenty a book of Aristotle's called the Ten Categories came into my hands — on whose very name I used to hang as on something great and divine, whenever my rhetoric master at Carthage and others reckoned learned mouthed it with their cheeks bursting with pride — and I read it and understood it with no help at all? When I compared notes with others, who said they had only just understood it with very able tutors, who not only explained it aloud but drew a great many things in the sand, they could tell me no more about it than I had learned reading it by myself. The book seemed to me to speak very clearly about substances, such as "man", and about their qualities: the shape of a man, what sort it is; his height, how many feet; his relations, whose brother he is; where he is placed; when he was born; whether he is standing or sitting; whether he is shod or armed; whether he is doing something or having something done to him — and all the countless things that can be arranged under these nine categories, of which I have given a few samples, or under the chief category of Substance.

What did all this do for me, when in fact it got in my way? Imagining that whatever existed was covered by those ten categories, I tried to understand Your wonderful and unchangeable oneness in the same terms, my God, as though You too had been made a subject of Your own greatness and beauty, so that they existed in You as their subject, the way they do in bodies — whereas You Yourself are Your greatness and Your beauty, while a body is not great or beautiful by being a body, since it would still be a body if it were less great or less beautiful. But what I conceived about You was falsehood, not truth: fictions of my own misery, not the realities of Your blessedness. For You had commanded, and it was carried out in me, that the earth should bring forth briars and thorns for me, and that I should eat my bread in the sweat of my brow.

And what good did it do me that I read and understood by myself, vile slave of vile appetites that I was, every book I could get hold of on the so-called liberal arts? I took delight in them and did not know where whatever was true or certain in them came from. For I had my back to the light and my face to the things it lit, so that my face, with which I made out the things that were lit, was not itself lit. Whatever was written on rhetoric or logic or geometry or music or arithmetic I understood by myself, without much difficulty and with no teacher; You know it, Lord my God, because both quickness of understanding and sharpness in distinguishing are Your gift. But I did not sacrifice any of it to You. So it did not serve my good but my ruin, since I was busy getting so good a portion of my inheritance into my own keeping, and did not keep my strength for You, but wandered away from You into a far country to spend it on prostitutes. For what use were good abilities not put to good use? I did not realise how hard those arts were to master, even for the studious and the talented, until I tried explaining them to such people — and the best of them was the one who was not too far behind me.

But what good did any of it do me, when I imagined that You, Lord God, the truth, were an enormous shining body and I was a fragment of that body? What monstrous perversity! But that is what I was. And I do not blush, my God, to confess Your mercies to me and to call on You, when I did not blush then to declare my blasphemies to men and to bark at You. What good was my nimble wit in those sciences then, and all those knotty volumes untangled by me with no help from any human teacher, when I was going so foully and so sacrilegiously wrong about the doctrine of true religion? And what harm did a far slower wit do to Your little ones, since they did not go far away from You, and could grow their feathers safely in the nest of Your church, and feed the wings of love on the food of a sound faith? Lord our God, let us hope under the shadow of Your wings; protect us and carry us. You will carry us when we are small and carry us to our grey hairs; for our firmness, when it is You, is firmness indeed, but when it is our own it is weakness. Our good always lives with You, and when we turn away from it we are turned aside. Let us come back now, Lord, so that we are not overturned; because with You our good lives without any decay, and that good is You. And we need not be afraid that there will be nowhere to come back to because we fell from it — for our being away did not bring our home down. Our home is Your eternity.
