Book Six: Ambrose, Alypius, and the Struggle to Believe

(Part 1 of 3)

My hope from my youth, where were You to me, and where had You gone? Had You not created me and marked me off from the beasts of the field and the birds of the air? You had made me wiser than they were, and I walked in darkness and in slippery places, and I looked for You outside myself and did not find the God of my heart. I had come into the depths of the sea and had lost all trust and all hope of ever finding the truth.

By now my mother had come out to me, made resolute by her faith, following me over sea and land and trusting in You through every danger. In the dangers of the sea she comforted the sailors themselves — though it is usually sailors who comfort passengers unfamiliar with deep water when they are frightened — assuring them of a safe arrival, because You had assured her of it in a vision. She found me in grave danger, having despaired of ever finding the truth. But when I let her know that I was no longer a Manichee, though not a Catholic Christian either, she was not overjoyed as though at something unexpected. She had already been reassured about that part of my misery which had made her mourn me as a dead man, though one You would wake again, carrying me out on the bier of her thoughts so that You might say to the widow's son, Young man, I say to you, get up — and he would revive and begin to speak, and You would give him back to his mother. So her heart was not shaken by any tumult of excitement when she heard that what she had asked of You daily in tears had already so largely come about: that although I had not yet reached the truth, I had been rescued from falsehood. Being certain that You, who had promised the whole thing, would one day give the rest, she answered me quite calmly, with a heart full of confidence, that she believed in Christ that before she left this life she would see me a Catholic believer. That was what she said to me. But to You, fountain of mercies, she poured out still more prayers and tears, that You would hurry Your help and light up my darkness. And she went the more eagerly to church and hung on the lips of Ambrose, praying for the fountain of that water which springs up to everlasting life. She loved that man like an angel of God, because she knew that it was through him that I had been brought, for the moment, to the doubtful state of faith I was now in — through which she confidently expected me to pass from sickness to health, after what would be, so to speak, a sharper attack of the fever, the kind doctors call the crisis.

Once, when my mother had brought to the churches built in memory of the saints some cakes and bread and wine, as her custom had been in Africa, she was stopped by the doorkeeper. And as soon as she learned that the bishop had forbidden it, she accepted his wishes so devoutly and obediently that I was astonished at how readily she found fault with her own practice rather than argue about his ban. Wine-drinking laid no siege to her spirit, and no love of wine drove her to hate the truth, as it does far too many people, men and women alike, who recoil from a lesson in sobriety like a thoroughly drunk man from a cup mixed with water. When she brought her basket of the customary festival food, to be tasted by herself and then given away, she never included more than one small cup of wine, watered down to suit her own abstemious habits, which she would sip out of courtesy. And if there were several churches of departed saints to be honoured in that way, she carried the same single cup round to be used at all of them; and although it grew not only very watery but unpleasantly warm from being carried about, she would share it out among the people there in small sips, since what she was after was devotion and not pleasure. So as soon as she found that this custom had been forbidden by that famous preacher and most devout bishop, even for people who would use it soberly — in case it gave the heavy drinkers an occasion for excess, and because these annual commemorations of the dead were very like the superstition of the pagans — she gave it up quite willingly. Instead of a basket filled with the fruits of the earth, she had learned to bring to the churches of the martyrs a breast filled with purer prayers, and to give what she could to the poor; so that the sharing of the Lord's body should be rightly celebrated in the place where, following the example of his passion, the martyrs had been sacrificed and crowned. And yet it seems to me, Lord my God, and this is what my heart thinks about it in Your sight, that she might not have given up that custom so readily if it had been forbidden by somebody other than Ambrose, whom she did not love as she loved him. She loved him utterly, for my salvation's sake, and he loved her in return for her deeply religious way of life, in which she was constant at church, so fervent in spirit in her good works; so that when he saw me he often broke into praise of her, congratulating me on having such a mother — not knowing what a son she had in me, who doubted every one of these things and imagined the way to life could not be found at all.

Nor did I yet groan in my prayers for You to help me. My mind was entirely set on learning and restless to argue. And Ambrose himself I considered a happy man as the world counts happiness, since such great people held him in such honour; only his celibacy struck me as a painful business. What hope he carried inside him, what struggles he had against the temptations that beset his very excellences, what comfort he had in trouble, and what sweet joys Your bread had for the hidden mouth of his spirit when he chewed it over — of all that I could form no guess and had no experience. Nor did he know the tides of my feelings or the depth of my danger. For I could not ask him what I wanted, in the way I wanted, being shut off from both his ear and his voice by crowds of busy people whose troubles he served. When he was not taken up with them, which was only for a short time, he was either refreshing his body with the absolutely necessary food or his mind with reading.

But when he read, his eye ran over the page and his heart searched out the sense, while his voice and tongue were still. Often, when we had come in — for nobody was forbidden to come in, and it was not his custom to have visitors announced — we saw him reading like this, silently, and never otherwise. And after sitting a long time in silence, since who would dare to interrupt a man so absorbed, we would leave again, guessing that in the small interval he got for refreshing his mind, free from the din of other people's business, he did not want to be taken off it. Perhaps he was also afraid that if the author he was reading said anything obscurely, some attentive or puzzled listener would want it explained, or would want to discuss some of the harder questions; and with his time spent that way he could not get through as many volumes as he wanted. Though preserving his voice, which was easily strained by a very little speaking, may be the truer reason for his reading silently. Whatever his intention was, in a man like that it was certainly good.

I certainly had no chance to ask what I wanted of that holy oracle of Yours, his heart, unless the question could be answered briefly. And those tides in me, which needed pouring out to him, required his full attention, and never found it. I did hear him every Sunday, rightly expounding the word of truth among the people; and I became more and more convinced that all the knots of clever slander which our deceivers had tied against the divine books could be untied. And when I also came to understand that "man created by You in Your own image" was not understood by Your spiritual sons — whom You have brought to birth again by grace out of our Catholic mother — as though they believed and conceived of You as bounded by a human shape, then, although I had not even the faintest shadow of a notion what a spiritual substance might be, I blushed with joy at having spent so many years barking not at the Catholic faith but at the inventions of physical imaginations. For I had been so rash and so irreligious that I had pronounced judgement and condemnation on things I ought to have learned by asking. For You, most high and most near, most hidden and most present, who have no limbs some larger and some smaller, but are wholly everywhere and nowhere in space, are not of any bodily shape; and yet You have made man in Your own image — and look, from head to foot he is contained in space.

Being ignorant, then, of how this image of Yours could exist, I should have knocked and put the difficulty as a question, asking how it was to be believed, instead of insultingly attacking it as if it were believed. So doubt about what to hold for certain gnawed at my heart the more sharply, the more ashamed I was that after being so long deceived by the promise of certainties, I had gone on chattering about so many uncertainties with a childish error and vehemence. That they were falsehoods became clear to me later; what I was certain of at the time was that they were uncertain, and that I had once counted them certain, when with a blind contentiousness I accused Your Catholic Church — which I now found, not indeed to be teaching truly yet, but at least not to be teaching what I had so severely criticised her for. So I was confounded, and turned round. And I was glad, my God, that the one and only Church, the body of Your only Son, in which the name of Christ had been laid on me as a baby, had no taste for these infantile notions; and that in her sound teaching she maintained no doctrine that would cram You, the creator of everything, into a space — however great and wide, but bounded everywhere by the outline of a human body.

I was glad too that the old Scriptures of the law and the prophets were now set before me to be read with different eyes from the ones that had once made them seem absurd, when I attacked Your holy people for thinking what in fact they did not think. And with joy I heard Ambrose in his sermons to the people often recommend this text as a rule: the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. And he would draw aside the mystical veil and lay open spiritually what, taken literally, seemed to teach something unsound — teaching nothing here that offended me, though he taught things I did not yet know to be true. For I kept my heart from consenting to anything, afraid of falling headlong; and by hanging in suspense I was being killed the more surely. For I wanted to be as sure of the things I could not see as I was that seven and three make ten. I was not so mad as to think that even this could not be grasped; but I wanted other things to be as clear as this — whether physical things not present to my senses, or spiritual things, which I could not conceive of except as bodies. And by believing I might have been cured, so that the eyesight of my soul, being cleared, might somehow be turned towards Your truth, which stays for ever and fails in no part. But it happens that a man who has tried a bad doctor is afraid to trust himself to a good one; and so it was with the health of my soul, which could not be healed except by believing, and refused to be cured in case it should believe falsehoods — resisting Your hands, who have prepared the medicines of faith and applied them to the diseases of the whole world, and given them such great authority.

Being led on from this to prefer Catholic teaching, I felt that its way of proceeding was more modest and more honest, in that it required things to be believed that had not been demonstrated — whether because they could be demonstrated in themselves but not to certain people, or could not be demonstrated at all — whereas among the Manichees our credulity was mocked with a promise of certain knowledge, and then a great many fabulous and absurd things were forced on us to be believed, precisely because they could not be demonstrated. Then You, Lord, little by little, with the most gentle and merciful hand, touching and settling my heart, persuaded me. I thought of the countless things I believed which I had never seen and had not been present at: so many events in secular history, so many reports of places and cities I had not visited, so much from friends, so much from doctors, so much continually from other people, without believing which we should do nothing at all in this life. And last of all, with what unshakeable confidence I believed which parents I was born to, which I could never have known unless I believed it on hearsay. Considering all this, You persuaded me that the ones to blame were not the people who believed Your books, which You have established with such great authority among almost every nation, but the people who did not believe them; and that no attention should be paid to anyone who said to me, "How do you know that those Scriptures were given to mankind by the Spirit of the one true God?" For that was of all things the most to be believed, since no contentiousness of blasphemous questioning, out of all the mass of it I had read in the self-contradicting philosophers, could wring from me the belief that You exist, whatever You are, which I did not know, and that the government of human affairs belongs to You.

This I believed, sometimes more strongly and sometimes more weakly; but I always believed both that You existed and that You cared about us, though I did not know what to think about Your substance, or what road led to You or back to You. So since we were too weak to find out truth by abstract reasoning, and for that very reason needed the authority of holy writ, I had now begun to believe that You would never have given that writing such outstanding authority throughout the world unless You had meant to be believed in through it and looked for through it. For now that I had heard several of the passages that used to offend me by their strange sound expounded satisfactorily, I put them down to the depth of the mysteries; and its authority looked to me all the more venerable and all the more worthy of religious trust in that, while it lay open for everyone to read, it kept the majesty of its mysteries in its deeper meaning — coming down to everyone in the great plainness of its words and the lowliness of its style, and yet demanding the most intense effort from those who are not light-minded. So that it might take everyone into its open arms, and ferry a few across through narrow channels towards You — yet far more than if it did not stand up on such a height of authority, and did not draw crowds into its arms by its holy lowliness. These things I thought about, and You were with me. I sighed, and You heard me. I wavered, and You steered me. I wandered along the broad road of the world, and You did not abandon me.
