Book Seven: The Platonists and the Problem of Evil

(Part 2 of 3)

When I heard these things and believed them, told by a man of such credibility, all my resistance gave way. And first I tried to reclaim Firminus himself from that obsession, by telling him that on inspecting his horoscope I ought, if I were going to predict truly, to have seen in it parents of standing in the neighbourhood, a family noble in its own city, high birth, a good upbringing, a liberal education — whereas if that slave had consulted me about the same horoscope, since it was his as well, I ought again, to tell him equally truly, to see in it the lowest of pedigrees, a slave's condition, and everything else utterly at odds with the first. So if I spoke the truth, I would be saying different things from the same horoscope; and if I said the same thing, I would be speaking falsely. From which it followed quite certainly that whatever is said truly after inspecting a horoscope is said not by art but by chance; and whatever is said falsely is not from ignorance of the art but from a failure of the chance.

With that opening made, I turned the like of it over in my own mind, so that none of those old fools who lived by the trade — whom I was longing to attack and refute with derision — could argue against me that Firminus had told me a lie, or that his father had lied to him. I fixed my thoughts on twins, who for the most part come out of the womb so close together that the small interval between them, whatever force people may claim it has in the nature of things, cannot be noted by human observation or expressed at all in the charts the astrologer has to inspect in order to pronounce truly. And they cannot be pronouncing truly, since looking at the same charts he would have had to predict the same things of Esau and Jacob, and the same things did not happen to them. So either he must be speaking falsely; or, if truly, then looking at the same charts he must not give the same answer. So it is not by art but by chance that he speaks truly. For You, Lord, most righteous ruler of the universe, while neither the man consulting nor the man consulted knows it, bring it about by Your hidden inspiration that the man consulting should hear what, according to the hidden deserts of souls, he ought to hear, out of the unsearchable depth of Your just judgement — to whom let no man say, What is this? Why that? Let him not say it, for he is a man.

By now, my helper, You had freed me from those chains. And I looked for where evil comes from, and found no way through. But You did not let any wavering of my thought carry me away from the faith by which I believed both that You exist and that Your substance is unchangeable, and that You care about men and will judge them, and that in Christ Your Son our Lord, and in the holy Scriptures which the authority of Your Catholic Church pressed on me, You had laid down the way of man's salvation to the life that comes after this death. With these things safe and immovably settled in my mind, I anxiously looked for where evil comes from.

What were the labour pains of my teeming heart, what groans, my God! And Your ears were open there too and I did not know it. And when I searched hard in silence, those silent contritions of my soul were loud cries to Your mercy. You knew what I was going through, and no one else did. For what portion of it was distilled through my tongue into the ears of my closest friends? Did the whole tumult of my soul, which neither time nor speech was enough for, reach them? Yet the whole of it went up to Your hearing, everything I roared out from the groanings of my heart; and my desire was in front of You, and the light of my eyes was not with me. That light was within and I was outside; nor was it confined to a place, while I was intent on things that are in places. And there I found no resting place; they did not receive me in a way that let me say, "This is enough, this is good"; and they did not let me go back to where things might be good enough for me. For I was above these things and below You; and You are my true joy when I am subject to You, and You had made the things You created below me subject to me. And this was the true balance, the middle region of my safety: to remain in Your image, and by serving You, to rule the body. But when I rose up proudly against You and charged at the Lord with my neck under the thick bosses of my shield, even these lower things were set above me and pressed me down, and there was no space anywhere to breathe. They met my eye on all sides in heaps and crowds, and in my thoughts their images presented themselves unasked, whenever I wanted to come back to You, as though they were saying, "Where are you going, unworthy and defiled?" And these things had grown out of my wound, for You humble the proud like a man who has been wounded; and it was through my own swelling that I was cut off from You — my face swollen with pride closed up my eyes.

But You, Lord, remain for ever, and are not angry with us for ever, because You pity our dust and ashes, and it pleased You to reform my deformities. And by inward goads You stirred me up, so that I should be uneasy until You were made plain to my inward sight. So by the secret hand of Your treatment my swelling was reduced, and the troubled and dimmed eyesight of my mind was healed day by day by the stinging ointment of healthy sorrows.

And You, wanting first to show me how You resist the proud but give grace to the humble, and by how great an act of mercy You had marked out for men the way of humility — in that Your Word was made flesh and lived among men — arranged for me, through a man swollen with the most unnatural pride, to get hold of certain books of the Platonists, translated from Greek into Latin. And in them I read, not in these very words but to exactly this effect, backed up with many and various arguments: that in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; the same was in the beginning with God; all things were made by him, and without him was nothing made that was made; what was made by him is life, and the life was the light of men, and the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not take it in. And that the soul of man, though it bears witness to the light, is not itself that light, but the Word of God, being God, is the true light that lights every man who comes into the world. And that he was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world did not know him. But that he came to his own, and his own did not receive him; and that as many as did receive him, to them he gave the power to become the sons of God, as many as believed in his name — that I did not read there.

Again, I read there that God the Word was born not of flesh nor of blood, nor of the will of man, nor of the will of the flesh, but of God. But that the Word was made flesh and lived among us, I did not read there. For I found in those books that it was said in many different ways that the Son was in the form of the Father, and did not think it robbery to be equal with God, since by nature he was the same substance. But that he emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, made in the likeness of men and found in fashion as a man, and humbled himself and became obedient to death, and that the death of the cross; and that therefore God raised him from the dead and gave him a name above every name, so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven and things on earth and things under the earth, and every tongue confess that the Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of God the Father — those books do not have. That before all time and above all time Your only-begotten Son remains unchangeable, co-eternal with You, and that souls receive of his fullness so that they may be blessed, and are renewed so as to be wise by sharing in the wisdom that lives in them, is there. But that at the proper time he died for the ungodly, and that You did not spare Your only Son but gave him up for us all, is not there. For You hid these things from the wise and revealed them to little children, so that those who labour and are heavy laden might come to him and he might give them rest, because he is meek and lowly in heart; and the meek he directs in judgement, and the gentle he teaches his ways, seeing our lowliness and our trouble and forgiving all our sins. But those who are lifted up on the lofty walk of some supposedly higher learning do not hear him saying, Learn from me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest for your souls. Although they knew God, they do not glorify him as God, nor are they thankful, but grow empty in their thinking, and their foolish heart is darkened; claiming to be wise, they became fools.

And so I read there too how they had exchanged the glory of Your incorruptible nature for idols and various shapes, for the likeness of the image of corruptible man, and of birds and animals and creeping things — that Egyptian food, in fact, for which Esau lost his birthright, since Your firstborn people worshipped the head of a four-footed beast instead of You, turning back in their hearts towards Egypt, and bowing Your image, which is their own soul, before the image of a calf that eats hay. These things I found here, and I did not feed on them. For it pleased You, Lord, to take away the reproach of being the lesser from Jacob, so that the elder should serve the younger; and You called the Gentiles into Your inheritance. And I had come to You from among the Gentiles, and I set my mind on the gold that You wanted Your people to take out of Egypt, since it was Yours wherever it was. And You said to the Athenians through Your apostle that in You we live and move and have our being, as one of their own poets had said. And those books certainly came from there. But I did not set my mind on the idols of Egypt, which they served with Your gold, exchanging the truth of God for a lie, and worshipping and serving the creature more than the creator.

And being warned by this to come back to myself, I went into my inmost self with You as my guide. And I was able to, because You had become my helper. And I went in, and with the eye of my soul, such as it was, I saw above that same eye of my soul, above my mind, the unchangeable light. Not this ordinary light that any creature can look at, nor a greater light of the same kind, as though this one's brightness were multiplied many times over and filled all space with its greatness. It was not that kind of light but another, utterly different from these. Nor was it above my soul as oil floats above water, or as the sky is above the earth. It was above me because it made me, and I was below it because I was made by it. He who knows the truth knows what that light is, and he who knows it knows eternity. Love knows it.

Eternal truth, and true love, and beloved eternity! You are my God; I sigh for You day and night. When I first knew You, You lifted me up so that I could see there was something for me to see, and that I was not yet the kind of person who could see it. And You beat back the weakness of my sight, blazing Your beams upon me at full strength, and I trembled with love and dread. And I found myself to be far away from You, in a country unlike Yours, as though I heard this voice of Yours from on high: "I am the food of grown men. Grow, and you shall feed on me. And you shall not change me into yourself as you do the food of your body; you shall be changed into me." And I learned that You correct a man for his wrongdoing, and that You made my soul shrivel like a spider's web. And I said, "Is truth nothing, then, because it is not spread through space, finite or infinite?" And You cried out to me from far off, "Yes it is: I am who I am." And I heard as the heart hears, and I had no room left to doubt; I would sooner have doubted that I was alive than that truth exists, which is clearly seen and understood by the things that are made.

And I looked at the other things below You, and I saw that they neither altogether are nor altogether are not. They are, since they are from You; and they are not, since they are not what You are. For that truly is which stays unchangeably. So it is good for me to hold fast to God; because if I do not remain in him I cannot remain in myself, while he, remaining in himself, makes everything new. And You are the Lord my God, since You have no need of anything good from me.

And it was made plain to me that things which are corrupted are nevertheless good; they could not be corrupted if they were supremely good, and they could not be corrupted if they were not good at all. For corruption does damage, and unless it reduced some goodness it could do no damage. So either corruption does no damage, which is impossible; or, which is quite certain, everything that is corrupted is deprived of some good. But if they were deprived of all good, they would cease to exist. For if they still existed and could no longer be corrupted, they would be better than before, since they would go on incorruptibly. And what could be more monstrous than to claim that things become better by losing all their good? So if they were deprived of all good they would no longer exist. Therefore as long as they exist they are good; therefore whatever exists is good. So that evil whose origin I was looking for is not a substance at all; for if it were a substance it would be good. Either it would be an incorruptible substance, and so a supreme good; or a corruptible substance, which could not be corrupted unless it were good. So I saw, and it was made plain to me, that You made all things good, and that there is no substance at all that You did not make. And because You did not make everything equal, therefore everything exists; because each thing is good, and taken all together they are very good, since our God made everything very good.

And to You nothing whatever is evil — not only to You, but to Your creation as a whole, since there is nothing outside it that could break in and wreck the order You have appointed for it. But among its parts, some things are counted evil because they do not harmonise with certain others; while those very things harmonise with others, and are good, and in themselves are good. And all these things that do not harmonise together do harmonise with the lower part, which we call earth, which has its own cloudy and windy sky to match it. Far be it from me to say, "These things ought not to exist." If I saw nothing but these, I would certainly long for better; but even for these alone I would have to praise You. For that You are to be praised is shown from the earth by dragons and all the deeps, fire and hail, snow and ice and stormy wind fulfilling Your word; mountains and all hills, fruit trees and all cedars; wild animals and all cattle, creeping things and flying birds; kings of the earth and all peoples, princes and all judges of the earth; young men and girls, old men and children, praising Your name. But when from heaven these praise You — when all Your angels praise You in the heights, our God, and all Your hosts, sun and moon, all the stars and the light, the heaven of heavens and the waters above the heavens, praise Your name — then I no longer longed for anything better, because I could take them all in together. And with a sounder judgement I understood that the things above were better than the things below, but that everything together was better than the things above by themselves.
