Book Seven: The Platonists and the Problem of Evil

(Part 3 of 3)

There is no soundness in people who are displeased by anything in Your creation, any more than there was in me, when a great deal of what You have made displeased me. And because my soul did not dare to be displeased with my God, it preferred not to count as Yours whatever displeased it. That is how it had gone off into the opinion of two substances, and had no rest, and talked nonsense. And coming back from that, it had made itself a God stretched through the infinite measures of all space, and thought this was You, and set it up in its heart, and had again become the temple of its own idol, which You detest. But after You had soothed my head without my knowing it, and closed my eyes so that they should not look at emptiness, I let go a little of my old self, and my madness was lulled to sleep; and I woke up in You, and saw You infinite, but in a different way — and this seeing did not come from the flesh.

And I looked back at other things, and I saw that they owed their being to You, and that they were all bounded in You, but in a different way: not as being in a space, but because You hold all things in Your hand, in Your truth. And all things are true so far as they exist, and there is no falsehood except when something is thought to be that is not. And I saw that all things harmonise not only with their places but with their times. And that You, who alone are eternal, did not begin to work after countless stretches of time had gone by; because all stretches of time, both the ones that have passed and the ones still to come, neither go nor come except through You, who work and remain.

And I noticed, and found nothing strange in it, that bread which is pleasant to a healthy mouth is disgusting to a sick one; and that light which delights sound eyes is offensive to sore ones. Your righteousness displeases the wicked, and so much the more do the viper and the reptiles, which You created good and fitted to the lower parts of Your creation — parts which the very wicked also fit into, the more so the more unlike You they are, while they fit the higher creatures the more they grow like You. And I asked what wickedness is, and found it to be no substance but a perversion of the will, turned aside from You, God, the highest, towards these lower things, throwing away its own insides and swelling up on the outside.

And I was amazed that I now loved You, and not a phantom in Your place. And yet I did not press on to enjoy my God; I was carried up to You by Your beauty and soon carried back down from You by my own weight, sinking with grief into these lower things. That weight was the habit of the flesh. And yet a memory of You stayed with me, and I did not doubt at all that there was someone for me to hold fast to, only that I was not yet the sort of person who could hold fast to You — because the body that is corrupted weighs down the soul, and the earthly tent weighs down the mind that has many things to think about. And I was quite certain that Your invisible things, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen and understood by the things that are made, even Your eternal power and divinity.

For I examined why it was that I admired the beauty of bodies, in the sky or on the earth, and what helped me to judge soundly about changeable things and pronounce, "This ought to be like this, this ought not." And in examining why I judged as I did, given that I did judge, I had found the unchangeable and true eternity of truth above my changeable mind. So step by step I moved up from bodies to the soul, which perceives through the bodily senses; and from there to the soul's inward faculty, to which the bodily senses report external things, and which is as far as the faculties of animals reach; and from there again to the reasoning faculty, to which what has been taken in by the bodily senses is referred for judgement. And this faculty, finding that it too was something variable in me, raised itself to its own understanding, and drew my thoughts away from the power of habit, pulling itself out of the crowds of contradictory phantoms, so as to find what that light was in which it was bathed when it cried out without any doubt at all that the unchangeable was to be preferred to the changeable — and from which it also knew the unchangeable, since unless it had known it in some way it would have had no sure ground for preferring it to the changeable. And so with the flash of one trembling glance it arrived at That Which Is. And then I saw Your invisible things understood by the things that are made. But I could not hold my gaze there; and my weakness was struck back, and I was thrown onto my usual habits again, carrying away with me only a loving memory of it, and a longing for something I had, as it were, caught the smell of and was not yet able to eat.

Then I looked for a way of getting strength enough to enjoy You, and did not find it until I embraced the mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who is over all, God blessed for ever, calling to me and saying, I am the way, the truth, and the life — and mixing the food I was unable to take in with our flesh. For the Word was made flesh, so that Your wisdom, by which You created everything, might provide milk for our infancy. For I did not hold to my Lord Jesus Christ, I in my humbling to the humble one; nor did I yet know what his weakness was going to teach us. For Your Word, the eternal truth, far above the higher parts of Your creation, raises up to itself those who submit; but in this lower world it built itself a lowly house out of our clay, by which to bring down from themselves those who were to submit, and carry them over to himself — reducing their swelling and nursing their love, so that they should go no further in self-confidence, but rather agree to become weak, seeing at their feet divinity made weak by putting on our coats of skin; and being exhausted, throw themselves down on it, so that it might rise and lift them up.

But I thought otherwise. I conceived of my Lord Christ only as a man of outstanding wisdom, whom nobody could be compared to; especially since, having been marvellously born of a virgin, he seemed accordingly, through God's care for us, to have reached that great eminence of authority as an example of despising temporary things in order to gain immortality. But what mystery there was in "the Word was made flesh" I could not even imagine. All I had learned from what is written about him was that he ate and drank, slept, walked, rejoiced in spirit, was sad, and talked; that flesh did not attach itself to Your Word by itself, but with a human soul and mind. Everybody knows this who knows the unchangeableness of Your Word, which I now knew as far as I could, and did not doubt at all. For to move the limbs of the body by an act of will at one moment and not the next, to be moved by a feeling at one moment and not the next, to deliver wise sayings through human signs at one moment and to keep silent the next, all belong to a soul and mind subject to variation. And if these things were falsely written of him, everything else would be under the same suspicion, and there would be no saving faith for mankind left in those books. So since they were written truly, I acknowledged a complete man in Christ: not only a man's body, nor a body with a sensitive soul but no rational one, but a real man — whom I judged to be preferred above others not only for being a shape of truth, but for a certain great excellence of human nature and a fuller share in wisdom.

But Alypius imagined that Catholics believed God to be so clothed in flesh that besides God and flesh there was no soul at all in Christ, and did not think a human mind was ascribed to him. And because he was firmly convinced that the actions recorded of Christ could only be done by a living and rational creature, he moved the more slowly towards the Christian faith. But when he later understood that this was the error of the Apollinarian heretics, he was glad and fell in with the Catholic faith. I confess it was somewhat later that I learned how, in that saying "the Word was made flesh", the Catholic truth is distinguished from the falsehood of Photinus. For the rejection of heretics makes the doctrines of Your church and sound teaching stand out more clearly. There must also be heresies, so that the approved may be shown up among the weak.

But having read those books of the Platonists, and been taught by them to search for an incorporeal truth, I saw Your invisible things understood by the things that are made; and though I was thrown back, I did grasp what it was that the darkness of my mind was stopping me from contemplating. I was sure that You existed, and were infinite, and yet were not spread through space, finite or infinite; and that You truly are, who are always the same, varying in no part and by no motion; and that everything else is from You, on this one absolutely sure ground, that it exists. Of these things I was sure, and too unsure to enjoy You. I chattered like an expert; and if I had not looked for Your way in Christ our saviour, I should have turned out not an expert but a corpse. For by now I had begun to want to seem wise, being full of my own punishment; and I did not mourn, but rather sneered, puffed up with knowledge. For where was that love that builds on the foundation of humility, which is Christ Jesus? And when were those books going to teach me it? I believe it was for this reason that You wanted me to come across them before I studied Your Scriptures: so that it should be printed on my memory how they affected me, and so that afterwards, when my spirit had been tamed by Your books and my wounds touched by Your healing fingers, I might tell the difference between presumption and confession — between people who saw where they had to go and could not see the road, and the road that leads not merely to seeing the blessed country but to living in it. For if I had been formed first in Your holy Scriptures, and You had grown sweet to me through familiar use of them, and I had then come across those other volumes, they might perhaps have pulled me off the solid ground of true religion; or, if I had held on to the healthy frame of mind I had taken in from Scripture, I might have thought it could have been got from the study of those books alone.

So I seized most eagerly on that venerable writing of Your Spirit, and above all on the apostle Paul. And with that, the difficulties vanished in which he had once seemed to me to contradict himself, and his argument to disagree with the evidence of the Law and the Prophets. The face of that pure word appeared to me as one and the same, and I learned to rejoice with trembling. So I began; and whatever truth I had read in those other books, I found here amid the praise of Your grace — so that a man who sees may not boast as though he had not received, not only what he sees but the fact that he sees it, for what does he have that he has not received? — and so that he may not only be advised to look at You, who are always the same, but healed so as to hold You; and so that a man who cannot see into the distance may still walk the road by which he can arrive and see and hold. For though a man delights in the law of God according to the inner man, what is he to do about that other law in his limbs, which wars against the law of his mind and takes him prisoner under the law of sin that is in his limbs? For You are righteous, Lord; but we have sinned and done wrong and acted wickedly, and Your hand has grown heavy on us, and we are justly handed over to that ancient sinner, the king of death, because he persuaded our will to be like his own will, by which he did not stay in Your truth.

What is a wretched man to do? Who shall free him from the body of this death, but only Your grace, through Jesus Christ our Lord, whom You have begotten co-eternal with Yourself and formed at the beginning of Your ways; in whom the prince of this world found nothing worth death, and yet killed him, so that the record of debt that stood against us was wiped out? None of this is in those books. Those pages do not present the picture of this devotion, the tears of confession, Your sacrifice, a troubled spirit, a broken and contrite heart, the salvation of the people, the bridal city, the pledge of the Holy Spirit, the cup of our redemption. Nobody there sings, Shall not my soul be subject to God? For from him comes my salvation; he is my God and my salvation, my defender, and I shall not be shaken again. Nobody there hears him calling, Come to me, all you who labour. They are too proud to learn from him, because he is meek and lowly in heart; for You have hidden these things from the wise and prudent and revealed them to little children. For it is one thing to see the land of peace from a wooded mountaintop and find no way there, trying uselessly along impassable roads, harassed and ambushed by runaways and deserters under their captain the lion and the dragon; and quite another to keep to the road that leads there, guarded by the army of the heavenly commander, where deserters from the heavenly army do not plunder, since they avoid that road as a torture. These things sank into me wonderfully, when I read that least of Your apostles, and had considered Your works, and trembled greatly.
