Book Eight: The Garden at Milan

(Part 2 of 3)

So I understood from my own experience what I had read: how the flesh craves against the spirit and the spirit against the flesh. I was on both sides myself; but I was more myself in the part I approved of than in the part I disapproved of. For in the second part it was now mostly not me, since in much of it I was suffering against my will rather than acting willingly. And yet it was through me that habit had got this power of making war on me, because I had come willingly where I did not want to be. And who has any right to complain, if a just punishment follows the sinner? I no longer had my old excuse — that the reason I still hesitated to rise above the world and serve You was that the truth was not fully established for me — because now it was. But I was still tied to the service of the earth and refused to fight under Your flag; and I was as afraid of being freed of all my encumbrances as I ought to have been of being encumbered with them.

So I was held down pleasantly by the baggage of this present world, as a man is by sleep; and the thoughts I turned over about You were like the efforts of somebody trying to wake, who is overcome by a heavy drowsiness and sinks back into it. Nobody wants to sleep for ever, and in everybody's sober judgement being awake is better; and yet a man who feels a heavy lethargy in all his limbs usually puts off shaking off sleep, and, though half annoyed with himself, gives in to it with pleasure even after it is time to get up. In the same way I was sure it would be much better to give myself up to Your love than to give myself over to my own appetite; but although the first course satisfied me and had the better of the argument, the second pleased me and had the better of me. And I had nothing to answer when You called to me, Wake up, sleeper, and rise from the dead, and Christ will give you light. When You showed me on every side that what You said was true, I was convicted by the truth and had nothing at all to answer with except those dull, drowsy words: "In a minute." "Soon." "Just leave me a little longer." But "soon, soon" never came to now, and my "little longer" went on a long time. It was no use my delighting in Your law according to the inner man, when another law in my limbs fought against the law of my mind and took me prisoner under the law of sin that was in my limbs. For the law of sin is the violence of habit, by which the mind is dragged and held even against its will — and deservedly, since it fell into the habit willingly. So who was to rescue me, wretched as I was, from the body of this death, but Your grace alone, through Jesus Christ our Lord?

And how You rescued me from the chains of desire, which held me most tightly to the craving of the flesh, and from the drudgery of worldly business, I shall now tell, and confess to Your name, Lord, my helper and my redeemer. In the middle of growing anxiety I was going about my usual work and sighing to You every day. I went to Your church whenever I was free from the business under whose burden I groaned. Alypius was with me, released after his third term from his legal work and waiting for someone to sell his advice to, as I sold the skill of speaking, if teaching can impart it. Nebridius had by now, out of consideration for our friendship, agreed to teach under Verecundus, a citizen and grammarian of Milan and a very close friend of us all, who badly wanted, and claimed by the rights of friendship, the faithful help he greatly needed from our circle. Nebridius was not drawn to this by any desire for advantage, since he could have made much more of his learning if he had wanted to; but being the kindest and gentlest of friends, he would not fail in a good turn or brush off our request. He handled it very discreetly, though, avoiding becoming known to people who count as great in this world, and avoiding the distraction of mind that goes with it, wanting to keep his mind free and at leisure for as many hours as possible to look for or read or hear something about wisdom.

Then one day, when Nebridius was away — I do not remember why — a man called Ponticianus came to see Alypius and me, a fellow African and a high official at the emperor's court. What he wanted with us I do not know, but we sat down to talk; and it happened that on a table in front of us, meant for some game, he noticed a book, took it up, opened it, and, contrary to what he expected, found it was the apostle Paul. He had thought it would be one of the books I was wearing myself out teaching. At that he smiled and looked at me, and said how glad and how surprised he was to have suddenly come across this book, and this book alone, in front of me. For he was a Christian, and baptised, and often bowed himself before You, our God, in church, in frequent and sustained prayer. When I told him that I was taking great pains over those Scriptures, a conversation started, prompted by something he said, about Antony the Egyptian monk, whose name was held in high honour among Your servants, though it was unknown to us until that hour. When he discovered this, he dwelt on the subject the longer, informing us and marvelling at our ignorance of so great a man. And we sat astonished, hearing Your wonderful works attested so fully, in times so recent, almost our own, and done in the true faith and the Catholic Church. We were all amazed: we that they were so great, and he that they had never reached us.

From there his talk turned to the communities in the monasteries, and their holy ways, a sweet-smelling incense to You, and the fruitful deserts of the wilderness, which we knew nothing about. And there was a monastery at Milan, full of good brothers, outside the city walls, under the fostering care of Ambrose — and we did not know about it. He went on talking and we listened in intent silence. And he told us how one afternoon at Trier, when the emperor was taken up with the games, he and three companions went out for a walk in some gardens near the city walls; and as they happened to walk in pairs, one went aside with him and the other two wandered off by themselves. And these two, in their wandering, came on a small house lived in by certain servants of Yours, poor in spirit, of whom is the kingdom of heaven; and there they found a little book containing the life of Antony. One of them began to read it, and to admire it, and to catch fire from it; and as he read, to think about taking up such a life himself, and giving up his official career to serve You. And these two were of the kind they call agents for public affairs. Then suddenly, filled with a holy love and a sober shame, angry with himself, he turned his eyes on his friend and said: "Tell me, I beg you, what are we hoping to get by all this labour of ours? What are we aiming at? What are we serving for? Can our hopes at court rise higher than being the emperor's favourites? And what in that is not fragile and full of dangers? And through how many dangers do we arrive at a greater danger? And when do we get there? Whereas a friend of God — if I want it, I become one right now." So he spoke; and, in labour with the birth of a new life, he turned his eyes back to the book and read on, and was changed inside, where You could see; and his mind was stripped of the world, as soon appeared. For as he read, and the waves of his heart rolled up and down, he raged at himself a while, then saw clearly and decided on a better course; and being Yours by now, he said to his friend, "I have broken free of those hopes of ours and made up my mind to serve God; and I am beginning on it now, this hour, in this place. If you do not want to imitate me, do not stand in my way." The other answered that he would stay with him, to share so glorious a reward and so glorious a service. And so both of them, being Yours now, were building the tower at the necessary cost: giving up everything they had and following You.

Then Ponticianus and the other man, who had been walking in another part of the garden, came looking for them and found them there, and reminded them that they should get back, since the day was nearly over. But the two told them their decision and their intention, and how that resolve had begun and settled in them, and begged them, if they would not join, at least not to make trouble about it. And the others, though not changed at all from what they had been, still wept for themselves, so he said, and congratulated them piously, and commended themselves to their prayers; and so, with their hearts still lingering on the earth, they went off to the palace. But the other two, fixing their hearts on heaven, stayed in that little house. And both of them were engaged to be married; and when their fiancées heard about it, they too dedicated their virginity to God.

That was Ponticianus' story. But while he was speaking, Lord, You were turning me round to face myself, taking me out from behind my own back where I had put myself so as not to look at myself, and setting me in front of my own face, so that I might see how foul I was, how crooked and dirty, spotted and ulcerated. And I looked, and I was horrified — and there was nowhere I could run to away from myself. And if I tried to turn my eyes away from me, he went on with his story, and You set me over against myself again and pushed me in front of my own eyes, so that I might find out my wickedness and hate it. I had known it, but I had pretended not to see it, turned a blind eye and forgotten it.

But now, the more warmly I loved the men whose healthy resolve I was hearing about, who had handed themselves over to You entirely to be cured, the more I loathed myself in comparison with them. Some twelve years of my life had gone by since my nineteenth, when on reading Cicero's Hortensius I had been stirred to a serious love of wisdom; and still I was putting off giving up merely earthly happiness and devoting myself to the search for that other thing, when not only the finding of it but the very search for it was to be preferred to the treasures and kingdoms of this world even when already found, and to bodily pleasures even when spread around me at my command. But I, wretched, most wretched, at the very beginning of my adolescence had begged You for chastity and said, "Give me chastity and self-control, but not yet." For I was afraid You would hear me too soon and cure me too soon of the disease of lust, which I wanted satisfied rather than put out. And I had wandered down crooked roads into a sacrilegious superstition, not that I was sure of it, but I preferred it to the alternatives, which I did not investigate religiously but attacked maliciously.

And I had thought that the reason I put off from day to day rejecting the hopes of this world and following You alone was that nothing certain appeared to steer my course by. And now the day had come when I was to be laid bare to myself, and my conscience was to reproach me. "Where are you now, my tongue? You said that while the truth was uncertain you did not care to throw off the baggage of empty things. Now it is certain, and that burden is still weighing you down, while people who have neither worn themselves out searching for it nor spent ten years and more thinking about it have had their shoulders lightened and been given wings to fly away." So I was gnawed at inside and thrown into a horrible confusion of shame, while Ponticianus talked. And when he had brought his story and his business to a close, he went his way, and I went into myself.

What did I not say against myself? With what whips of condemnation did I not lash my soul, to make it follow me as I struggled to go after You! And it drew back; it refused, and did not excuse itself. Every argument was used up and refuted; what was left was a mute shrinking; and it dreaded, as it would dread death, being held back from the flow of that habit it was wasting to death in.

Then, in this great struggle of my inner household, which I had raised so violently against my own soul in the chamber of my heart, troubled in mind and in face, I turned on Alypius. "What is the matter with us?" I burst out. "What is it? What did you hear? The unlearned get up and take heaven by force, and here we are with our learning and no heart, wallowing in flesh and blood! Are we ashamed to follow because others have gone ahead — and not ashamed of not even following?" Something like that I said, and my fever of mind tore me away from him, while he stared at me in astonishment and said nothing. For it was not my usual tone; and my forehead, my cheeks, my eyes, my colour, my voice said more of what was in my mind than the words I spoke.

There was a small garden belonging to our lodging, which we had the use of, as we had of the whole house, since the owner, our landlord, was not living there. The tumult in my chest had driven me out there, where nobody could interrupt the burning quarrel I had started with myself, until it should come out as You knew and I did not. I was only healthily out of my mind and dying in order to live, knowing what an evil thing I was and not knowing what good thing I was shortly to become. So I went off into the garden and Alypius came after me. His being there did not disturb my privacy; and how could he have left me in such a state? We sat down as far from the house as we could. I was troubled in spirit, and violently indignant that I was not entering into Your will and Your covenant, my God, which every bone in my body cried out to me to enter, and praised to the skies. And we do not get there by ships or carriages or on foot — not even as far as I had come from the house to the place where we were sitting. For to go there, and to arrive there, was nothing but to will to go, but to will it strongly and completely; not to twist and turn a crippled, half-divided will this way and that, with one part sinking as another rose.

Lastly, in the very fever of my hesitation, I made with my body a lot of the movements that people sometimes want to make and cannot, because they lack the limbs, or the limbs are tied, or weakened by illness, or hindered somehow. If I tore my hair, or hit my forehead, or locked my fingers together round my knee, I did it because I willed it. But I might have willed it and not done it, if my limbs had not had the power of movement to obey. So there were many things I did where willing was not by itself being able; and I did not do the thing I wanted incomparably more to do, and which I would be able to do the moment I willed it — because the moment I willed it, I would be willing it wholly. For in that case the ability was the same thing as the will, and to will was to do. And yet it was not done; and my body obeyed the feeblest willing of my soul more readily, moving its limbs at a nod, than my soul obeyed itself in carrying out, by the will alone, this one momentous act of will.
