Book Eleven: Time and Eternity

(Part 1 of 3)

Lord, since eternity is Yours, can You be ignorant of what I say to You? Or do You see in time what happens in time? Then why am I laying out so many accounts before You? Certainly not so that You might learn them from me, but to stir up my own devotion and my readers' towards You, so that we may all say, Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised. I have said it already and I shall say it again: I do this for love of Your love. For we pray, too, and yet truth has said, Your Father knows what you need before you ask. So it is our feelings that we lay open to You, confessing our own miseries and Your mercies to us, so that You may free us completely, since You have begun; so that we may stop being wretched in ourselves and be blessed in You — seeing You have called us to become poor in spirit, and gentle, and mourners, and hungry and thirsty for righteousness, and merciful, and pure in heart, and peacemakers. See, I have told You many things, as well as I could and as I wanted to, because You first wanted me to confess to You, my Lord God. For You are good, and Your mercy lasts for ever.

But how could I manage with the tongue of my pen to tell all Your encouragements, and all Your terrors and comforts and guidings, by which You brought me to preach Your word and give Your sacrament to Your people? And even if I could tell them in order, the drops of time are precious to me; and I have long been burning to meditate on Your law, and to confess to You in it both my skill and my lack of skill, the daybreak of Your enlightening and the remains of my darkness, until weakness is swallowed up by strength. And I do not want anything else to steal the hours I find free from the necessities of refreshing my body and my mind's powers, and from the service we owe to men, or which we pay them even when we do not owe it.

Lord my God, listen to my prayer, and let Your mercy hear my desire; for it is anxious not for myself alone but wants to serve brotherly love, and You see my heart, that this is so. I would sacrifice to You the service of my thought and my tongue; give me something that I may offer You. For I am poor and needy, and You are rich to all who call on You — You, who beyond the reach of care, care for us. Circumcise all rashness and all lying from both my inward and my outward lips; let Your Scriptures be my pure delight; let me neither be deceived in them nor deceive out of them. Lord, listen and take pity, Lord my God, light of the blind and strength of the weak, and light of those who see and strength of the strong as well: listen to my soul, and hear it crying out of the depths. For if Your ears are not with us in the depths too, where are we to go? Where cry out? The day is Yours and the night is Yours; at Your nod the moments fly by. Grant out of them a space for our thinking on the hidden things of Your law, and do not shut it against us who knock. For it is not for nothing that You wanted the dark secrets of so many pages written; and those forests are not without their deer, who retire into them and range and walk and feed and lie down and chew the cud. Complete me, Lord, and reveal them to me. Your voice is my joy; Your voice exceeds abundance of pleasures. Give me what I love; for I do love, and even that You gave me. Do not abandon Your own gifts, and do not despise Your green plant that is thirsty. Let me confess to You whatever I find in Your books, and hear the voice of praise, and drink in You, and consider the wonderful things out of Your law — from the very beginning, in which You made heaven and earth, right through to the everlasting reign of Your holy city with You.

Lord, have mercy on me and hear my desire. For it is not, I think, of the earth: not of gold and silver and precious stones, or fine clothes, or honours and offices, or the pleasures of the flesh, or even the necessities of the body for this pilgrim life of ours — all of which shall be added to those who seek Your kingdom and Your righteousness. See, Lord my God, where my desire lies. The wicked have told me of delights, but not like Your law, Lord. That is where my desire lies. See, Father, look and see and approve; and may it be pleasing in the sight of Your mercy that I should find grace before You, so that the inner parts of Your words may be opened to me as I knock. I beg You by our Lord Jesus Christ Your Son, the man of Your right hand, the Son of man, whom You have established for Yourself as mediator between us and You; through whom You sought us when we were not seeking You, and sought us so that we might seek You; Your Word, through whom You made all things, and me among them; Your only-begotten, through whom You called the believing people to adoption, and me among them. I beg You by him, who sits at Your right hand and pleads with You for us, in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden. It is these I am looking for in Your books. Moses wrote of him; he says so himself; the truth says so.

I would like to hear and understand how "In the beginning You made heaven and earth." Moses wrote this; wrote it and went away, passed from here from You to You; and he is not in front of me now. If he were, I would take hold of him and ask him, and beg him in Your name to open these things to me, and would put the ears of my body to the sounds bursting from his mouth. And if he spoke Hebrew, it would strike my senses in vain and none of it would touch my mind; but if Latin, I would know what he said. But how would I know whether he was telling the truth? And if I knew even that, would I know it from him? Truly it would be within me, within, in the chamber of my thoughts, that truth — neither Hebrew nor Greek nor Latin nor barbarian, without organs of voice or tongue, without the sound of syllables — would say, "It is true," and I would say at once and confidently to that man of Yours, "You are telling the truth." So since I cannot ask him, I ask You, truth, of whom he was full when he spoke truth: You, my God, I beg, forgive my sins; and You who gave Your servant the gift of saying these things, give me too the gift of understanding them.

Look: heaven and earth exist, and they proclaim that they were created, since they change and vary. Whereas whatever has not been made and yet exists has nothing in it that it did not have before — and that is what changing and varying is. They proclaim also that they did not make themselves: "We exist because we have been made; so we did not exist before we existed, in a way that would let us make ourselves." And the evidence of the fact is the voice of those who say it. So it was You, Lord, who made them; You who are beautiful, since they are beautiful; You who are good, since they are good; You who are, since they are. And yet they are not beautiful or good or existent in the way that You their creator are: compared with You they are neither beautiful nor good, nor do they exist. This we know, thanks be to You. And our knowledge, compared with Your knowledge, is ignorance.

But how did You make heaven and earth? What was the engine of so mighty a fabrication? It was not like a human craftsman shaping one body out of another according to the judgement of his mind, which can somehow invest a thing with the form it sees inside itself by its inward eye. And where would he get the power to do that, unless You had made that mind? And he invests with a form something that already exists and has being — clay or stone or wood or gold or something of the sort. And where would those come from, if You had not appointed them? You made the craftsman his body; You made the mind that commands his limbs; You made the material he makes anything out of; You made the grasp by which he takes in his art and sees inside what he is doing outside; You made his bodily senses, by which, as by an interpreter, he can convey from mind to matter what he is doing, and report back to his mind what has been done, so that inside it may consult the truth presiding over it as to whether it has been done well. All these praise You, the creator of everything.

But how do You make them? How, God, did You make heaven and earth? Certainly it was not in heaven or on earth that You made heaven and earth; nor in the air or the waters, since these too belong to heaven and earth; nor did You make the whole world in the whole world, since there was no place to make it in before it was made, that it might exist. Nor did You hold anything in Your hand to make heaven and earth out of. Where would You have got that from, which You had not made, to make something else out of? For what exists, except because You exist? So You spoke, and they were made; and in Your Word You made them.

But how did You speak? In the way the voice came out of the cloud saying, This is my beloved Son? For that voice passed by and passed away; it began and ended; the syllables sounded and passed, the second after the first, the third after the second, and so on in order until the last after all the rest, and silence after the last. From which it is abundantly clear and plain that it was the movement of a creature that expressed it — a movement in time, serving Your eternal will. And these words of Yours, created for a moment, the outward ear reported to the intelligent soul, whose inward ear lay listening to Your eternal Word. But the soul compared these words sounding in time with that eternal Word of Yours in silence, and said, "It is different, utterly different. These words are far beneath me, and they do not exist, since they run away and pass; but the Word of my Lord remains above me for ever." If, then, You said in sounding and passing words that heaven and earth should be made, and so made heaven and earth, then there was a bodily creature before heaven and earth, by whose movements in time that voice could run its course in time. But there was nothing bodily before heaven and earth; or if there was, then surely You had created it without such a passing voice, in order to make out of it the passing voice by which to say, Let heaven and earth be made. For whatever it was that such a voice was made out of, unless it were made by You it could not exist at all. So by what Word did You speak, so that a body might be made, out of which these words might in turn be made?

So You are calling us to understand the Word — God with You, God — which is spoken eternally, and by which all things are spoken eternally. For what was spoken was not spoken one thing after another, one concluded so that the next might be spoken, but everything together and eternally. Otherwise we have time and change, and not a true eternity or a true immortality. This I know, my God, and I give thanks. I know it and confess it to You, Lord; and along with me, whoever is not ungrateful to sure truth knows it and blesses You. We know, Lord, we know: since in so far as anything is not what it was, and is what it was not, so far it dies and rises. So nothing of Your Word gives way or takes another's place, because it is truly immortal and eternal. And therefore to the Word co-eternal with You, You say all You say at once and eternally; and whatever You say shall be made, is made; and You do not make in any way except by saying. And yet the things You make by saying are not all made at once, or everlasting.

Why, Lord my God, I ask You? I see it after a fashion, but how to express it I do not know — unless it is that whatever begins to be and stops being, begins and stops at the moment when it is known in Your eternal reason that it ought to begin or stop; and in that reason nothing begins or stops. This is Your Word, which is also "the beginning, because it also speaks to us". So in the gospel he speaks through the flesh, and this sounded outwardly in men's ears, so that it might be believed and sought inwardly and found in the eternal truth, where the good and only master teaches all his disciples. There, Lord, I hear Your voice speaking to me, because the one who teaches us is speaking to us, while the one who does not teach us, though he speaks, is not speaking to us. And who teaches us now but the unchangeable truth? For even when we are warned through a changeable creature, we are only being led to the unchangeable truth, where we learn truly, standing and hearing him and rejoicing greatly at the bridegroom's voice, which restores us to him from whom we come. And therefore he is the beginning: because unless he stayed, there would be nowhere to come back to when we went astray. And when we come back from error, it is by knowing; and so that we may know, he teaches us, because he is the beginning, and speaks to us.

In this beginning, God, You have made heaven and earth: in Your Word, in Your Son, in Your power, in Your wisdom, in Your truth, wonderfully speaking and wonderfully making. Who shall take it in? Who shall declare it? What is it that gleams through me and strikes my heart without hurting it, so that I shudder and catch fire? I shudder in so far as I am unlike it; I catch fire in so far as I am like it. It is wisdom, wisdom itself, that gleams through me, cutting through my cloudiness — which closes over me again as I faint away from it, through the darkness that gathers on me for my punishment. For my strength is brought low in need, so that I cannot carry my own blessings, until You, Lord, who have been gracious to all my wrongdoing, heal all my weaknesses. For You will also redeem my life from corruption and crown me with loving-kindness and tender mercies, and satisfy my desire with good things, because my youth shall be renewed like an eagle's. For we are saved in hope, and so we wait with patience for Your promises. Let anyone who can, hear You speaking inwardly out of Your oracle; I shall boldly cry out, How wonderful are Your works, Lord — in wisdom You have made them all. And this wisdom is the beginning, and it was in that beginning that You made heaven and earth.

Are they not full of their old leaven, the people who say to us, "What was God doing before he made heaven and earth? For if he was unoccupied and doing nothing," they say, "why does he not go on doing nothing, from now on and for ever, as he did before? If some new movement arose in God, and a new will to make a creature he had never made before, how could that be a true eternity, in which a will arises that was not there before? For the will of God is not a creature but is prior to the creature, since nothing could be created unless the will of the creator had come first. So the will of God belongs to his very substance. And if something has arisen in God's substance that was not there before, then that substance cannot truly be called eternal. But if God's will has been from eternity that the creature should exist, why was the creature not from eternity too?"

People who talk this way do not yet understand You, wisdom of God, light of souls; they do not yet understand how the things are made that are made by You and in You. And yet they try to grasp eternal things, while their heart flutters between the movements of things past and things to come, and is still unsteady. Who will hold that heart still and fix it, so that it stands for a moment and for a moment catches the glory of that ever-fixed eternity, and compares it with the times, which are never fixed, and sees that it cannot be compared? And that a long time cannot become long except out of many movements passing by, which cannot be prolonged all together; whereas in the eternal nothing passes, but the whole is present, while no span of time is present all at once? And that all past time is driven on by time to come, and all time to come follows on the past, and all past and future is created and flows out of what is always present? Who will hold the heart of man so that it may stand still and see how eternity, always standing still, neither past nor to come, utters times past and times to come? Can my hand do this, or the hand of my mouth by speech bring about so great a thing?

See how I answer the man who asks, "What was God doing before he made heaven and earth?" I do not answer as somebody is said to have answered flippantly, dodging the pressure of the question: "He was preparing hell for people who pry into mysteries." Answering an enquiry is one thing; making fun of the enquirer is another. So that is not my answer. I would rather answer "I do not know" about what I do not know, than answer in a way that raises a laugh against a man who asks deep questions and wins praise for a man who gives false ones. But I say that You, our God, are the creator of every creature; and if by the name "heaven and earth" every creature is meant, then I say boldly that before God made heaven and earth he did not make anything. For if he made something, what did he make except a creature? And I wish I knew everything I want to know for my own good as well as I know that no creature was made before any creature was made.

But if some roving brain ranges over the images of times gone by, and is amazed that You, the God almighty and all-creating and all-sustaining, the maker of heaven and earth, held back from so great a work for countless ages before You would make it, let him wake up and consider that he is amazed at illusions. For where could countless ages have passed that You did not make, You who are the author and creator of all ages? Or what times could there be that were not made by You? Or how could they pass, if they never existed? So since You are the creator of all times, if there was any time before You made heaven and earth, why do they say You gave up working? That very time You made, and times could not pass before You made those times. But if there was no time before heaven and earth, why is it asked what You were doing then? For there was no "then" when there was no time.
