Book Eleven: Time and Eternity

(Part 3 of 3)

Do You tell me to agree, if somebody defines time as "the motion of a body"? You do not. That no body is moved except in time, I hear; that You say. But that the motion of a body is time, I do not hear; You do not say it. For when a body is moved, I measure by time how long it moves, from the moment it began to move until it stopped. And if I did not see when it began, and it goes on moving so that I do not see when it ends, I cannot measure it — except perhaps from the moment I began looking until I stop. And if I look a long while, I can only say it was a long time, and not how long, because when we say "how long" we do it by comparison: "this is as long as that", or "twice as long as that", or the like. But when we can mark the distances of the places the moving body goes from and to, or of its parts if it turns as on a lathe, then we can say precisely in how much time the motion of that body, or of its part, from this place to that, was completed. So since the motion of a body is one thing, and what we measure its length by is another, who cannot see which of the two is rather to be called time? And if a body is sometimes moving and sometimes standing still, then we measure by time not only its motion but its standing still as well; and we say, "It stood still as long as it moved", or "It stood still twice or three times as long as it moved", or any other proportion our measuring has either established or guessed at — more or less, as we usually say. So time is not the motion of a body.

And I confess to You, Lord, that I still do not know what time is; and again I confess to You, Lord, that I know I am saying this in time, and that having spoken about time for a long while, that very "long while" is not long except by a lapse of time. So how do I know this, when I do not know what time is? Or is it perhaps that I do not know how to express what I do know? How wretched I am, that I do not even know what I do not know. Look, my God, I am not lying in front of You; my heart is as I speak. You will light my candle; You, Lord my God, will lighten my darkness.

Does my soul not most truly confess to You that I do measure times? So do I measure, my God, and not know what I am measuring? I measure the motion of a body by time; and do I not measure the time itself? Or could I really measure the motion of a body — how long it went on, and in how long a stretch it could get from this place to that — without measuring the time it moved in? And this time itself, how do I measure it? Do we measure a longer time by a shorter one, as we measure the length of a beam by the length of a forearm? For that is how we seem to measure the length of a long syllable by the length of a short one, and to say that this is double that. So we measure the lengths of stanzas by the lengths of the lines, and the lengths of the lines by the lengths of the feet, and the lengths of the feet by the lengths of the syllables, and the lengths of the long syllables by the lengths of the short ones — not measuring by the pages, since then we would be measuring spaces and not times, but as we utter the words and they pass by, and we say, "It is a long stanza, being made of so many lines; long lines, since they consist of so many feet; long feet, since they are drawn out through so many syllables; a long syllable, since it is double a short one." But we do not get any certain measure of time this way either, since it may be that a shorter line, pronounced more fully, takes up more time than a longer one pronounced in a hurry. And the same for a line, a foot, a syllable.

So it seemed to me that time is nothing but a stretching out — of what, I do not know; and I wonder whether it is not of the mind itself. For what, I ask You, my God, am I measuring when I say either indefinitely, "This is a longer time than that", or definitely, "This is double that"? That I am measuring time I know; and yet I am not measuring future time, since it does not yet exist; nor present time, since it is not stretched out over any extension; nor past time, since it no longer exists. So what am I measuring? Times as they pass, and not times past? That is what I said.

Courage, my mind, and push on hard. God is our helper; he made us, and not we ourselves. Push on to where truth begins to dawn. Suppose the voice of a body begins to sound, and does sound, and goes on sounding; and then it stops. There is silence now, and that voice is past and is no longer a voice. Before it sounded it was to come, and could not be measured because it did not yet exist; and now it cannot be measured, because it no longer exists. So it could be measured while it was sounding, because then there was something there that could be measured. But even then it was not standing still; it was passing on and passing away. Could it be measured all the more for that? For while it was passing it was being stretched over some extension of time, so that it could be measured — since the present has no extension. So if it could be measured then, suppose another voice has begun to sound and is still sounding in one continuous tenor without any break. Let us measure it while it sounds; since once it has stopped sounding it will be past and there will be nothing left to measure. Let us measure it, then, and say how much it is. But it is still sounding, and it cannot be measured except from the moment it began to the moment it stopped; for the interval between is exactly what we measure, namely from some beginning to some end. So a voice that has not yet ended cannot be measured, so as to say how long or short it is, or to call it equal to another, or double a single one, or anything of the kind. But when it has ended, it no longer exists. How can it be measured then? And yet we do measure times — and not the times that do not yet exist, nor those that no longer exist, nor those that are not stretched out by any duration, nor those that have no boundaries. So we measure neither times to come, nor times past, nor present times, nor passing times; and yet we do measure times.

Deus Creator omnium — this line of eight syllables alternates short and long. The four short ones, the first, third, fifth and seventh, are single in relation to the four long ones, the second, fourth, sixth and eighth. Each of these has twice the time of each of those. I pronounce them, I report on them, and I find it so, as anyone's plain sense perceives. By plain sense, then, I measure a long syllable by a short one, and I sensibly find it to have twice as much. But when one sounds after the other, if the first is short and the second long, how am I to hold on to the short one, and how, in measuring, am I to apply it to the long one so as to find that this has twice as much — seeing the long one does not begin to sound until the short one stops? And do I measure that very long syllable as present, when I do not measure it until it has ended? And its ending is its passing away. So what is it that I am measuring? Where is the short syllable I measure with? Where is the long one I measure? Both have sounded, have flown, have passed away, are no more. And yet I measure, and answer confidently, so far as one can rely on a practised sense, that this syllable is single and that one double in extension of time. And I could not do this unless they were already past and finished. So it is not the syllables themselves, which no longer exist, that I measure, but something in my memory, which stays fixed there.

It is in you, my mind, that I measure times. Do not interrupt me — that is, do not interrupt yourself with the tumult of your own impressions. In you I measure times. The impression that passing things make in you stays behind when they are gone; and it is this, still present, that I measure, not the things that passed by to make the impression. This is what I measure when I measure times. So either this is time, or I do not measure times at all.

And what about when we measure silence, and say that this silence lasted as long as that voice did? Do we not stretch out our thought to the measure of a voice, as if it were sounding, so as to be able to report on the intervals of silence in a given space of time? For though the voice and the tongue are still, in thought we go over poems and lines and any other discourse, or the dimensions of motions, and report on their lengths of time, how much this is compared with that, exactly as if we were pronouncing them aloud. If a man wanted to utter a prolonged sound, and had settled in his thought how long it should be, he has already gone through a stretch of time in silence, and, committing it to memory, he begins to utter the sound, which goes on until it is brought to the end he had proposed. Or rather, it has sounded and will sound: the part of it that is finished has sounded, and the rest will sound. And so it goes on, until the present attention carries the future over into the past, the past growing by the shrinking of the future, until by the using-up of the future the whole is past.

But how is that future shrunk or used up, when it does not yet exist? And how is that past increased, when it no longer exists — except that in the mind that does all this there are three things going on? For it expects, and it attends, and it remembers; so that what it expects passes, through what it attends to, into what it remembers. Who then denies that things to come do not yet exist? And yet there is in the mind an expectation of things to come. And who denies that past things no longer exist? And yet there is still in the mind a memory of things past. And who denies that present time has no extension, since it passes away in a moment? And yet our attention lasts, and through it what will be present goes on to become absent. So it is not future time that is long, since it does not yet exist; a long future is a long expectation of the future. And it is not past time that is long, since it no longer exists; a long past is a long memory of the past.

Suppose I am about to recite a psalm I know. Before I begin, my expectation is stretched over the whole of it; but once I have begun, however much of it I peel off into the past is stretched along my memory. So the life of this action of mine is divided between my memory, as to what I have recited, and my expectation, as to what I am about to recite. And attention is present with me, so that through it what was future may be carried over and become past. And the more this is done again and again, the more the expectation is shortened and the memory lengthened, until the whole expectation is used up, when the whole action is finished and has passed into memory. And what happens in the whole psalm happens in each separate part of it and each separate syllable. The same holds in that longer action of which this psalm may be a part; the same holds in the whole life of a man, of which all the man's actions are parts; the same holds through the whole age of the sons of men, of which all men's lives are parts.

But because Your loving-kindness is better than all lives, look: my life is nothing but a being pulled apart, and Your right hand held me up — in my Lord, the Son of man, the mediator between You, the one, and us, the many; many too through our many distractions among many things. So that through him I might take hold of the one in whom I have been taken hold of, and be gathered up again out of my old way of life to follow the one: forgetting what lies behind, and not pulled apart but stretched out — not towards things that shall be and shall pass away, but towards the things that lie ahead; not distractedly but intently, following on for the prize of my heavenly calling, where I may hear the voice of Your praise and contemplate Your delights, which neither come nor pass away. But now my years are spent in mourning. And You, Lord, are my comfort, my everlasting Father; and I have been split up among times whose order I do not know; and my thoughts, the very inmost parts of my soul, are torn and mangled by tumultuous varieties, until I flow together into You, purified and melted down by the fire of Your love.

And now I shall stand and grow firm in You, in my mould, which is Your truth. And I shall not put up with the questions of people who, by a diseased craving that is its own punishment, thirst for more than they can hold, and say, "What was God doing before he made heaven and earth?" Or, "How did it come into his mind to make anything, having never made anything before?" Grant them, Lord, to think carefully about what they are saying, and to discover that "never" cannot be said where there is no time. So when he is said "never to have made", what is that but to say he made it "at no time"? So let them see that time cannot exist without created being, and stop talking this nonsense. May they also be stretched out towards the things that lie ahead, and understand that You are before all times, the eternal creator of all times, and that no times are co-eternal with You, and no creature, even if there is some creature before all times.

Lord my God, what a depth is that recess of Your mysteries, and how far the consequences of my sins have thrown me from it! Heal my eyes, so that I may share the joy of Your light. Certainly, if there were a mind gifted with such vast knowledge and foreknowledge as to know everything past and to come the way I know a psalm I know well, that mind would be extraordinarily wonderful and frighteningly amazing: nothing past and nothing to come in later ages would be any more hidden from it than, when I sang that psalm, it was hidden from me what and how much of it had gone by from the beginning, and what and how much was left to the end. But far be it, You who are the creator of the universe, the creator of souls and bodies — far be it that You should know all things past and to come in any such way. Far, far more wonderfully and far more mysteriously do You know them. For the feelings of a man singing something he knows, or listening to a song he knows well, are varied and his senses divided by his expectation of the words to come and his memory of the ones past; and nothing of the kind happens to You, unchangeably eternal, that is, the eternal creator of minds. So just as You in the beginning knew heaven and earth without any variation in Your knowledge, so in the beginning You made heaven and earth without any division in Your action. Whoever understands this, let him confess to You; and whoever does not understand, let him confess to You. How high You are, and the humble in heart are Your dwelling place; for You raise up those who are bowed down, and they do not fall, since You are their raising up.
