Book Twelve: Heaven and Earth

(Part 1 of 3)

My heart, Lord, touched by the words of Your holy Scripture, is very busy in the middle of this poverty of my life. And that is why, most of the time, the poverty of human understanding is rich in words: because enquiring has more to say than discovering, and asking takes longer than getting, and our hand that knocks has more work to do than our hand that receives. We hold the promise; who shall cancel it? If God is for us, who can be against us? Ask, and you shall have; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you. For everyone who asks receives, and he who seeks finds, and to him who knocks it shall be opened. These are Your own promises; and who need be afraid of being cheated, when it is the truth that promises?

The lowliness of my tongue confesses to Your highness that You made heaven and earth: this sky I see, and this earth I walk on, from which comes the earth I carry about with me. You made it. But where is that heaven of heavens, Lord, which we hear of in the words of the psalm: The heaven of heavens belongs to the Lord, but the earth he has given to the children of men? Where is that heaven which we do not see, and to which everything we do see is earth? For this bodily whole, not being wholly everywhere, has received its share of beauty in these lower parts, of which the lowest is this earth of ours; but to that heaven of heavens, even the sky over our earth is only earth. Indeed both these great bodies may not absurdly be called earth in relation to that unknown heaven, which is the Lord's and not the sons' of men.

And this earth was invisible and without form, and there was some depth of an abyss over which there was no light, because it had no shape. So You commanded it to be written that darkness was over the face of the deep. And what is that but the absence of light? For if there had been light, where would it have been, except above everything, lighting it? So where light was not, what was the presence of darkness but the absence of light? Darkness was over it, then, because light was not over it, as where there is no sound there is silence. And what is it to have silence there, except to have no sound there? Have You not taught this soul that confesses to You, Lord? Have You not taught me, Lord, that before You formed and diversified this formless matter there was nothing — no colour, no shape, no body, no spirit? And yet not altogether nothing; for there was a certain formlessness, without any beauty.

Then what should it be called, so that it might be conveyed in some measure to duller minds, except by some ordinary word? And what in all the world can be found nearer to an absolute formlessness than earth and the deep? Occupying the lowest level, they are less beautiful than the higher parts, which are all transparent and shining. So why should I not conceive the formlessness of matter — which You had created without beauty, to make this beautiful world out of — to be suitably suggested to men by the name of earth invisible and without form?

So that when thought looks for what the senses can conceive under this, and says to itself, "It is no intelligible form, like life or justice, since it is the matter of bodies; and it is no object of the senses, since being invisible and without form there was nothing in it for sight or sense" — while a man's thought says this to itself, it may be trying either to know it by being ignorant of it, or to be ignorant of it by knowing it.

But if I wanted, Lord, to confess to You with my tongue and my pen everything You have taught me about that matter — whose name I had heard before without understanding it, when people who did not understand it told me about it, so that I conceived of it as having countless different forms, and therefore did not conceive of it at all, my mind tossing up and down foul and horrible "forms" out of all order, but "forms" all the same; and I called it formless not because it lacked all form but because it had the kind my mind would turn away from if it were presented, as strange and jarring, and human weakness would be troubled by. And still what I conceived was formless not by being deprived of all form but in comparison with more beautiful forms; and true reason did persuade me that I had to strip it entirely of every last remnant of form, if I wanted to conceive matter absolutely without form. And I could not. It was easier for me to imagine that a thing deprived of all form did not exist at all than to conceive of something between form and nothing — neither formed nor nothing, a formless almost-nothing. So my mind gave up questioning my spirit about it, my spirit being full of images of formed bodies and changing and varying them at will. And I turned to bodies themselves and looked more deeply into their changeableness, by which they stop being what they were and begin to be what they were not; and I suspected that this very shifting from form to form takes place through a certain formless state, and not through sheer nothing. But I longed to know this, not merely to suspect it. If my voice and my pen were to confess to You everything, all the knots You untied for me in this question, what reader could hold out to take it all in? And my heart shall not for all that stop honouring You, and singing praise, for the things it is not able to express.

For the changeableness of changeable things is itself capable of all the forms those changeable things get changed into. And what is this changeableness? Is it soul? Is it body? Is it whatever it is that constitutes soul or body? If one could say "a nothing-something", an "is-that-is-not", I would say that was it. And yet in some way it did already exist, in being capable of receiving these visible and composite shapes.

But where did it get this degree of being from, if not from You, from whom all things come in so far as they are? But so much the further from You the more unlike You they are — for it is not a farness of place. So You, Lord, who are not one thing in one place and something else in another, but the selfsame, and the selfsame, and the selfsame, holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, did in the beginning, which is from You, in Your wisdom, which was born of Your own substance, create something, and that out of nothing. For You created heaven and earth not out of Yourself, since then they would have been equal to Your only-begotten Son and thereby to You as well; and there is no way it would be right for anything to be equal to You that was not from You. And there was nothing else besides You out of which You might create them, God, one Trinity and threefold unity. So it was out of nothing that You created heaven and earth: a great thing and a small thing; for You are almighty and good, to make everything good, both the great sky and the tiny earth. You existed, and there was nothing besides out of which You created heaven and earth: two sorts of thing, one near to You and the other near to nothing; one which You alone should be above, and one which nothing should be below.

But that heaven of heavens was for Yourself, Lord. And the earth which You gave to the sons of men to see and touch was not the earth we now see and touch. For it was invisible and without form, and there was a deep over which there was no light — or, darkness was above the deep, that is, more than in the deep. Because this deep of waters, visible now, has even in its depths a light suited to its nature, perceptible in some degree to the fishes and creeping things at the bottom. But that whole deep was almost nothing, because up to that point it was altogether without form; and yet there was already something there that could be formed. For You, Lord, made the world out of a matter without form, which You made out of nothing as next to nothing, so as to make out of it the great things that we sons of men marvel at.

For this bodily sky is truly wonderful; and about that firmament between water and water, on the second day, after the creation of light, You said, Let it be made, and it was made. And that firmament You called heaven — the sky, that is, over this earth and sea, which You made on the third day by giving a visible shape to the formless matter You had made before all days. For You had already made a heaven before all days; but that was the heaven of this heaven, since in the beginning You had made heaven and earth. But this earth which You made was formless matter, because it was invisible and without form, and darkness was over the deep. And out of this invisible and formless earth, out of this formlessness, this almost-nothing, You could make all these things that this changeable world consists of, without ever consisting steadily; whose very changeableness shows itself in this, that times can be observed and counted in it. For times are made by the alterations of things, as the shapes are varied and turned whose matter is the invisible earth I have spoken of.

And so the Spirit, the teacher of Your servant, when it tells us that in the beginning You created heaven and earth, says nothing of times, nothing of days. For truly that heaven of heavens which You created in the beginning is some intelligent creature which, though in no way co-eternal with You, the Trinity, nevertheless shares in Your eternity, and through the sweetness of that most happy contemplation of You strongly restrains its own changeableness; and without any fall since its first creation, holding close to You, is set beyond all the rolling change of times. And that very formlessness of the earth, invisible and without form, is not counted among the days either. For where there is no shape and no order, nothing comes or goes; and where that is not, plainly there are no days, and no succession of stretches of time.

Let the light, the truth, the light of my heart and not my own darkness, speak to me. I fell away into that darkness and was blacked out; but even from there, even from there I loved You. I went astray and remembered You. I heard Your voice behind me calling me back, and hardly heard it through the uproar of the enemies of peace. And now, look, I am coming back, distressed and panting after Your fountain. Let nobody stop me. Of this I shall drink, and so live. Let me not be my own life; from myself I lived badly; I was death to myself; and I come alive again in You. Speak to me; talk with me. I have believed Your books, and their words are utterly full of mystery.

You have already told me with a strong voice, Lord, in my inner ear, that You are eternal, You who alone have immortality; since You cannot be changed in shape or in motion, and Your will is not altered by times — seeing that no will that varies is immortal. This is clear to me in Your sight; and let it be made clearer and clearer to me, I beg You, and in the making clear of it, let me soberly stay under Your wings. You have also told me with a strong voice, Lord, in my inner ear, that You have made all the natures and substances which are not what You are and yet exist; and that the only thing that is not from You is what does not exist; and the movement of the will away from You who are, towards what exists in a lesser degree, because such a movement is transgression and sin; and that nobody's sin either harms You or disturbs the order of Your rule, first or last. This is clear to me in Your sight; and let it be made clearer and clearer to me, I beg You; and in the making clear of it, let me soberly stay under Your wings.

You have also told me with a strong voice, in my inner ear, that neither is that creature co-eternal with You whose happiness You alone are, and which with the most persevering purity, drawing its nourishment from You, nowhere and at no time puts forth its natural changeableness; and which, with You always present to it, and keeping itself towards You with its whole love, having no future to expect and carrying nothing it remembers into the past, is neither altered by any change nor pulled apart into times. Blessed creature, if such there is, for holding close to Your blessedness; blessed in You, its eternal inhabitant and its enlightener! And I cannot find a name I would sooner give the heaven of heavens which is the Lord's than Your house — which contemplates Your delights without any lapse into going out to something else; one pure mind, most harmoniously one, by that settled state of peace of the holy spirits who are citizens of Your city in heavenly places, far above the heavenly places we can see.

By this a soul whose pilgrimage has been made long and far away may understand, if she now thirsts for You, if her tears have now become her bread while they say to her every day, Where is your God? — if she now asks one thing of You and wants it, that she may live in Your house all the days of her life. And what is her life but You? And what are Your days but Your eternity, like Your years which do not run out, because You are always the same? By this, then, may the soul that is able understand how far You are above all times, eternal — seeing that Your house, which at no time went off into a far country, though it is not co-eternal with You, yet by continually and unfailingly holding close to You suffers no changeableness of times. This is clear to me in Your sight; and let it be made clearer and clearer to me, I beg You; and in the making clear of it, let me soberly stay under Your wings.

There is, I do not know what, a kind of formlessness in the changes of these last and lowest creatures. And who will tell me — unless it is somebody who through the emptiness of his own heart wanders and tosses himself about among his own fancies — who but such a man would tell me that if every shape were so worn away and used up that there remained only that formlessness through which a thing was changed and turned from one shape into another, that this could produce the succession of times? Plainly it could not; because without a variety of motions there are no times, and there is no variety where there is no shape.

Considering these things, as far as You give me to, my God, as far as You stir me up to knock, and as far as You open to me when I knock, I find that You have made two things not within the compass of time, neither of which is co-eternal with You. One is so formed that without any pause in its contemplation and without any interval of change, though changeable, yet unchanged, it may thoroughly enjoy Your eternity and unchangeableness. The other was so formless that it had nothing in it that could be changed from one form to another, of motion or of rest, so as to become subject to time. But You did not leave this formless, because before all days, in the beginning, You created heaven and earth: the two things I have been speaking of. But the earth was invisible and without form, and darkness was over the deep. In these words the formlessness is conveyed to us — so that minds unable to conceive an utter absence of all form without arriving at nothing may be drawn on by degrees — out of which another heaven might be created, along with a visible and well-formed earth; and the waters variously ordered; and whatever else in the forming of the world is recorded to have been created, and created not without days; and that as being of such a nature that the successive changes of times could take place in them, since they are subject to appointed alterations of motions and forms.

This, then, is what I understand, my God, when I hear Your Scripture saying, In the beginning God made heaven and earth, and the earth was invisible and without form, and darkness was over the deep, and not mentioning what day You created them. This is what I understand. It is because of the heaven of heavens — that intelligent heaven, whose intelligences know everything at once, not in part, not darkly, not through a glass, but as a whole, plainly, face to face; not this thing now and that thing next, but, as I said, knowing everything at once, without any succession of times — and because of the earth invisible and without form, which is also without any succession of times, the succession that gives us "this thing now, that thing next", since where there is no form there is no distinction of things. It is on account of these two, then, a primal formed thing and a primal formless thing — the one heaven, but the heaven of heaven; the other earth, but the earth invisible and without form — it is because of these two that I understand Your Scripture to have said, without mentioning days, In the beginning God created heaven and earth. For it immediately added which earth it was talking about; and also, in that the firmament is recorded as created on the second day and called heaven, it conveys to us which heaven it had spoken of before, without mentioning days.

What a wondrous depth Your words have! Their surface is in front of us, inviting little children; and yet they are a wondrous depth, my God, a wondrous depth! It is awesome to look into: an awe of honour and a trembling of love. Its enemies I hate violently; if only You would kill them with Your two-edged sword, so that they might stop being enemies to it — for that is the way I love to see them killed to themselves, that they may live to You. But there are others who are not fault-finders but admirers of the book of Genesis. "The Spirit of God," they say, "who wrote these things through his servant Moses, would not have wanted these words understood in that way. He would not have wanted it understood as you say, but otherwise, as we say." To them, with You, God of all, as judge, I answer this.

"Will you say it is false, what truth tells me with a strong voice in my inner ear about the eternity of the creator: that his substance is in no way changed by time, and his will is not separate from his substance? So that he does not will one thing now and another next, but once and at once and always wills everything that he wills; not again and again, and not now this and now that; and does not afterwards will what he did not will before, or stop willing what he willed before, because such a will is changeable, and nothing changeable is eternal — and our God is eternal. And again, what he tells me in my inner ear: the expectation of things to come becomes sight when they have come, and this same sight becomes memory when they are past. Now all thought that varies like this is changeable; and nothing changeable is eternal — and our God is eternal." These things I infer and put together, and find that my God, the eternal God, has not made any creature by any new act of will, and that his knowledge admits nothing transitory. "What will you say to that, objectors? Are these things false?" "No," they say. "What then? Is it false that every nature already formed, and every matter capable of form, exists only from him who is supremely good, because he supremely is?" "We do not deny that either," they say. "What then? Do you deny that there is a certain lofty creature, holding to the true and truly eternal God with so chaste a love that although it is not co-eternal with him it is still not detached from him, and does not dissolve into the variety and succession of times, but rests in the truest contemplation of him alone?" Because You, God, show Yourself to the man who loves You as much as You command, and are enough for him; and so he does not turn away from You, or towards himself. This is the house of God, not made of earthly stuff, and not of any heavenly bulk either, but spiritual, and a partaker in Your eternity, because it never lapses, for ever. For You have made it fast for ever and ever; You have given it a law which it shall not pass. And yet it is not co-eternal with You, God, because it is not without a beginning: it was made.
