Book Twelve: Heaven and Earth

(Part 2 of 3)

For although we find no time before it, since wisdom was created before all things — not that wisdom which is altogether equal and co-eternal with You, our God, its Father, and by which all things were created, and in which, as the beginning, You created heaven and earth, but the wisdom that is created, that is, the intelligent nature which by contemplating the light is itself light. For this too, though created, is called wisdom. And as much difference as there is between the light that lights and the light that is lit, so much there is between the wisdom that creates and the wisdom that is created; as between the righteousness that makes righteous and the righteousness that is made by being justified. For we too are called Your righteousness; a certain servant of Yours says so: That we might be made the righteousness of God in him. So since a certain created wisdom was created before all things — the rational and intelligent mind of that chaste city of Yours, our mother which is above and is free and eternal in the heavens (in what heavens, if not in those that praise You, the heaven of heavens? Because this too is the heaven of heavens belonging to the Lord) — although we find no time before it, since what was created before all things also comes before the creature of time, still the eternity of the creator himself is before it, from whom, being created, it took its beginning: not a beginning of time, since time did not exist yet, but of its creation.

So it is from You, our God, in such a way as to be altogether other than You, and not the selfsame. Because although we find no time before it, and not even in it, since it is always fit to look on Your face and is never drawn away from it, and so is not varied by any change — still there is in it a liability to change, from which it would grow dark and cold, except that by a strong love holding close to You, like perpetual noon, it shines and glows from You. House of light and delight! I have loved your beauty, and the place where the glory of my Lord lives, your builder and owner. Let my wandering sigh after you; and I say to him who made you, let him take possession of me too, in you, since he made me as well. I have gone astray like a lost sheep; and yet on the shoulders of my shepherd, your builder, I hope to be carried back to you.

"What do you say to me, objectors, whom I was addressing, who nevertheless believe Moses to have been the holy servant of God and his books the oracles of the Holy Spirit? Is this house of God not eternal in the heavens, in its own measure, though not co-eternal with God — when you look for changes of times in it in vain, because you will not find them? For that to which it is always good to hold fast to God surpasses all extension and all revolving periods of time." "It is," they say. "Then out of everything my heart cried out to my God, when inwardly it heard the voice of his praise — what part of it do you say is false? Is it that the matter was without form, in which, because there was no form, there was no order? But where there was no order there could be no succession of times; and yet this 'almost nothing', in so far as it was not altogether nothing, certainly came from him from whom whatever is comes, in whatever degree it is." "That too," they say, "we do not deny."

With these people I now talk a little in Your presence, my God, who grant that all these things are true which Your truth whispers to my soul. As for those who deny them, let them bark and deafen themselves as much as they like; I shall try to persuade them to be quiet and to open a way in themselves for Your word. And if they refuse and push me away, I beg You, my God, do not be silent to me. Speak truly in my heart, for only You speak that way. And I shall leave them alone, blowing on the dust outside and raising it into their own eyes; and I shall go into my room and sing a song of loves to You there, groaning with groans too deep for words on my journey, and remembering Jerusalem, with my heart lifted up towards it: Jerusalem my country, Jerusalem my mother, and Yourself who rule over it, its enlightener, father, guardian, husband, pure and strong delight and solid joy and all good things beyond words, and all at once, because You are the one sovereign and true good. And I shall not be turned away until You gather everything that I am out of this scattered and disordered state into the peace of that dearest mother of ours, where the first fruits of my spirit already are, and from which I am assured of these things; and until You shape and confirm it for ever, my God, my mercy.

But those who do not call all these truths false, who honour Your holy Scripture as set out by holy Moses, putting it, as we do, at the summit of authority to be followed, and yet contradict me on some point — to them I answer this. Judge for Yourself, our God, between my confessions and these men's contradictions.

For they say, "Even if these things are true, Moses did not mean those two when, by revelation of the Spirit, he said, In the beginning God created heaven and earth. He did not mean by the word heaven that spiritual or intelligent creature which always looks on the face of God, or by the word earth that formless matter." "What then?" "That man of God," they say, "meant what we say; this is what he was declaring by those words." "What?" "By the name of heaven and earth," they say, "he wanted first to signify, in a general and compressed way, all this visible world, so as afterwards, by listing the several days, to lay out in detail and piece by piece all the things which the Holy Spirit was pleased to announce this way. For the people he was speaking to were so rough and unspiritual that he thought them fit to be trusted only with the knowledge of God's visible works." They do agree, however, that the words earth invisible and without form, and that dark deep, out of which it is afterwards shown that all these visible things we know were made and arranged during those days, may not unreasonably be understood of this formless first matter.

But what if somebody else says that this same formlessness and confusion of matter was first conveyed under the name of heaven and earth for this reason: that out of it this visible world was created and completed, with all the natures that appear most obviously in it, and that this world is often called by the name of heaven and earth? And what if another says that invisible and visible nature is not inappropriately called heaven and earth, and that the whole creation which God made in his wisdom, that is, in the beginning, was covered by those two words — but that, since all things are made not of the substance of God but out of nothing (because they are not what God is, and there is a changeable nature in all of them, whether they endure, as the eternal house of God does, or are changed, as the soul and body of man are), therefore the common matter of all things visible and invisible, as yet unformed though capable of form, out of which both heaven and earth were to be created (that is, the invisible and the visible creature, once formed), was given the same names as the earth invisible and without form and the darkness upon the deep — but with this distinction, that by the earth invisible and without form is understood bodily matter before it has been qualified by any form, and by the darkness upon the deep, spiritual matter, before it underwent any restraint on its unlimited fluidity or received any light from wisdom?

There is still room for a man to say, if he likes, that the already completed and formed natures, visible and invisible, are not what is meant by the name of heaven and earth when we read, In the beginning God made heaven and earth; but that the still unformed beginning of things, the stuff apt to receive form and making, was called by those names, because it contained confusedly, not yet distinguished by their qualities and forms, all those things which, now sorted into order, are called heaven and earth, the one being the spiritual and the other the bodily creation.

Having heard and carefully considered all this, I shall not quarrel over words; that is good for nothing but the ruin of the hearers. But the law is good for building up, if a man uses it lawfully, since its end is love out of a pure heart and a good conscience and unfeigned faith. And our master knew well which two commandments he hung all the law and the prophets on. So what harm does it do me, my God, light of my eyes in secret, while I zealously confess these things — since different things may be understood under these words which are nevertheless all true — what harm, I say, does it do me if I think the writer meant something other than somebody else thinks he meant? All of us readers are certainly trying to trace out and understand the meaning of the man we are reading; and since we believe he speaks the truth, we do not dare to imagine he said anything we ourselves know or think to be false. So while every man tries to understand in the holy Scriptures the same thing the writer understood, what harm is there if a man understands something You, the light of all truth-speaking minds, show him to be true, even though the man he is reading did not understand this — seeing that he too understood a truth, though not this truth?

For it is true, Lord, that You made heaven and earth. And it is true too that the beginning is Your wisdom, in which You create everything. And true again that this visible world has for its greater part the heaven and the earth, which briefly take in all made and created natures. And true too that whatever is changeable gives us to understand a certain lack of form, by which it receives a form, or is changed, or turned. It is true that whatever holds so fast to the unchangeable form that although it is liable to change it is never changed, is subject to no times. It is true that the formlessness which is almost nothing cannot be subject to the alteration of times. It is true that the thing something is made out of may, by a certain manner of speaking, be called by the name of the thing made out of it; so that the formlessness out of which heaven and earth were made might be called heaven and earth. It is true that of things having form, none is nearer to having no form than the earth and the deep. It is true that not only every created and formed thing but everything capable of being created and formed was made by You, from whom all things come. It is true that whatever is formed out of what had no form was unformed before it was formed.

Out of these truths, which are not doubted by those whose inward eye You have enabled to see such things, and who unshakeably believe Your servant Moses to have spoken in the Spirit of truth — out of all of these, then, one is taken by the man who says, In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth, meaning "in his Word co-eternal with himself, God made the intelligible and the sensible, or the spiritual and the bodily creature." Another is taken by the man who says, In the beginning God made heaven and earth, meaning "in his Word co-eternal with himself, God made the whole bulk of this bodily world, together with all the visible and known creatures it contains." Another by the man who says, In the beginning God made heaven and earth, meaning "in his Word co-eternal with himself, God made the formless matter of creatures spiritual and bodily." Another by the man who says, In the beginning God created heaven and earth, meaning "in his Word co-eternal with himself, God created the formless matter of the bodily creature, in which heaven and earth still lay confused, which, now distinguished and formed, we see today in the bulk of this world." Another by the man who says, In the beginning God made heaven and earth, meaning "at the very beginning of creating and working, God made that formless matter, confusedly containing in itself both heaven and earth; out of which, being formed, they now stand out and are visible, with everything in them."

And as for understanding the words that follow, out of all those truths one man chooses this for himself, who says, But the earth was invisible and without form, and darkness was upon the deep, meaning "the bodily thing God made was as yet a formless matter of bodily things, without order and without light." Another says, The earth was invisible and without form, and darkness was upon the deep, meaning "this whole thing, which is called heaven and earth, was still a formless and dark matter, out of which the bodily heaven and the bodily earth were to be made, with all the things in them that our bodily senses know." Another says, The earth was invisible and without form, and darkness was upon the deep, meaning "this whole thing, which is called heaven and earth, was still a formless and dark matter, out of which was to be made both that intelligible heaven, elsewhere called the heaven of heavens, and the earth, that is, the whole bodily nature, under which name this bodily sky is included as well; in a word, out of which every visible and invisible creature was to be created." Another says, of The earth was invisible and without form, and darkness was upon the deep, that "Scripture did not call that formlessness by the name of heaven and earth; the formlessness already existed, and it is what he called the earth invisible and without form, and the darkness upon the deep; and he had said before that God made heaven and earth, namely the spiritual and the bodily creature." Another says, The earth was invisible and without form, and darkness was upon the deep, meaning "there already was a certain formless matter, of which Scripture said before that God made heaven and earth, namely the whole bodily bulk of the world, divided into two great parts, upper and lower, with all the common and familiar creatures in them."

Suppose somebody tried to argue against these last two opinions like this. "If you will not allow that this formlessness of matter seems to be called by the name of heaven and earth, then there was something God had not made, out of which to make heaven and earth; for Scripture has not told us that God made this matter, unless we understand it to be meant by the name of heaven and earth, or of earth alone, when it says, In the beginning God made the heaven and earth. So that in what follows, and the earth was invisible and without form, although it pleased him to call the formless matter that, we are to understand no other matter than the one God made, of which it is written above, God made heaven and earth." The supporters of either of those two last opinions will answer, on hearing this: "We do not deny that this formless matter was created by God, the God from whom all things come, and all very good. Just as we say that what is created and formed is a greater good, so we admit that what is made capable of creation and form is a lesser good, but good all the same. What we say is that Scripture has not written down that God made this formlessness, just as it has not written down many other things — the cherubim and seraphim, and the ones the apostle distinctly speaks of, thrones, dominions, principalities, powers. And that God made all these is perfectly obvious. Or if in the words he made heaven and earth everything is included, what shall we say of the waters over which the Spirit of God moved? If they are included in the word earth, then how can formless matter be meant by that name of earth, when we can see how beautiful the waters are? Or if it is taken that way, why is it written that the firmament was made out of that same formlessness and called heaven, and not written that the waters were made? For the waters do not stay formless and invisible, since we watch them flowing so beautifully. But if they received that beauty when God said, Let the waters under the firmament be gathered together, so that the gathering itself is their forming, what is to be said about the waters above the firmament? If they were formless they would not have deserved so honourable a place, and it is not written by what word they were formed. So if Genesis is silent about God's making of something which nevertheless neither sound faith nor well-grounded understanding doubts that God did make; and if no sober teaching will dare to claim these waters are co-eternal with God on the grounds that we find them mentioned in the book of Genesis without finding when they were created — why then, since truth teaches us, should we not understand that formless matter, which this Scripture calls the earth invisible and without form and the dark deep, to have been created by God out of nothing, and therefore not co-eternal with him, even though this history has left out when it was created?"

Having heard and taken in all this, as far as my weak capacity allows — and I confess it to You, Lord, who know it — I see that two sorts of disagreement can arise when something is put into words by truthful reporters. One concerns the truth of the things; the other concerns the meaning of the reporter. For we ask one question about the making of the creation, namely what is true; and quite another about what Moses, that excellent minister of Your faith, wanted his reader and hearer to understand by those words. As for the first sort, away with everyone who imagines he knows as a truth something that is false; and as for the second, away with everyone too who imagines Moses wrote things that are false. But let me be united in You, Lord, with the others, and take delight in You with those who feed on Your truth, in the largeness of love; and let us come together to the words of Your book and look in them for Your meaning, through the meaning of Your servant, by whose pen You handed them out.

But which of us, among the many truths that occur to enquirers in these words as they are understood in different ways, will so hit on that one meaning as to be able to say, "This is what Moses thought", and "This is what he wanted understood in that history", with the same confidence as he would say, "This is true", whether Moses thought it or not? For look, my God: I, Your servant, who in this book have vowed a sacrifice of confession to You, and pray that by Your mercy I may pay my vows to You — can I, with the same confidence with which I say that in Your unchangeable Word You created all things visible and invisible, also say that Moses meant nothing but this when he wrote, In the beginning God made heaven and earth? No. Because I do not see in his mind that he was thinking of this when he wrote these things, in the way I do see it to be certain in Your truth. He might have had his thoughts on God's beginning to create when he said in the beginning; and by heaven and earth in this place he might have meant no formed and completed nature, whether spiritual or bodily, but both of them just begun and still formless. For I can see that whichever of the two had been said, it might have been said truly; but which of the two he was thinking of in these words I cannot see. Although whether it was one of these, or some other sense I have not mentioned here, that so great a man saw in his mind when he uttered these words, I have no doubt that he saw it truly and expressed it fittingly.
