Book Twelve: Heaven and Earth

(Part 3 of 3)

So let nobody harass me by saying, "Moses did not think what you say but what I say." For if he asked me, "How do you know that Moses thought what you infer from his words?" I ought to take it in good part and would answer, perhaps, as I have above, or at greater length if he would not give way. But when he says, "Moses did not mean what you say but what I say," and yet does not deny that what each of us says may both be true — then, my God, life of the poor, in whose heart there is no contradiction, pour a softening dew into my heart, so that I may patiently put up with people who say this to me: not because they have a divine Spirit and have seen in the heart of Your servant what they say, but because they are proud, not knowing Moses' opinion but loving their own, not because it is the truth but because it is theirs. Otherwise they would love another true opinion just as much, as I love what they say when they say something true — not because it is theirs but because it is true, and on that very ground not theirs, because it is true. But if they love it because it is true, then it is both theirs and mine, being common to all lovers of truth. But when they insist that Moses did not mean what I say but what they say, that I do not like and do not love. Even if it were so, their rashness belongs not to knowledge but to over-boldness, and its parent was not insight but vanity.

And that, Lord, is why Your judgements are terrible: seeing that Your truth is neither mine nor his nor anybody else's, but belongs to all of us, whom You call publicly to share in it, warning us terribly not to treat it as our private property, in case we are deprived of it. For whoever claims as his own what You offer to everyone to enjoy, and wants what belongs to all to be his, is driven out of what is common into what is his own — that is, out of truth into a lie. For whoever speaks a lie speaks it out of his own.

Listen, God, best of judges; truth itself, listen to what I shall say to this objector. Listen, for I speak in front of You and in front of my brothers, who use Your law lawfully to the end of love. Listen and see, if it pleases You, what I shall say to him. This is the brotherly and peaceable word I give him back: "If we both see that what you say is true, and both see that what I say is true, then where, I ask you, do we see it? Not I in you, and not you in me, but both of us in the unchangeable truth itself, which is above our souls." So since we are not fighting over the light of the Lord God itself, why are we fighting over the thoughts of our neighbour, which we cannot see the way the unchangeable truth is seen? For if Moses himself appeared to us and said, "This is what I meant," we still would not see it, but would believe it. So let us not be puffed up, one against another, beyond what is written. Let us love the Lord our God with all our heart and all our soul and all our mind, and our neighbour as ourselves. And unless we believe that Moses meant, in whatever he did mean in those books, to serve these two commandments of love, we shall make God a liar by imagining our fellow servant's mind to be other than what he has taught us. See now how foolish it is, out of such an abundance of perfectly true meanings as can be drawn out of those words, to insist rashly on which of them Moses chiefly meant, and by destructive quarrelling to offend against love itself, for whose sake he said everything he said, and whose words we are setting out to expound.

And yet I, my God, lifter-up of my humility and rest of my labour, who hear my confessions and forgive my sins — since You command me to love my neighbour as myself, I cannot believe that You gave a smaller gift to Moses Your faithful servant than I would wish or want You to have given me, had I been born when he was and had You set me in that office, so that through the service of my heart and my tongue those books might be given out which for so long afterwards were to profit all nations, and from such a height of authority were to overtop everything said by false and proud teachings. Truly, if I had then been Moses — for we all come from the same lump, and what is man, except that You are mindful of him? — if I had then been what he was, and been commanded by You to write the book of Genesis, I would have wanted such a power of expression and such a style given to me that those who cannot yet understand how God creates would not reject what I said as beyond them; and those who had got that far would find that whatever true opinion they had reached by thinking was not left out of those few words of Your servant; and that if another man had discovered another truth by the light of truth, that too should not fail to be discoverable in the same words.

For just as a spring within a narrow compass is more abundant, and supplies a flow for more streams over wider spaces, than any one of those streams which after a long distance is drawn off from the same spring, so the account given by that steward of Yours, which was to benefit many people who would discuss it, overflows out of a narrow allowance of language into streams of the clearest truth, from which every man may draw for himself such truth as he can on these subjects — one man one truth, another another, by longer roundabout stretches of talk.

For some people, when they read or hear these words, imagine that God, like a man or some mass endowed with unlimited power, by some new and sudden decision created heaven and earth outside himself, at a certain distance, as it were: two great bodies, above and below, in which everything was to be contained. And when they hear, God said, Let it be made, and it was made, they imagine words that began and ended, sounding in time and passing away, after whose departure the thing that had been commanded came into being; and whatever else of the sort their familiarity with the material world would suggest. In these people, still small children and unspiritual, while their weakness is carried along by this humble kind of speech as in a mother's arms, faith is wholesomely built up, by which they hold it certain that God made all the natures their eye sees around them in such admirable variety. And if anyone despises these words as too simple, and with a proud weakness stretches himself out beyond the sheltering nest, he will, alas, fall badly. Have pity, Lord God, in case passers-by trample the unfledged bird; and send Your angel to put it back in the nest, so that it may live until it can fly.

But there are others for whom these words are no longer a nest but a deep shady orchard; and they see the fruit hidden in it, and fly joyfully round and seek it out with cheerful calls and pluck it. For in reading or hearing these words they see that all times past and to come are surpassed by Your eternal and stable remaining; and yet that there is no creature formed in time that You did not make. Whose will, because it is the same as what You are, made everything, not by any change of will and not by a will that did not exist before; and these things were not made out of Yourself, in Your own likeness, which is the form of all things, but out of nothing: a formless unlikeness, which was to be formed by Your likeness, returning to Your unity according to its appointed capacity, so far as is given to each thing in its kind, and might all be made very good — whether they stay around You, or, removed by degrees in time and place, make or undergo the beautiful variations of the universe. These things they see and rejoice at, in the small degree they can here, in the light of Your truth.

Another man bends his mind on the words, In the beginning God made heaven and earth, and sees in them wisdom, which is the beginning because it also speaks to us. Another likewise bends his mind on the same words and by beginning understands the start of created things: in the beginning he made, as if it said, he first made. And among those who understand in the beginning to mean "in Your wisdom You created heaven and earth", one believes that the matter out of which heaven and earth were to be created is what is called heaven and earth there; another that they are natures already formed and distinguished; another that one is a formed nature, and a spiritual one, under the name heaven, and the other a formless bodily matter under the name earth. And those again who take the names heaven and earth to mean matter still formless, out of which heaven and earth were to be formed, do not all understand it the same way either: one takes it as the matter out of which both the intelligible and the sensible creation were to be completed; another only as the matter out of which this sensible bodily mass was to be made, holding in its vast lap these visible and ordinary natures. Nor do those who believe that creatures already ordered and arranged are what is called heaven and earth here all understand the same thing: one takes it as both the invisible and the visible, the other as the visible only, in which we see this bright sky and dark earth with the things they contain.

But a man who understands in the beginning he made in no other sense than "at first he made" can only truly understand heaven and earth as the matter of heaven and earth, that is, as the whole intelligible and bodily creation. For if he wanted to understand it as the universe already formed, it may fairly be asked of him, "If God made this first, what did he make afterwards?" And after the universe he will find nothing, whereupon he must hear another question against his will: "How did God make this first, if there was nothing after it?" But when he says that God first made matter formless and then formed it, there is nothing absurd about it, so long as he is qualified to tell what comes before by eternity, what by time, what by choice, and what in origin. By eternity, as God is before all things; by time, as the flower is before the fruit; by choice, as the fruit is before the flower; by origin, as the sound is before the tune.

Of these four, the first and last are understood with extreme difficulty, the two in the middle easily. For it is a rare and too lofty a vision to see Your eternity, Lord, unchangeably making changeable things, and so being before them. And who again is sharp-sighted enough to make out without great trouble how the sound is therefore before the tune? Because a tune is a formed sound; and a thing not formed can exist, whereas what does not exist cannot be formed. So the matter is before the thing made, and not because it makes the thing, seeing it is itself rather made; and it is not before by any interval of time. For we do not first in time utter formless sounds without singing and then afterwards adapt and shape them into the form of a melody, as wood or silver is shaped into a chest or a vessel. Such materials do also come before, in time, the forms of the things made out of them; but in singing it is not so, for when a song is sung its sound is heard, and there is not first a formless sound afterwards formed into a melody. For every sound passes away as soon as it is made, and you cannot find anything to call back and compose by art. So the melody is concentrated in its sound, and that sound of it is its matter. And this is formed so as to be a tune; and therefore, as I said, the matter of the sound is before the form of the tune — not before by any power it has to make the tune, for a sound is in no way the craftsman of the tune, but something bodily, subjected to the soul that sings, to make a tune out of. And it is not first in time, since it is given out along with the tune. And it is not first in choice, since a sound is not better than a tune, a tune being not only a sound but a beautiful sound. But it is first in origin, because a tune does not receive form so as to become a sound; a sound receives a form so as to become a tune.

By this example let anyone who can understand how the matter of things was made first and called heaven and earth, because heaven and earth were made out of it. And yet it was not made first in time, because it is the forms of things that give rise to time; and that matter was formless, whereas now it is, in time, an object of the senses, together with its form. And yet nothing can be said about that matter except as though it came earlier in time, whereas in value it is last, since formed things are superior to formless ones; and it is preceded by the eternity of the creator, so that there might be something out of nothing, out of which something might be created.

In this diversity of true opinions, let truth herself produce concord. And may our God have mercy on us, so that we may use the law lawfully, the end of the commandment being pure love. And if anyone asks me by this rule, "Which of these was Your servant Moses' meaning?" — this would not be the language of my confessions if I did not confess to You, "I do not know." And yet I do know that those senses are true, except for the unspiritual ones, about which I have said what seemed necessary. And even those hopeful little children who think that way have this benefit, that the words of Your book do not frighten them, delivering high things humbly, and a copious meaning in few words. And all of us who, I confess, see and express the truth delivered in those words, let us love one another, and love together You our God, the fountain of truth, if it is truth we are thirsty for and not empty things. And let us so honour this servant of Yours, the steward of this Scripture, full of Your Spirit, as to believe that when by Your revelation he wrote these things, he intended the meaning that stands out among them for light of truth and for fruitfulness of profit.

So when one man says, "Moses meant what I mean", and another, "No, he meant what I mean", I think I speak more reverently when I say, "Why not both, if both are true?" And if there is a third or a fourth — indeed if anyone sees any other truth in those words — why may he not be believed to have seen all of them, this man through whom the one God tuned the holy Scriptures to the understanding of many, who would see in them things that were true but different? For I certainly say this, and I say it fearlessly from my heart: if I were to write anything that was to have supreme authority, I would rather write in such a way that whatever truth anyone could grasp about these matters could be conveyed by my words, than set down one meaning of my own so clearly as to exclude all the rest, which, not being false, could not offend me. So I shall not be so rash, my God, as not to believe that You granted as much to that great man. Without doubt, when he wrote those words, he perceived and had in mind whatever truth we have been able to find in them — and whatever we have not been able to find, and are still not able to, but which may be found in them.

Finally, Lord, who are God and not flesh and blood: if the man saw less, could anything be hidden from Your good Spirit, who shall lead me into the land of uprightness — anything that You Yourself were going to reveal by those words to readers in times to come, even though the man through whom they were spoken had in mind, perhaps among many true meanings, some one of them? And if that is how it is, let the meaning he had in mind be the highest of all. But to us, Lord, either reveal that same meaning, or any other true one You please; so that whether You show us the same thing You showed Your servant, or something else by way of those words, You may feed us and error may not deceive us. See, Lord my God, how much we have written on a few words — how much! What strength of ours, what ages would be enough for all Your books at this rate? So allow me to confess to You more briefly in them, and to choose some one true, certain and good sense that You inspire in me, even where many may occur — this being the law of my confession: that if I should say what Your minister intended, that is right and best, since that is what I should aim at; and if I should not manage it, that I should still say what Your truth willed to tell me by his words, since it was Your truth that revealed to him too what it willed.
