Book Thirteen: The Days of Creation

(Part 2 of 4)

I too say it, my God: where are You? See where You are! In You I breathe a little, when I pour out my soul by myself in the voice of joy and praise, the sound of a man keeping festival. And then it grows sad again, because it slips back and becomes a deep — or rather perceives that it is still a deep. My faith speaks to it, the faith You have lit to light my feet in the night: why are you sad, my soul, and why do you trouble me? Hope in the Lord; his word is a lamp to your feet. Hope and endure, until the night is over — the mother of the wicked, the anger of the Lord — of which we too were once children, who were once darkness, and whose leavings we still carry about in our body, dead because of sin; until the day breaks and the shadows run away. Hope in the Lord: in the morning I shall stand in Your presence and contemplate You; I shall confess to You for ever. In the morning I shall stand in Your presence and see the health of my face, my God, who will also bring our mortal bodies to life by the Spirit who lives in us, because in mercy he has been borne over our inner dark and floating deep. From him we have received a down payment on this pilgrimage, that we should now be light, while we are saved by hope, and are children of the light and children of the day, and not children of the night or of the darkness — which nevertheless we once were. Between them and us, in this uncertainty of human knowledge, You alone divide, You who test our hearts and call the light day and the darkness night. For who tells us apart but You? And what do we have that we have not received from You? Out of the same lump vessels are made for honour, and others out of it for dishonour.

And who except You, our God, made for us that firmament of authority over us in Your divine Scripture? For it is said, The sky shall be folded up like a scroll; and now it is stretched over us like a skin. For Your divine Scripture has a higher authority since the mortals through whom You gave it out to us underwent their mortality. And You know, Lord, You know how You clothed men in skins when they became mortal through sin. So You have stretched out the firmament of Your book like a skin — Your harmonising words, which You spread over us by the ministry of mortal men. For it was by their very deaths that the solid firmament of authority in Your words, as set out by them, was more loftily stretched over everyone under it; while they were alive here it was not stretched so high. You had not yet spread the heavens out like a skin; You had not yet enlarged in every direction the glory of their deaths.

Let us look, Lord, at the heavens, the work of Your fingers; clear from our eyes the cloud You have spread beneath them. There is Your testimony, which gives wisdom to little ones; complete Your praise, my God, out of the mouths of babies and infants. For we know no other books that so destroy pride, that so destroy the enemy and the defender who resists Your reconciling by defending his own sins. I know of no other words so pure, Lord, that so persuade me to confess, and make my neck pliant to Your yoke, and invite me to serve You for nothing. Let me understand them, good Father; grant this to me, who am set under them, since it was for those set under them that You established them.

There are other waters above this firmament, immortal, I believe, and separated from earthly corruption. Let them praise Your name — let them praise You, the people above the heavens, Your angels, who have no need to gaze up at this firmament or to learn Your Word by reading. For they always look on Your face, and there they read, without any syllables in time, what Your eternal will wills. They read, they choose, they love. They are always reading, and what they read never passes away; for by choosing and by loving they read the very unchangeableness of Your counsel. Their book is never closed, their scroll never rolled up, since You Yourself are this to them, and are so eternally; because You have set them above this firmament, which You have firmly settled over the weakness of the people below, where they might gaze up and learn Your mercy, which announces in time You who made times. For Your mercy, Lord, is in the heavens, and Your truth reaches to the clouds. The clouds pass away, but the sky remains. The preachers of Your word pass out of this life into another; but Your Scripture is spread out over the peoples to the end of the world. And yet heaven and earth also shall pass away, but Your words shall not pass away. Because the scroll shall be rolled up, and the grass it was spread over shall pass away with its beauty; but Your Word remains for ever, which now appears to us under the dark image of the clouds, and through the glass of the heavens, and not as it is. Because we too, though we are the beloved of Your Son, it has not yet appeared what we shall be. He looks through the lattice of our flesh, and he spoke tenderly to us, and set us alight, and we ran after his scent. But when he appears, then we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. As he is, Lord, will our sight be.

For only You know altogether as You are — You who are unchangeably, and know unchangeably, and will unchangeably. And Your being knows and wills unchangeably; and Your knowing is and wills unchangeably; and Your willing is and knows unchangeably. And it does not seem right in Your eyes that as the unchangeable light knows itself, so it should be known by the thing that is lit and changeable. And so my soul is like a land where there is no water, because just as it cannot light itself by itself, so it cannot satisfy itself by itself. For so is the fountain of life with You, just as in Your light we shall see light.

Who gathered the embittered into one society? For they all have one end, a temporary and earthly happiness, and everything they do is to get it, though they toss up and down with a countless variety of cares. Who but You, Lord, said, Let the waters be gathered together into one place, and let the dry land appear, which thirsts for You? For the sea is Yours, and You made it, and Your hands prepared the dry land. And it is not the bitterness of men's wills but the gathering of the waters that is called sea; for You hold back the wicked desires of men's souls and set their limits, how far they may be allowed to go, so that their waves break against each other; and so You make it a sea, by the order of Your rule over all things.

But the souls that thirst for You and appear before You, separated by other boundaries from the society of the sea, You water with a sweet spring, so that the earth may bring forth her fruit; and at Your command, Lord God, our soul may bud with works of mercy after their kind, loving our neighbour in the relief of his bodily needs, and having seed in itself after its likeness, when out of a feeling of our own weakness we have compassion enough to relieve the needy, helping them as we would want to be helped if we were in the same need. And not only in easy things, like a plant yielding seed, but in the protection of our help, with our best strength, like a tree yielding fruit: that is, doing good by rescuing a man who suffers wrong out of the hand of the powerful, and giving him the shelter of protection by the strength of a just judgement.

So, Lord, so, I beg You, let there spring up, as You do and as You give cheerfulness and ability — let truth spring out of the earth, and righteousness look down from heaven, and let there be lights in the firmament. Let us break our bread for the hungry and bring the homeless poor into our house. Let us clothe the naked, and not despise those of our own flesh. And when these fruits have sprung up out of the earth, see that it is good; and let our temporary light break out; and let us, arriving from this lower fruitfulness of action at the delight of contemplation, and taking hold of the Word of life above, appear like lights in the world, holding fast to the firmament of Your Scripture. For there You teach us to divide between things of the mind and things of the senses, as between day and night; or between souls given to things of the mind and souls given to things of the senses. So that now it is not only You in the secret of Your judgement, as before the firmament was made, who divide between the light and the darkness, but Your spiritual children too, set and ranked in the same firmament, now that Your grace is laid open throughout the world, may give light on the earth and divide between the day and the night, and be for signs of the times: that old things have passed away, and all things have become new; that our salvation is nearer than when we first believed; that the night is far gone and the day is at hand; and that You will crown Your year with blessing, sending the labourers of Your goodness into Your harvest, in whose sowing others have laboured, and sending them also into another field whose harvest shall be at the end. So You grant the prayers of the man who asks, and bless the years of the just; but You are the same, and in Your years, which do not run out, You prepare a barn for our passing years.

For by an eternal counsel You bestow heavenly blessings on the earth in their proper seasons. To one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, like the greater light, for those who delight in the light of clear truth, as it were to rule the day. To another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit, like the lesser light; to another faith; to another the gift of healing; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another the discerning of spirits; to another different kinds of tongues. And all these are like stars. For all these the one and the same Spirit works, giving to each man his own as he wills, and making stars appear plainly, for the profit of all. But the word of knowledge, which contains all the sacraments, which vary in their seasons like the moon, and those other notices of gifts which are reckoned up in order like stars — in so far as they fall short of that brightness of wisdom which gladdens the day I spoke of, they are only for the ruling of the night. For they are necessary to the kind of people that even Your most prudent servant could not speak to as spiritual but only as unspiritual: he who speaks wisdom among those who are grown up. But the natural man, like a baby in Christ fed on milk until he is strong enough for solid food and his eye is able to look at the sun, let him not live in a night forsaken by all light, but be content with the light of the moon and the stars. So You speak to us, our all-wise God, in Your book, Your firmament, so that we may make everything out in an admirable contemplation, though as yet in signs and in times and in days and in years.

But first, wash yourselves, be clean; put away evil from your souls and from before my eyes, so that the dry land may appear. Learn to do good, judge for the fatherless, plead for the widow, so that the earth may bring forth green plants for food, and the tree bearing fruit; and come, let us reason together, says the Lord, so that there may be lights in the firmament of heaven and they may shine on the earth.

That rich man asked the good master what he should do to gain eternal life. Let the good master tell him — whom he took for no more than a man, but he is good because he is God — let him tell him that if he wants to enter into life he must keep the commandments; let him put away from himself the bitterness of malice and wickedness; not kill, not commit adultery, not steal, not bear false witness; so that the dry land may appear and bring forth the honouring of father and mother and the love of our neighbour. All these, he says, I have kept. Then where do so many thorns come from, if the earth is fruitful? Go and root up the spreading thickets of greed; sell what you have, and be filled with fruit by giving to the poor, and you shall have treasure in heaven; and follow the Lord if you want to be perfect, joining those among whom he speaks wisdom, who knows what to allot to the day and to the night — so that you too may know it, and so that for you there may be lights in the firmament of heaven, which there will not be unless your heart is there; and that will not be either, unless your treasure is there, as you have heard from the good master. But that barren earth was grieved, and the thorns choked the word.

But you, chosen generation, you weak things of the world, who have left everything to follow the Lord: go after him and confound the mighty; go after him, beautiful feet, and shine in the firmament, so that the heavens may declare his glory, dividing between the light of the mature — though not like the angels — and the darkness of the little ones, who are nevertheless not despised. Shine over the earth; and let the day, lit by the sun, pour out to the day the speech of wisdom; and let the night, shining with the moon, show to the night the word of knowledge. The moon and the stars shine for the night, and the night does not blot them out, since they give it what light it has. For when God said, as it were, Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven, there came suddenly a sound from heaven, like a rushing mighty wind, and there appeared divided tongues as of fire, and one sat on each of them. And lights were made in the firmament of heaven, holding the word of life. Run everywhere, holy fires, beautiful fires; for you are the light of the world, and you are not put under a bucket. He whom you hold fast to is lifted high, and has lifted you high. Run to and fro, and be known to all nations.

Let the sea also conceive and bring forth your works; and let the waters bring forth the moving creature that has life. For you, separating the precious from the worthless, are made the mouth of God, by whom he says, Let the waters bring forth — not the living creature the earth brings forth, but the moving creature that has life, and the birds that fly above the earth. For Your sacraments, God, by the ministry of Your holy ones, have moved among the waves of the world's temptations, to make the Gentiles holy in Your name, in Your baptism. And in the middle of all this many great wonders were worked, like great whales; and the voices of Your messengers flying above the earth, in the open firmament of Your book, which was set over them as the authority they were to fly under, wherever they went. For there is no speech or language where their voice is not heard, since their sound has gone through all the earth and their words to the end of the world, because You, Lord, multiplied them by blessing them.

Am I speaking untruly, or mixing things up and confusing them, and failing to distinguish between the clear knowledge of these things in the firmament of heaven and the material works in the wavy sea and under the firmament of heaven? For of those things whose knowledge is substantial and defined, without any increase by generation — lights of wisdom and knowledge, as it were — even of those the material workings are many and various; and one thing growing out of another, they are multiplied by Your blessing, God, who have refreshed the fastidiousness of mortal senses, so that one thing in the understanding of our mind may be set out and expressed in many ways by the motions of the body. It is the waters that have brought these sacraments forth, but in Your word. The needs of a people estranged from the eternity of Your truth have brought them forth, but in Your gospel; because the waters themselves cast them out, and the diseased bitterness of the waters was the reason they were sent out in Your Word.

Everything You have made is beautiful now; and yet You Yourself, who made it all, are unspeakably more beautiful. And if Adam had not fallen away from You, the brackishness of the sea would never have flowed out of him — that is, the human race, so deeply curious and stormily swelling and restlessly tumbling up and down. And then there would have been no need for Your stewards to work in many waters, in a bodily and perceptible way, at mysterious doings and sayings. For that is what those moving and flying creatures now seem to me to mean: that people initiated and consecrated by bodily sacraments should not get any further unless their soul had a spiritual life, and unless after the word of admission it looked forward to completion.

And by this, in Your Word, it is not the deepness of the sea but the earth separated from the bitterness of the waters that brings forth, not the moving creature that has life but the living soul. For now it no longer needs baptism, as the heathen do and as it did itself when it was covered with the waters — for there is no other entrance into the kingdom of heaven, since You have appointed that this should be the entrance. Nor does it look for marvellous miracles to produce belief; for it is not the kind that will not believe unless it sees signs and wonders, now that the faithful earth has been separated from the waters that were bitter with unbelief, and tongues are a sign not for those who believe but for those who do not. So the earth You have founded on the waters does not need that flying kind which at Your word the waters brought forth. Send Your word into it by Your messengers; for we speak of their working, and yet it is You who work in them, so that they may work out a living soul in it. The earth brings it forth, because the earth is the reason they work this in the soul, as the sea was the reason they worked on the moving creatures that have life and the birds that fly under the firmament of heaven, which the earth does not need — although it feeds on that fish taken out of the deep, at that table You have prepared in the presence of those who believe. For that was why he was taken out of the deep: so that he might feed the dry land. And the bird, though bred in the sea, is nevertheless multiplied on the earth. For it was man's unbelief that made the first preachings of the evangelists necessary; and yet the faithful too are encouraged and blessed by them in many ways, from day to day. But the living soul takes its beginning from the earth: for it profits only those who are already among the faithful to hold themselves back from the love of this world, so that their soul may live for You — the soul that was dead while it lived in pleasures. In death-bringing pleasures, Lord; for You, Lord, are the life-giving delight of the pure heart.
