Book Thirteen: The Days of Creation

(Part 3 of 4)

Now let Your ministers work on the earth — not as on the waters of unbelief, by preaching and speaking through miracles and sacraments and mysterious words, in which ignorance, the mother of wonder, might be intent on them out of reverence for those secret signs. For that is the entrance into faith for the sons of Adam who have forgotten You, while they hide themselves from Your face and become a dark deep. But let Your ministers now work as on dry land, separated from the whirlpools of the great deep; and let them be a pattern to the faithful by living in front of them and stirring them up to imitation. For that is how men hear, so as not only to hear but to do. Seek the Lord, and your soul shall live, so that the earth may bring forth the living soul. Do not be conformed to the world. Hold yourselves back from it: the soul lives by avoiding what it dies by wanting. Hold yourselves back from the ungoverned wildness of pride, the sluggish self-indulgence of luxury, and the falsely named knowledge — so that the wild beasts may be tamed, the cattle broken to the yoke, the serpents made harmless. For these are the movements of our mind, under an allegory: the haughtiness of pride, the pleasure of lust and the poison of curiosity are the movements of a dead soul. For a soul does not die so as to lose all movement; it dies by abandoning the fountain of life, and so is taken up by this passing world and conformed to it.

But Your word, God, is the fountain of eternal life and does not pass away. So this departure of the soul is held back by Your word, when it is said to us, Do not be conformed to this world — so that the earth may bring forth a living soul in the fountain of life: that is, a soul made self-controlled in Your Word, by Your evangelists, by following the followers of Your Christ. For this is after his kind, because a man usually imitates his friend. Be as I am, he says, for I am as you are. So in this living soul there will be good beasts, in gentleness of action — for You have commanded, Go about your business gently, and so you will be loved by everyone. And good cattle, which neither have too much if they eat nor go short if they do not. And good serpents, not dangerous enough to do harm but wise enough to be careful, and searching into this temporal nature only so far as is enough for eternity to be clearly seen and understood by the things that are made. For these creatures are obedient to reason when, being held back from fatally getting the better of us, they live and are good.

For look, Lord our God, our creator, when our affections have been held back from the love of the world, by which we died through living badly, and have begun to be a living soul through living well; and the word You spoke through Your apostle is made good in us, Do not be conformed to this world — then that follows which You immediately added: But be transformed by the renewing of your mind. Not now after your kind, as though following a neighbour who went before you, and not living by the example of some better man. For You did not say, "Let man be made after his kind", but, Let us make man after our own image and likeness — so that we might test what Your will is. For it was to this end that that steward of Yours, who fathered children by the gospel, said this, so that he should not have them for ever as babies whom he would have to feed on milk and cherish like a nurse: Be transformed, he says, by the renewing of your mind, so that you may test what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. And so You do not say, "Let man be made", but Let us make man. And You did not say, "according to his kind", but after our image and likeness. For a man renewed in his mind, and looking at and understanding Your truth, does not need a man as his director, so as to follow after his kind; by Your direction he tests what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of Yours. Indeed You teach him, now that he is capable of it, to make out the Trinity in the unity and the unity in the Trinity. And so to the words said in the plural, Let us make man, there is added in the singular, And God made man; and to the words said in the plural, After our likeness, there is added in the singular, After the image of God. So a man is renewed in the knowledge of God, after the image of him who created him; and being made spiritual, he judges all things — all things that are to be judged — while he himself is judged by nobody.

And that he judges all things answers to his having dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the air, and over all the cattle and the wild beasts, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth. He does this by the understanding of his mind, by which he perceives the things of the Spirit of God; whereas otherwise, a man set in a position of honour had no understanding, and is compared to the brute beasts and has become like them. So in Your church, our God, according to the grace You have given it — for we are Your workmanship created for good works — it is not only those who are set over others spiritually but those who are spiritually subject to those set over them. For it was in this way that You made man male and female, in Your spiritual grace, where, as regards the sex of the body, there is neither male nor female, because there is neither Jew nor Greek, neither slave nor free. Spiritual people, whether they are set over others or obey, judge spiritually. They do not judge the spiritual knowledge that shines in the firmament, since they ought not to judge so supreme an authority; and they may not judge Your book itself, even where something in it does not shine clearly, since we submit our understanding to it and hold it certain that even what is closed to our sight is rightly and truly said. For a man, though now spiritual and renewed in the knowledge of God after the image of him who created him, ought to be a doer of the law and not a judge of it. Nor does he judge that distinction between spiritual and unspiritual men which is known to Your eyes, our God, and which they have not yet revealed to us by their works, so that we might know them by their fruits; but You, Lord, already know them, and have divided and called them in secret before ever the firmament was made. Nor does he, spiritual though he is, judge the restless people of this world; for what has he to do with judging those who are outside, when he does not know which of them will later come into the sweetness of Your grace, and which will stay in the perpetual bitterness of irreligion?

So man, whom You made after Your own image, did not receive dominion over the lights of heaven, or over that hidden heaven itself, or over the day and the night which You named before the foundation of the sky, or over the gathering of the waters which is the sea. He received dominion over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air, and over all the cattle, and over all the earth, and over all the creeping things that creep on the earth. For he judges and approves what he finds right and rejects what he finds wrong: whether in the celebration of the sacraments by which those are initiated whom Your mercy searches out in many waters; or in that in which the Fish is set out, taken out of the deep, which the devout earth feeds on; or in the expressions and signs of words, subject to the authority of Your book — signs which come out of the mouth and sound out, flying as it were under the firmament, in interpreting, expounding, discussing, arguing, blessing or praying to You, so that the people may answer, Amen. And the reason all these words have to be pronounced aloud is the deep of this world and the blindness of the flesh, which cannot see thoughts; so that there is a need to speak aloud into the ears. So that although flying birds are multiplied on the earth, they take their beginning from the waters. The spiritual man also judges by approving what is right and rejecting what he finds wrong in the works and lives of the faithful: their alms, which are like the earth bringing forth fruit; and the living soul, living by the taming of the affections, in chastity, in fasting, in holy meditation; and those things that are perceived by the senses of the body. Over all these he is now said to judge, in which he also has the power of correction.

But what is this, and what kind of mystery is it? You bless mankind, Lord, so that they may increase and multiply and fill the earth. Are You not giving us a hint to understand something by that? Why did You not bless the light too, which You called day, or the firmament of heaven, or the lights, or the stars, or the earth, or the sea? I might say that You, God, who created us in Your image — I might say that it had been Your good pleasure to give this blessing to man alone, if You had not blessed the fishes and the whales in the same way, so that they should increase and multiply and fill the waters of the sea, and blessed the birds so that they should be multiplied on the earth. I might likewise say that this blessing belonged properly to creatures that are bred of their own kind, if I had found it given to the fruit trees and plants and beasts of the earth. But as it is, it is not said to the plants or the trees or the beasts or the serpents, Increase and multiply — although all these, as much as fishes or birds or men, do increase by generation and continue their kind.

What shall I say then, truth, my light? That it was said idly and without meaning? Far be it, Father of devotion, far be it from a minister of Your word to say so. And if I do not understand what You mean by that phrase, let my betters, that is, those with more understanding than I have, make better use of it, as You, my God, have given each man to understand. But let my confession also be pleasing in Your eyes, in which I confess to You that I believe, Lord, that You did not say this in vain; and I shall not suppress what this passage suggests to me. For it is true; and I cannot see what should stop me from understanding the figurative sayings of Your Bible this way. For I know that a thing understood in one way by the mind can be signified in many ways by bodily expressions, and that a thing signified in one way by bodily expression can be understood in many ways in the mind. Consider the single love of God and of our neighbour: by how many sacraments and countless languages, and in each separate language by how many countless ways of speaking, is it bodily expressed! In this way the offspring of the waters increase and multiply. Consider again, whoever is reading this: what Scripture delivers and the voice pronounces in one way only, In the beginning God created heaven and earth — is it not understood in many ways, not through any cheat of error but by various kinds of true meaning? In this way the offspring of man increase and multiply.

So if we take the natures of the things themselves not allegorically but literally, then the phrase increase and multiply fits everything that comes from seed. But if we take the words as spoken figuratively, which I rather suppose is Scripture's purpose, since it surely does not ascribe this blessing superfluously to the offspring of water creatures and of men alone — then we find multitude belonging to spiritual creatures as well as bodily ones, as in heaven and earth; and to the righteous and the unrighteous, as in light and darkness; and to the holy authors who have been the ministers of the law to us, as in the firmament settled between the waters and the waters; and to the society of people still in the bitterness of unbelief, as in the sea; and to the zeal of holy souls, as in the dry land; and to the works of mercy belonging to this present life, as in the plants bearing seed and the trees bearing fruit; and to the spiritual gifts set out for building up, as in the lights of heaven; and to affections shaped to temperance, as in the living soul. In all these cases we meet multitudes and abundance and increase. But what should increase and multiply in such a way that one thing may be expressed in many ways, and one expression understood in many ways, we do not find, except in signs bodily expressed and things conceived in the mind. By signs bodily pronounced we understand the generations of the waters, made necessary by the depth of the flesh; by things conceived in the mind, human generations, on account of the fruitfulness of reason. And this is why we believe You, Lord, to have said to these kinds, Increase and multiply. For in this blessing I take You to have granted us a power and a faculty both for expressing in several ways what we understand in one, and for understanding in several ways what we read delivered obscurely in one. So the waters of the sea are filled, which are not moved except by different meanings; and so the earth too is filled with human increase, whose dryness shows in its longing, and reason rules over it.

I would also say, Lord my God, what the following Scripture reminds me of; yes, I shall say it and not be afraid. For I shall say the truth, with You inspiring me with what You wanted me to bring out of those words. By no other inspiration than Yours do I believe myself to speak truth, seeing that You are the truth and every man a liar. So whoever speaks a lie speaks out of his own; and so, in order to speak truth, I shall speak out of Yours. You have given us for food every plant bearing seed that is on all the earth, and every tree that has in it the fruit of a tree yielding seed. And not to us alone, but to all the birds of the air and the beasts of the earth and all creeping things — but to the fishes and the great whales You have not given them. Now we said that by these fruits of the earth were signified, and figured in an allegory, the works of mercy provided for the necessities of this life out of the fruitful earth. Such an earth was the devout Onesiphorus, on whose house You had mercy, because he often refreshed Your Paul and was not ashamed of his chain. So did the brothers too, and such fruit did they bear, who out of Macedonia supplied what he lacked. But how he grieved over some trees that did not give him the fruit that was owed to him, where he says, At my first defence nobody stood by me, but everyone deserted me. I pray God it may not be charged against them. For these fruits are owed to those who minister spiritual teaching to us out of their understanding of the divine mysteries; and they are owed to them as men; and owed to them too as the living soul, which offers itself as an example in all self-control; and owed to them too as flying creatures, for their blessings which are multiplied over the earth, because their sound went out into all lands.

But those are fed by these fruits who take delight in them; and those are not delighted by them whose god is their belly. For even in those who yield the fruits, it is not the things yielded that are the fruit but the mind they yield them with. So the man who served God and not his own belly — I can plainly see why he rejoiced. I see it, and I rejoice with him. He had received from the Philippians what they had sent him by Epaphroditus; and yet I can see why he rejoiced. For what he rejoiced at is what he fed on; for, speaking truly, I rejoiced greatly in the Lord, he says, that now at last your care for me has flowered again, in which you were careful before, but it had become wearisome to you. So these Philippians had dried up with a long weariness and had withered, as it were, as to bearing this fruit of a good work; and he rejoices for them, that they have flowered again — not for himself, that they had supplied his needs. So he adds, Not that I speak from want; for I have learned, in whatever state I am, to be content with it. I know how to be brought low, and I know how to have plenty; everywhere and in everything I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to have plenty and to go without. I can do all things through him who strengthens me.

What is it, then, that you are rejoicing at, great Paul? What are you rejoicing at? What are you feeding on, man renewed in the knowledge of God after the image of him who created you, living soul of so much self-control, tongue like the flying birds, speaking mysteries — for it is to such creatures that this food is owed? What is it that feeds you? Joy. Let us hear what follows: Nevertheless you have done well, in that you shared in my affliction. This is what he rejoices at; this is what he feeds on: because they had done well, and not because his difficulty was eased — he who says to You, You have made room for me when I was in distress. For he knew how to have plenty and how to go without, in You who strengthen him. For you Philippians know too, he says, that at the beginning of the gospel, when I left Macedonia, no church shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving, but you alone. For even in Thessalonica you sent once and again for my needs. It is to these good works that he now rejoices they have returned; and he is glad that they have flowered again, as when a fruitful field takes back its green.
