Book Thirteen: The Days of Creation

(Part 4 of 4)

Was it for his own needs, because he said, You sent for my needs? Is that what he is rejoicing at? Certainly not. But how do we know? Because he says immediately afterwards, Not that I want a gift, but I want fruit. I have learned from You, my God, to distinguish between a gift and fruit. A gift is the thing itself that a man gives when he supplies us with these necessities: money, food, drink, clothing, shelter, help. But the fruit is the good and right will of the giver. For the good master did not only say, Whoever receives a prophet, but added, in the name of a prophet. And he did not only say, Whoever receives a righteous man, but added, in the name of a righteous man. So the one shall truly receive a prophet's reward and the other a righteous man's. And he does not only say, Whoever gives a cup of cold water to one of my little ones, but adds, in the name of a disciple; and so concludes, Truly I say to you, he shall not lose his reward. The gift is to receive a prophet, to receive a righteous man, to give a cup of cold water to a disciple; but the fruit is to do it in the name of a prophet, in the name of a righteous man, in the name of a disciple. Elijah was fed with fruit by the widow who knew she was feeding a man of God and fed him for that reason; but by the raven he was fed with a gift. And it was not Elijah's inner man that was fed that way but only the outer, which might also have died for want of that food.

So I shall say what is true in Your sight, Lord. When unspiritual men and unbelievers, for whose winning and initiation the introductory sacraments and the mighty workings of miracles are necessary — which we take to be signified by the name of fishes and whales — undertake to refresh Your servant bodily, or help him in some other way with something useful for this present life, and yet do not know why this is to be done or to what end, then they are not feeding these men, and these men are not fed by them; because the one lot do not act out of a holy and right intention, and the other do not rejoice at gifts whose fruit they cannot yet see. For the mind feeds on what it is glad of. And so the fishes and whales do not feed on the food the earth does not bring forth until after it has been separated and divided from the bitterness of the waves of the sea.

And You, God, saw everything You had made, and it was very good. And we too see the same, and everything is very good. Of each kind of Your works, when You had said, "let them be", and they were, You saw of each that it was good. Seven times I have counted it written that You saw that what You had made was good; and this is the eighth, that You saw everything You had made, and it was not only good but very good, being now all together. Separately they were only good; all together they were both good and very good. All beautiful bodies say the same, since a body made of members that are all beautiful is far more beautiful than the same members are by themselves, by whose well-ordered blending the whole is completed — although the members separately are beautiful too.

And I looked closely to find whether it was seven times or eight that You saw Your works were good, when they pleased You; and in Your seeing I found no times at all, by which I might understand how often You saw what You had made. And I said, "Lord, is this Scripture of Yours not true, since You are true, and being the truth have put it forth? Then why do You tell me that in Your seeing there are no times, when this Scripture of Yours tells me that what You made each day You saw to be good — and when I counted them, I found how many times?" And to this You answer me, for You are my God, and with a strong voice You tell Your servant in his inner ear, breaking through my deafness and crying out: "Man, what my Scripture says, I say. And yet Scripture speaks in time, while time has no relation to my Word, because my Word exists in an eternity equal to my own. So the things you see through my Spirit, I see; just as what you speak by my Spirit, I speak. And so when you see those things in time, I do not see them in time; just as when you speak in time, I do not speak them in time."

And I heard, Lord my God, and drank a drop of sweetness out of Your truth, and understood that there are certain men who dislike Your works and say that You made many of them under compulsion of necessity, such as the fabric of the heavens and the harmony of the stars; and that You made them not out of what was Yours, but that they were created elsewhere and from other sources, for You to bring together and compact and combine, when out of Your conquered enemies You raised the walls of the universe, so that they, tied down by the structure, should not be able to rebel against You again. And as for other things, they say You neither made them nor even put them together — all flesh, and all the very small creatures, and everything that has its root in the earth; but that a mind at enmity with You, and another nature not created by You and contrary to You, produced and framed these things in the lower stages of the world. They are deranged who say this, because they do not see Your works by Your Spirit, and do not recognise You in them.

But those who see these things by Your Spirit, You see in them. So when they see that these things are good, it is You who see that they are good; and whatever pleases for Your sake, it is You who please in it; and whatever pleases us through Your Spirit, pleases You in us. For what man knows the things of a man, except the spirit of a man which is in him? Even so nobody knows the things of God except the Spirit of God. Now we, he says, have received not the spirit of this world but the Spirit which is from God, so that we may know the things freely given us by God. And I am reminded: "Truly nobody knows the things of God except the Spirit of God; then how do we too know what things are given us by God?" The answer given me is: "Because the things we know by his Spirit, even these nobody knows but the Spirit of God. For as it was rightly said to those who were to speak by the Spirit of God, It is not you who speak, so it is rightly said to those who know through the Spirit of God, It is not you who know. And no less rightly is it said to those who see through the Spirit of God, It is not you who see; so that whatever they see through the Spirit of God to be good, it is not they but God who sees that it is good."

So it is one thing for a man to think something bad which is good, as the men I mentioned do; another for a man to see that something good is good, as Your creatures please many people because they are good, in whom nevertheless You are not what pleases, since they would rather enjoy the creatures than You; and another again for a man, when he sees that a thing is good, for God to see in him that it is good — so that he may be loved in what he has made, who cannot be loved except by the Holy Spirit he has given. Because the love of God is poured into our hearts by the Holy Spirit who is given to us; and it is by him that we see that whatever exists in any degree is good. For it comes from him who is not in any degree, but who is what he is.

Thanks be to You, Lord. We look at heaven and earth, whether the bodily part, higher and lower, or the spiritual and bodily creation. And in the adorning of these parts, which the whole mass of the world, or rather the whole creation, consists of, we see light made and divided from the darkness. We see the firmament of heaven, whether that primary body of the world between the spiritual waters above and the bodily waters below, or — since this too is called heaven — this space of air through which the birds of heaven wander, between those waters that are carried above them in vapour and drip down as dew on clear nights, and the heavier waters that flow along the earth. We look at the face of the waters gathered together in the fields of the sea; and the dry land, both empty and then formed so as to be visible and ordered, and the material of plants and trees. We look at the lights shining from above: the sun to suffice for the day, and the moon and stars to cheer the night; and by all of these times are to be marked and signified. We see on all sides a moist element, filled with fishes and beasts and birds, because the thickness of the air which holds up the flights of birds is thickened by the exhalation of the waters. We look at the face of the earth decked with earthly creatures, and man, created after Your image and likeness, set over all irrational creatures by that very image and likeness of Yours, which is the power of reason and understanding. And as in his soul there is one power that has command by directing, and another made subject so that it should obey, so also for the man there was made, bodily, a woman, who in the mind of her reasoning understanding should have an equality of nature, but in the sex of her body should be subject in the same way to the sex of her husband, as the appetite for doing is glad to take the skill of right-doing from the reason of the mind. These things we look at, and separately they are good, and all together very good.

Let Your works praise You, so that we may love You; and let us love You, so that Your works may praise You — works that from time have a beginning and an end, a rising and a setting, growth and decay, form and loss of form. So they have their succession of morning and evening, partly in secret and partly in the open; for they were made out of nothing, by You, not out of You; not out of any matter that was not Yours or that existed before, but out of matter created along with them — that is, created by You at the same time — because You gave form to its formless state without any interval of time. For seeing that the matter of heaven and earth is one thing and the form another, You made the matter out of nothing at all, but the form of the world out of the matter without form; and yet both together, so that the form followed the matter with no interval of delay.

We have also examined what You wanted foreshadowed, whether by the creation or by the telling of things in such an order. And we have seen that things separately are good and together very good — in Your Word, in Your only-begotten: both heaven and earth, the head and the body of the church, in Your predestination before all times, with no morning and evening. But when You began to carry out in time the things predestined, so that You might reveal hidden things and put our disorders right — for our sins hung over us and we had sunk into the dark deep, and Your good Spirit was borne over us to help us at the right moment; and You made the ungodly righteous and divided them from the wicked; and You made the firmament of the authority of Your book between those placed above, who were to be teachable towards You, and those below, who were to be subject to them. And You gathered the society of unbelievers together into one conspiracy, so that the zeal of the faithful might show, and they might bring forth works of mercy, distributing their earthly riches to the poor so as to gain heavenly ones. And after this You lit certain lights in the firmament, Your holy ones, holding the word of life and shining with an eminent authority set on high through spiritual gifts. And after that again, for the initiation of the unbelieving Gentiles, You produced out of bodily matter the sacraments and visible miracles and forms of words according to the firmament of Your book, by which the faithful should be blessed and multiplied. Next You formed the living soul of the faithful, through affections well ordered by the strength of self-control. And after that, the mind subject to You alone and needing to imitate no human authority You have renewed after Your image and likeness; and You made its rational actions subject to the excellence of the understanding, as the woman is to the man. And for all the offices of Your ministry, necessary for the perfecting of the faithful in this life, You willed that good things should be given by those same faithful for their temporary use, fruitful for the givers in the time to come. All these things we see, and they are very good, because You see them in us — You who have given us Your Spirit, by which we might see them, and in them love You.

Lord God, give us peace, since You have given us everything: the peace of rest, the peace of the Sabbath, which has no evening. For all this most beautiful array of things, very good as it is, must pass away when it has finished its course; for in them there was morning and evening.

But the seventh day has no evening and no setting, because You have made it holy to last for ever. So that what You did after Your works, which were very good, resting on the seventh day — although You made them in unbroken rest — may be announced to us beforehand by the voice of Your book: that we too, after our works, which are very good precisely because You have given them to us, shall rest in You as well, in the Sabbath of eternal life.

For then You will rest in us, as now You work in us; and so that will be Your rest through us, as these are Your works through us. But You, Lord, are always working and always at rest. You do not see in time, or move in time, or rest in a time; and yet You make the things that are seen in time, and the times themselves, and the rest that results from time.

So we see these things You have made, because they exist; but they exist because You see them. And we see outwardly that they exist, and inwardly that they are good; but You saw them there, once made, where You had seen them as still to be made. And we were moved at a later time to do good, after our hearts had conceived of Your Spirit; but in the earlier time we were moved to do evil, abandoning You. But You, the one good God, never stopped doing good. And we too have some good works, by Your gift, but not eternal ones; and after them we trust to rest in Your great hallowing. But You, being the good which needs no good, are always at rest, because Your rest is Yourself. And what man can teach a man to understand this? Or what angel, an angel? Or what angel, a man? Let it be asked of You, sought in You, knocked for at You. So, so shall it be received; so shall it be found; so shall it be opened. Amen.

	Gratias tibi, Domine — thanks be to You, Lord.
