LIBRARY  OF 
i  WELLES  LEY  COLLEGE 


PRESENTED  BY 
HKLSN  A.  MSBBIU. 


"^'M     ^€-«w*^«-^ 


V,. 


EUCLID 


AND      HIS 


MODERN      RIVALS 


EUCLID,     BOOK    I. 

Arranged  in  Logical  Sequence. 


A 

5  6 

7 

8 


9  11 

12         10  15 

16 


13 


14 


18        27 

19 

20 


23      21 


17 


26 


24  31 

25  I 


28 
29 


11     31 


32     33  30  34 

35 


41  30 


43         46 


36  37 

38       41        39 

40  I 

42 

V ^ 

44 


47 
48 


— V — 

45 


t^AUyU-t^  «_xV  •  /?liyi/*ccl^ . 


EUCLID 


AND   HIS 


MODERN     RIVALS 


BY 


CHARLES   L.    DODGSON,   M.  A. 

Sttcdcnt  and  late  Mathematical  Lectwer 
of  Christ  Church,   Oxford. 


'  All  for  your  delight 
We  are  not  here.      T/iai  yo7i  sJiould  here  recent  you 
The  actors  are  at  hand ;   and,  by  their  show, 
You  shall  know  all,  that  you  are  like  to  know.' 


SECOND  EDITION 


MACMILLAN     AND     CO. 
1885 

\^All  rights  reserved  ] 


\\ 


*^^. '>e(e^    K  Mel 


ev  vi 


PRINTED   BY   HORACE    HART,    PRINTER   TO  THE    UNIVERSITY 


^1415'^ 


tlATH 


Betricatcti 

to 

t  f)  t   in  c  m  0  r  y 

of 


*i 


PEEFACE  TO  SECOND  EDITION. 


The  only  new  features,  worth  mentioning,  in  the  second 
edition,  are  the  substitution  of  words  for  the  symbols 
introduced  in  the  first  edition,  and  one  additional  review — 
of  Mr.  Henrici,  to  wdiom,  if  it  should  appear  to  him  that 
I  have  at  all  exceeded  the  limits  of  fair  criticism,  I  beg  to 
tender  my  sincerest  apologies. 

C.  L.  D. 
C/i.  Clu  1885, 


PEEFACE  TO  FIEST  EDITION 


'  ridentem  dicei'e  verura 
Quid  vetat  ? ' 


The  object  of  this  little  book  is  to  furnish  evidence, 
first,  that  it  is  essential,  for  the  purpose  of  teaching  or 
examining  in  elementary  Geometry,  to  employ  one  text- 
book only;  secondly,  that  there  are  strong  a  priori  reasons 
for  retaining,  in  all  its  main  features,  and  specially  in  its 
sequence  and  numbering  of  Propositions  and  in  its  treat- 
ment of  Parallels,  the  Manual  of  Euclid ;  and  thirdly, 
that  no  sufficient  reasons  have  yet  been  shown  for  aban- 
doning it  in  favour  of  any  one  of  the  modern  Manuals 
which  have  been  offered  as  substitutes. 

It  is  presented  in  a  dramatic  form,  partly  because  it 
seemed  a  better  way  of  exhibiting  in  alternation  the  argu- 
ments on  the  two  sides  of  the   question  ;  partly  that   I 


X  PREFACE. 

might  feel  myself  at  liberty  to  treat  it  in  a  .rather  lighter 
style  than  would  have  suited  an  essay,  and  thus  to  make 
it  a  little  less  tedious  and  a  little  more  acceptable  to 
unscientific  readers. 

In  one  respect  this  book  is  an  experiment,  and  may 
chance  to  prove  a  failure  :  I  mean  that  I  have  not  thought 
it  necessar}^  to  maintain  throughout  the  gravity  of  style 
which  scientific  writers  usually  affect,  and  which  has  some- 
how come  to  be  regarded  as  an  '  inseparable  accident '  of 
scientific  teaching.  I  never  could  quite  see  the  reason- 
ableness of  this  immemorial  law :  subjects  there  are,  no 
doubt,  which  are  in  their  essence  too  serious  to  admit  of 
any  lightness  of  treatment — but  I  cannot  recognise  Geo- 
metry as  one  of  them.  Nevertheless  it  will,  I  trust,  be 
found  that  I  have  permitted  myself  a  glimpse  of  the  comic 
side  of  things  only  at  fitting  seasons,  when  the  tired  reader 
might  well  crave  a  moment^s  breathing-space,  and  not  on 
any  occasion  where  it  could  endanger  the  continuity  of 
a  line  of  argument. 

Pitying  friends  have  warned  me  of  the  fate  upon  which 
I  am  rushing :  they  have  predicted  that,  in  thus  abandon- 
ing the  dignity  of  a  scientific  writer,  I  shall  alienate  the 
sympathies  of  all  true  scientific  readers,  who  will  regard 
the  book  as  a  mere  J  etc  d^esprit,  and  will  not  trouble  them- 
selves to  look  for  any  serious  argument  in  it.  But  it  must 
be  borne  in  mind  that,  if  there  is  a  Scylla  before  me,  there 
is  also  a  Charybdis — and  that,  in  my  fear  of  being  read 
as  a  jest,  I  may  incur  the  darker  destinj^  of  not  being  read 
at  all. 

In  furtherance  of  the  great  cause  which  I  have  at  heart 
—the  vindication  of  Euclid's  masterpiece — I  am  content  to 
run  some  risk  ;  thinking  it  far  better  that  the  purchaser  of 
this  little  book  should  read  it,  though  it  be  with  a  smile, 


PREFACE.  xi 


than  that,  with  the  deepest  conviction  of  its  seriousness  of 
purpose,  he  should  leave  it  unopened  on  the  shelf. 

To  all  the  authors,  who  are  here  reviewed,  I  beg  to 
tender  my  sineerest  apolog-ies,  if  I  shall  be  found  to  have 
transgressed,  in  any  instance,  the  limits  of  fair  criticism, 
To  Mr.  "Wilson  especially  such  apology  is  due — partly 
because  I  have  criticised  his  book  at  great  length  and 
with  no  sparing  hand  —  partly  because  it  may  well  be 
deemed  an  impertinence  in  one,  whose  line  of  study  has 
been  chiefly  in  the  lower  branches  of  Mathematics,  to 
dare  to  pronounce  any  opinion  at  all  on  the  work  of  a 
Senior  Wrangler.  Nor  should  I  thus  dare,  if  it  entailed 
my  following  him  up  ^  yonder  mountain  height '  which  he 
has  scaled,  but  which  /  can  only  gaze  at  from  a  distance  : 
it  is  only  when  he  ceases  ^to  move  so  near  the  heavens,' 
and  comes  down  into  the  lower  regions  of  Elementary 
Geometry,  which  I  have  been  teaching  for  nearly  five- 
and-twenty  years,  that  I  feel  sufficiently  familiar  with 
the  matter  in  hand  to  venture  to  speak. 

Let  me  take  this  opportunity  of  expressing  my  grati- 
tude, first  to  Mr.  Todbunter,  for  allowing  me  to  quote 
nd  lihitum  from  the  very  interesting  Essay  on  Elementary 
Geometry,  which  is  included  in  his  volume  entitled  '  The 
Conflict  of  Studies,  and  other  Essays  on  subjects  connected 
with  Education,'  and  also  to  reproduce  some  of  the  beau- 
tiful diagrams  from  his  edition  of  Euclid ;  secondly,  to  the 
Editor  of  the  Athenaeum,  for  giving  me  a  similar  per- 
mission with  regard  to  a  review  of  Mr.  Wilson's  Geometry, 
written  by  the  late  Professor  De  Morgan,  which  appeared 
in  that  journal,  July  t8,  1868, 

C,  L.  D. 

Ch.  Ch.  1879. 


AEGUMENT    OF   DEAMA. 


ACT     L 

Preliminaries  to  examination  of 
Modern  Rivals. 


Scene  I. 
[Minos  and  Khadamanthus.] 

PAGE 

Consequences  of  allowing  the  use  of  various  Manuals 
of  Geometry  :  that  we  must  accept 

(i)  '  Circular  '  arguments  .....        1 

(2)  Illogical  do 2 

Example  from  Cooley  ...... 

,,  „      Wilson  .....       4 


xiv  ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA. 

Scene  II. 

[Minos  and  Euclid.] 


§  I.  A  priori  reasons  for  retaining  EuclicVs  Manual. 


We  require,  in  a  Manual,  a  select iou  rather  than  a 

complete  repertory  of  Geometrical  truths  .  .       G 

Discussion  limited  to  subject-matter  of  Euc.  I,  II.       .        8 
One  fixed  logical  sequence  essential    .         .         .  .       „ 

One  system  of  numbering"  desirable    .  .  .         .10 

A  joriori  claims  of  Euclid's  sequence  and  numeration 
to  be  retained         .         .  .  .  .         .         .11 

New  Theorems  might  be  interpolated  without  change 
of  numeration        .......,, 


§  2.  Method  of  procedure  in  exajnining  Modern  Rivals. 


Proposed  changes  which,  even  if  proved  to  be  essential, 
would  not  necessitate  the  abandonment  of  Euclid's 

Manual  : — 13 

(i)  Propositions  to  be  omitted; 

(2)  ,,  to  be  replaced  by  new  proofs  ; 

(3)  New  Propositions  to  be  added. 

Proposed  changes   which,  if  proved  to  be    essential, 
W(?2//ri?  necessitate  such  abandonment: — .         .         .15 
(i)  Separation  of  Problems  and  Theorems  ; 
(2)  Diiferent  treatment  of  Parallels. 


ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA. 


PAGE 

Other  subjects  of  enquiry :—      .         .  .         .         .15 

(3)  Superposition  ; 

(4)  Use  oF  diagonals  in  Euc.  II ; 

(5)  Treatment  of  Lines  ; 

(6)  „  ofAng-les; 

(7)  Euclid's  Propositions  omitted  ; 

(8)  ,,  ,,  newly  treatul  ; 

(9)  New  Propositions; 
(10)  Style,  &c. 

List  of  authors  to  be  examined,  viz. : —        .  .  .      IG 

Leg'endre,  Cooley,  Cutlibertson,  Henrici,  Wilson, 
Pierce,  Willock,  Chauvenet,  Loomis,  Morell, 
Reynolds,  Wright,  Syllabus  of  Ass-ociation  for 
Improvement  of  Geometrical  Teaching,  Wilson's 
'  Syllabus  ^-Manual. 


§  3.   The  comhination,  or  separation^  of  ProLIems 
and  Theorems. 


Iveasons  assigned  for  separation  .  .  .  .18 

lieasons  for  combination : —        .  .  .  .  .11) 

(i)  Problems  are  also  Theorems; 

(2)  Separation  would  necessitate  a  new  numer- 

ation, 

(3)  and  hypothetical  constructions. 


4.  Si/llahus  of  propositions  relating  to  Pairs  of  L'nics. 


Three  classes  of  Pairs  of  Lines  : —       .         .         .         .20 
(i)  Having  two  common  points  ; 


xvi  •  ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA. 

PAGE 

(2)  Having  a  common  point  and  a  separate  point ; 

(3)  J,        no  common  point. 

Four  kinds  of  '  properties  ' ;        .         .  .         .         .21 

(i)  common  or  separate  points; 
,  (2)  equality,  or  otherwise,  of  angles  made  with 
transversals  ; 

(3)  equidistance,  or  otherwise,  of  points   on  the 

one  from  the  others 

(4)  direction. 

Conventions  as  to  language        .         .  .         .  .22 

Propositions  divisible  into  two  classes  :—    .         .  .23 

(i)  Deducible  from  undisputed  Axioms; 

(2)  „  disputable       j, 

Three  classes  of  Pairs  of  Lines  : —       .         .         i         .      ,, 

(i)  Coincidental  ; 

(2)  Intersectional ; 

(3)  Separational. 

Subjects   and   predicates   of  Projpositions   concerning 
these  three  classes  : — 

Coincidental       .  .  .  .         .  .         .24 

Intersectional     .  .         .  .  .         .         .26 

Separational 27 

Table  I.  Containing  twenty  Projoositions,  of  which  some 
are  undisputed  Axioms,  and  the  rest  real  and  valid. 
Theorems,  deducible  from  undisputed  Axioms       .         .     28 

Subjects  and  predicates  of  other  propositions  concern- 
ing Separational  Lines  .  .  .  .         .         .33 

Table  II.  Containing  eighteen  Projoositio?is,  of  which  no 
one  is  an  undisputed  Axiom,  but  all  are  real  and  valid 
Theorems,  which,  though  not  deducible  from,  undisjputed 
Axioms,  are  such  that,  if  any  one  be  admitted  as  an 
Axiom^  the  rest  can  be  proved  .         .         .         .         =34 


ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA.  xvii 

PAGE 

Table  III.     Containing  jive  Propositions,    taken  from 
Table  II,  which  have  been  proposed  as  Axioms     .         .37 
(i)  Euclid^s  Axiom ; 

(2)  T.  Simpson's  Axiom  ; 

(3)  Clavius' 

(4)  Play  fair's  „ 

(5)  K.  Simpson's  Axiom. 

It  will  be  shown  (in  Appendix  III)  that  ani/  Theorem 
of  Table  II  is  sufficient  logical  basis  for  all  the 
rest .38 


§  5.  Flay f air  s  Axiom. 


Is  Euclid's  12th  Axiom  axiomatic?    .         .         .         .40 

Need  of  test  for  meeting  of  finite  Lines      .         .         .41 
Considerations    which    make    Euclid's   Axiom    more 
axiomatic       ........     42 

Euclid's  Axiom  deducible  from  Playfair's    .  .  .45 

Reasons  for  preferring  Euclid's  Axiom  : — 

(i)  Playfair^s  does  not  show  'which  way  the  Lines 

will  meet ;       .  .  .  .  .  .46 

(2)  Playfair's   asserts    more    than    Euclid's,    the 

additional  matter  being  superfluous  .  •      ,, 

Objection  to  Euclid's  Axiom  (that  it  is  the  converse 
of  I.  17)  untenable         ......     47 


§  6,  Principle  of  Superposition, 


Used  by  Moderns  in  Euc.  I.  5 48 

„         I.  24  ...  .     49 

b 


xviii  ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA. 


§  7.   Omission  of  Diagonals  in  Euc.  II. 


Proposal  tested  by  comparing  Euc.  II.  4,  with  Mr. 
Wilson's  version  of  it     .         .         .         .         .         .50 


ACT    II. 

[Minos  and  Niemand.] 


Manuals  which  reject  Euclid's  treatment 
of  Parallels, 


Scene  I. 
Introductory     .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .54 

Scene  II. 


Treatment  of  Parallels  hy  methods  involving 
infinite  series. 


Legendke. 


Treatment  of  Line     . 

,^  Angle 

,j  Parallels 

Test  for  meeting  of  finite  Lines 
Manual  unsuited  for  beginners  . 


55 
57 

58 
59 


ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA.  xix 


Scene  III. 


Treatment  of  Parallels  by  angles  made  with  transversals. 


COOLEY. 

PAGE 

Style  of  Preface         60 

Treatment  of  Parallels       .  .         .         .         .         .62 

Utter  collapse  of  Manual  .         .         .         .         ^         .     63 


Scene  IV. 


Treatment  of  Parallels  hy  equidistances. 


Q  CUTHBERTSON. 

Treatment  of  Line     .         .         .         .         .         .         .64 

Attempted  proof  of  Euclid's  (tacitly  assumed)  Axiom, 

that  two  Lines  cannot  have  a  common  segment  .  (55 
Treatment  of  Angle  .         .         .         .         .         .         .66 

,,  Parallels „ 

Assumption  of  R.  Simpson's  Axiom  .  .  .  .67 

Euclid's  12th  Axiom  replaced  by  a  Definition,  two 

Axioms,  and  five  Theorems    .  .  .  .         .68 

Test  for  meeting  of  two  finite  Lines   .  .  .  .69 

Manual  a  modified  Euclid  .         .         .         .         .70 

b  2 


ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA. 


Scene  V. 

■ 

Treatment  of  Parallels  hy  revolving  lines. 

Henrici. 

PAGE 

Treatment  of  Line 

71 

Angle 

74 

„            Parallels 

76 

Attempted  proof  of  Playfair's  Axiom  discussed    . 

)^ 

rejected    . 

83 

General  survey  of  book  : —          .... 

5) 

Enormous  amount  of  new  matter 

84 

Two  '  non-sequiturs  ' 

85 

An  absurdity  proved  a  la  Henrici 

86 

Motion  '  per  saltum '  denied 

87 

A  strange  hypothesis 

89 

A  new  kind  of  '  open  question '     . 

.     90 

Another 'non-sequitur'       .... 

5^ 

An  awkward  corner 

91 

Theorems  on  Symmetry      .... 

}j 

Summary  of  faults      ..... 

.      92 

Euclid  I,  1 8,  19,  contrasted  with  Henrici    . 

.      94 

A  final  tit-bit 

96 

Manual  rejected 

» 

Scene  VI. 

Treatment  of  Parallels  hy  direction. 

§  I.  Wilson. 

Introductory     ....... 

.      97 

Treatment  of  Line 

.      98 

„           Angle 

99 

ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA.  XXi 


PAGE 

Extension  of  limit  of  '  angle '  to   sum  of  lour  right 
angles  .........     99 


Straight '  angles 


.  101 
.  103 
.  105 
.    106 


Meaning  of  '  direction  ^      .  .  .  . 

^  Opposite  '  directions  .... 

'  Same  '  and  ^  different '  directions 

Axiom  'different  Lines  may  have  tlie  same  direction,' 
discussed        .  .         .  .  .  .         .  .108 

Property  'same  direction,'  when  asserted  of  different 
Lines,  can  neither  be  defined,  nor  constructed,  nor 
tested 109 

'  Separational  directions '  not  identical  with  '  identical 
directions  '     .  .  .  .  .  .  .         .110 

Virtual  assumption  of  'separational  Lines  are  real' 
(which  Euclid  proves  in  I.  27),  as  Axiom        .  .113 

Axiom  '  different  Lines  may  have  different  directions  ' 
discussed        .  .  .  .  .         .  .  .114 

Axiom  '  different  Lines  may  have  the  same  direction,' 
rejected,  and  Axiom  '  different  Lines  may  have 
different  directions '  granted  with  limitations  .  .115 

Axiom  '  different  Lines  which  meet  one  another  have 
different  directions  ''  granted  ...... 

Axiom  '  Lines  with  different  directions  would  meet ' 
discussed        .         .  .  .  .  .         .  .      •• 

and  rejected  .  .         .         .  .  .  .  .116 

Diagram  of  '  same '  and  '  different '  directions  con- 
demned    .         .         .117 

'  Different  hut  with  same  direction  '  accepted  as  (ideal) 
definition  of  Pair  of  Lines       .  .  .  .  .118 

'  Parallel/  as  used  by  Wilson,  to  be  replaced  by  term 
' sepcodal '     .         .         .         .         .         .         .         •      „ 

Definition  discussed  .  .  .  .  .  .  .119 

Theorem  'sepcodal  Lines  do  not  meet'  accepted  .   121 


ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA. 


121 


122 


.    123 


.    125 


.   127 


Theorem  ^  Lines,  sepcodal  to  a  thirds  are  so  to  each 
other,'  discussed,  and  condemned  as  a  '  Petitio  Tr'in- 
c'lpii'     ......... 

Axiom  'Angle  may  be  transferred,  preserving  direc- 
tions of  sides '  discussed  ..... 

If  angle  be  variable,  it  involves  fallacy  '  A  dicto  secun- 

climi  Quid  ad  dictmn  Sinijdiciter  '      . 
If  it  be  constant,  the   resulting  Theorem  (virtually 
identical  with  the  Axiom)  involves  fallacy  '  Tetitio 
Princijni '       .  .  .         .  . 

If  angle  be  constant,  the  Axiom  involves  two  assump- 
tions :  viz.  that 

(i)  there  can  be  a  Pair  of  different  Lines  that 

make  equal  angles  with  any  transversal 
(2)  Lines,  which  make  equal  angles  with  a  cer- 
tain transversal,  do  so  with  any  transversal  128 
Axiom  rejected  .  .  .  .  .         .  .129 

Ideas  of  '  direction '  discussed     .  .  .         .  .130 

Theory  of  direction  '  unsuited  for  teaching         .         .131 
Test  for  meeting  of  finite  Lines  discussed  : —       .         .132 
it  virtually  involves  Euclid's  Axiom    .         .  .133 

or  if  not,  it  causes  hiatus  in  proofs       .         .  .     „ 

List  of  Euclid's  Propositions  which  are  omitted  .         .134 
General  survey  of  book : —  .         .  .  .         .135 

A  false  Corollary         ......,, 

A  plethora  of  negatives       .  .  .  .         .136 

A  superfluous  datum  .         .  .  .  .137 

Cumbrous  proof  of  Euc.  I.  24     .  .         .  .     „ 

An  unintelligible  Corollary         .  .  .         .138 

A  unique  '  Theorem  of  equality  '  .  .         .139 

A  bold  assumption     ....... 

Two  cases  of  '  Peiitio  Principii '  .         .  .         .     „ 

A  Problem  3  J  pages  long „ 


ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA.  xxiii 

PAGE 

A  fifth  case  of  ^  Petitio  Prmcipii'         .         .         .140 

A  sixth 14 1 

Summing-up,  and  rejection  of  Manual        .         .         .     ,, 


§  2.  Pierce. 

Treatment  of  Line 144 

Introduction  of  Infinitesimals     .  .  .  .  .145 

Treatment  of  Parallels        .         .         .         .         .         .     ,, 

Angle  viewed  as  '  difierence  of  direction  '    .         .         .146 
Assumption  of  Axiom  '  difierent  Lines  may  have  the 
same  direction '      .  .  .  .  .  .  .147 

List  of  Euclid's  Theorems  which  are  omitted       .         .148 
Manual  not  adapted  for  beginners       .         .         .         .     ,, 


§  3.    WiLLOCK. 

Treatment  of  Parallels        .  .  .  .  .  .150 

Virtual  assumption   of  Axiom  '  different   Lines  may 
have  the  same  direction '         .         .         .         .         .     ,, 

Assumption  of  Axiom  '  separational   Lines  have  the 
same  direction'      .  .  .  .  .  .  .152 

General  survey  of  book : —         .         .         .         .         .153 

Difficulties  introduced  too  soon  .  .  .         ,     ,, 

Omission  of  '  coincidental '  Lines  .  .  .155 

'  Principle   of  double  conversion '  discussed,,  and 

condemned  as  illogical      .  .         .  .     ,, 

Mysterious  passage  about  ' incommensurables '     .   157 
Manual  rejected        ........ 


xxiv  ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA. 


ACT     III. 

Manuals  ichich  adopt  Euclid's  treatment 
of  Parallels, 

Scene  I. 

§1. 

PAGE 

Introductory 158 

§  2.  Chauvenet. 
General  survey 160 

§  3.   LOOMIS. 
General  survey 162 

§  4.    MORELL. 

Treatment  of  Line 163 

„  Angle 165 

„  Parallels       ....... 

General  survey : — 

'Direct,'  'reciprocal,'  and  'contrary'  Theorems    .   167 
Sentient  points  .....•,, 

A  false  assertion         .         .         .         .         .         .169 

A  speaking  radius      .         .         .         .         .         .170 

Ratios  and  common  measures      .         .         .         ,     „ 


ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA. 


XXV 


Derivation  of  '  homologous ' 
Mensuration  of  areas 
A  \o^\Q,2\  fiasco  . 
Manual  rejected 


PAGE 
171 

172 
173 
174 


§  5.  Reynolds. 

General  survey 

List  of  Euclid's  Theorems  omitted 


175 
176 


§  6.  Wright. 

Quotations  from  preface     . 
General  survey  : —    . 

Specimen  of  verbose  obscurity 


177 
178 
179 


Scene  II. 


§  I.  Syllables  of  the  Association  for  the  Improvement 
OF  Geometrical  Teaching. 


Introduction  0?  Nostradamus,  a  member  of  the  Asso- 
ciation    .  .  .182 


Treatment  of  Line     . 
Angle  . 
,,  Parallels 

Test  for  meeting  of  finite  Lines 
lie -arrangement  of  Euclid's  Theorems 


.  183 
.  184 
.    187 

.   188 


XXVI 


ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA, 


General  survey  : —     ...... 

A  '  Theorem  '  is  a  '  statement  of  a  Theorem ' 
Rule  of  Conversion     ..... 

Miscellaneous  inaccuracies  .... 

Summing-up     ....... 


PAGE 

189 

)j 
190 
191 
194 


§2.  Wilson's  '  Syllabus '-Manual. 


Introductory     .  .  .  .  .  .  .         .195 

A  Theorem  is  a  '  statement  of  a  Theorem  ' .         .         .196 
Rule  of  Conversion    .... 

Every  Theorem  a  ^  means  of  measuring ' 
'  Straight  angles '       .  .         .         . 

Miscellaneous  inaccuracies  .         , 

The  Manual's  one  great  merit    .         .         .         .         .197 

No  test  for  meeting  of  finite  Lines      .  .         .  .198 

Propositions  discussed  in  detail  :— 

An  important  omission        .  .  .  .  .199 

An  illogical  conversion        .         .         .         .         .     ,, 

^  JJn  enfant  terrible'    .         .         .         .         .         .201 

Summary  of  results  : —       ......  206 

Of  73  Propositions  of  Euclid,  this  Manual  has 
14  omitted  ; 
43  done  as  in  Euclid ; 

10  done  by  new  but  objectionable  methods,  viz. — 
I  illogical; 

1  '  hypothetical  construction^; 

2  needlessly  using  '  superposition  ' ; 
2  algebraical; 

4  omitting  the  diagonals  of  Euc.  II. ; 
6  done  by  new  and  admissible  methods. 


ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA. 


PAGE 

No  reason  for  abandoniug  Euclid's  sequence  and  nu- 
meration       .  .  .  .  .  .  .         .20  7 

Nor  for  regarding  this  Manual  as  anything  but  a 
revised  Euclid        .         .         .  .         .         .         .     ,, 

Summing-up     ...,....„ 


ACT     lY. 

[Minos  and  Euclid.] 


Manual  of  Euclid, 


§  I.  Treatment  of  Fairs  of  Lines. 


Modern  treatment  of  Parallels   .  .  .  .  .   20:> 

Playfair's  Axiom        .  .  .  .  .  .  ,210 


Test  for  meeting  of  finite  Lines 


^  2.  EuclicVs  constriictiom 


'  Arbitrary  restrictions '     .  .  .  .  .  .212 

'  Exclusion  of  hypothetical  constructions  '  .  .  .213 


xxviii  ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA. 


§  3.  Euclid's  demonstrations. 


PAGE 


'  Invariably  syllogistic  form '     .  .  .  .  .214 

'  Too  great  length  of*  demonstration  '  .  .  .     ,, 

'  Too  great  brevity  of  demonstration  '  .  .  .215 

'  Constant  reference  to  Axioms  '  .  .  .  .     „ 


§  4.  Euclid^ s  style. 


Artificiality,    unsuggestiveness,    and    want    of    sim- 
plicity .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .217 


§  5.  Euclid's  treatment  of  Lines  and  Angles. 


Treatment  of  Line     .         .         .         .         .         .  .217 

Angle  :— 

'  declination  from  '  accepted     .         .         .  .218 

must  be  less  than  sum  of  two  right  angles  .     ,, 

'  multiple  angles  '  in  VI.  '^'^    .          .  •  -     ■>, 

proof  for  Ax.  10  accepted         .  .         .  .219 


§  6.   Omissions^  alterations,  and  additions,  suggested 
Modern  Bivals. 


Omission  of  I.  7  suggested  .  .  .         .  .220 


ARGUMENT    OF    DRAMA. 


Reasons  for  retaining  it : — 
needed  to  prove  I.  8 
not  included  in  new  I.  8 
proves  rig'ulify  of  Triangle 
I.  7,  8  analogous  to  III.  23,  24 
bears  on  practical  science 
Omission  of  II.  8  suggested 

Reason  for  retaining  it,  its  use  in  Geometrical 
Conic  Sections    ...... 

Alterations  suggested : — 
New  proofs  for  I.  5  : — 

*  hypothetical  construction  '     . 

superposition 

treating  sides  as  '  obliques  ' 

as  radii  of  a  Circle 


PAGE 


220 


221 


Inversion  of  order  of  I. 


•ejected 


1.18,19,20; 
Fuller  proof  of  I.  24 ;  accepted    . 
Algebraical  proofs  of  II.  ;  rejected 
Additions  suggested  : — 
New  Axiom ;  accepted 
Two  new  Theorems ;  do.     . 


do. 


222 


^5 

223 


224 


§  7.  The  summing -v]). 


Euclid's  farewell  speech 


.   225 


APPENDICES. 


Extract  from  Mr.  Todhunters  essay  on  '  Ele- 
mentary Geometry'  included  in  '  The  Con- 
flict of  Studies,  &c! 226 

II. 

Extract  from  Mr.  Be  Morgans  revieiv  of 
Mr.  Wilson's  Geometry,  in  the  '  Athenceum ' 
for  Jidy  1 8,  1868 246 

III. 

Proof  thai,  if  any  one  Propositio7i  of  Table  II 
he  granted  as  an  Axiom^  the  rest  can  he 
deduced  from  it         .         .         .         .         .252 


APPENDICES.  XXXI 


IV. 

PAGE 

List  of  Fropositions  of  Euc.  /,  //,  ivitli  refer- 
ences to  their  occurrence  in  the  manuals 
of  his  Modern  Rivals : — 

§  I .  References  to  Legeyidre^  CuthherUotij  Henrici^  Wilson^ 

Pierce,  and  Willock 262 

§  2.    'References  to  the  other  Modern  Rivals  .         .270 


ACT   L 

Scene  I. 

'  Confusion  worse  confounded.' 
\SsrpVP     n     r.nJJana     of..  J,.        m:^^      ...'.J..:.r±        t»^- 


ERRATUM. 

Page  261,  1.  9,/or  i.e.  >Z  BAB     read  i.e.  Z  HAD  >IBAD  ; 


Min.  So,  my  friend!  That's  the  way  you  prove  I.  19, 
is  it  ?  Assuming  I.  20  ?  Cool,  refreshingly  cool !  But 
stop  a  bit !  Perhaps  he  doesn^t  '  declare  to  win '  on  Euclid. 
Let's  see.  Ah,  just  so !  '  Legendre,'  of  course  !  Well, 
I  suppose  I  must  give  him  full  marks  for  it :  what's  the 
question  worth  ? — Wait  a  bit,  though  !  Where's  his  paper 
of  yesterday?  I've  a  very  decided  impression  he  was  all 
for  '  Euclid '  then  :  and  I  know  the  paper  had  I.  20  in  it. 

'^  B 


ACT    I. 

Scene  I. 

'  Cotifusion  worse  confounded.' 

\Scene,  a  College  dudy.  Time,  midvigJtf.  Mixos  dis- 
covered  seated  between  tivo  gigantic  j)iles  of  manuscripts. 
Ever  and  anon  lie  takes  a  joaper  from  one  Tieap^  reads  it, 
makes  an  entry  in  a  book,  and  with  a  ivearij  sigh  transfers 
it  to  the  other  heap.  His  hair,  from  much  running  of  fiugers 
through  it,  radiates  in  all  directions^  and  surrounds  his  head 
like  a  halo  of  glory,  or  like  the  second  Corollary  of  Euc. 
I.  32.  Over  one  paper  he  ponders  gloomily,  and  at  length 
breaks  out  in  a  passionate  soliloquy. ~\ 

Min.  So,  my  friend!  That's  the  way  you  prove  I.  19, 
is  it?  Assuming  I.  20?  Cool,  refreshingly  cool!  But 
stop  a  bit !  Perhaps  he  doesn^t  '  declare  to  win '  on  Euclid. 
Let's  see.  Ah,  just  so !  '  Legendre,'  of  course  !  Well, 
I  suppose  I  must  give  him  full  marks  for  it :  what's  the 
question  worth  ? — Wait  a  bit,  though  !  Where's  his  paper 
of  yesterday  ?  I've  a  very  decided  impression  he  was  all 
for  '  Euclid '  then  :  and  I  know  the  paper  had  I.  20  in  it. 

^<^  B 


MINOS    AND  [Act  I. 


.  .  .  Ah,  here  it  is !  'I  think  we  do  know  the  sweet 
Koman  hand.'  Kerens  the  Proposition,  as  large  as  life, 
and  proved  by  I.  19.  'Now,  infidel,  I  have  thee  on  the 
hip ! '  You  shall  have  such  a  sweet  thin;^  to  do  in  viva- 
voce^  my  very  dear  friend !  You  shall  have  the  two 
Propositions  together,  and  take  them  in  any  order  you 
like.  It's  my  profound  conviction  that  you  don't  know 
how  to  prove  either  of  them  without  the  other.  They'll 
have  to  introduce  each  other,  like  Messrs.  Pyke  and  Pluck. 
But  what  fearful  confusion  the  whole  subject  is  getting 
into  !     (Knocking  heard.)     Come  in  ! 

Enter  Rhadamanthus. 

Jihad.  I  say !  Are  we  bound  to  mark  an  answer  that's 
a  clear  logical  fallacy  ? 

Min.  Of  course  you  are — with  that  peculiar  mark  which 
cricketers  call  '  a  duck's  Qgg,^  and  thermometers  '  zero.' 

Bhad.  Well,  just  listen  to  this  proof  of  I.  39, 

Reads, 


C 


« Let  EF  meet  the  two  parallel  Lines  AB,  CD,  in  the 
points  GH.  The  alternate  angles  AGH,  GHD,  shall  be 
equal. 


Sc.  I.]  RHADAMANTHUS. 


'For  A  Gil  and  EGB  are  equal  because  vertically  oppo- 
site, and  EGB  is  also  equal  to  GIIL  (Definition  9) ;  there- 
fore AGE  is  equal  to  GIID ;  but  these  are  alternate 
ang-les.' 

Did  you  ever  hear  anything  like  that  for  calm  assump- 
tion ? 

3Im.  What  does  the  miscreant  mean  by  '  Definition  9 '  ? 

E/md.  Oh,  that's  the  grandest  of  all !  You  must  listen 
to  that  bit  too.  There's  a  reference  at  the  foot  of  the  page 
to  '  Cooley.'  So  I  hunted  up  Mr.  Cooley  among  the  heaps 
of  Geometries  they've  sent  me — (by  the  way,  I  wonder  if 
they've  sent  t/ou  the  full  lot?  Forty-five  ^\ere  left  in  my 
rooms  to-day,  and  ten  of  them  I'd  never  even  heard  of 
till  to-day !) — well,  as  I  was  saying,  I  looked  up  Cooley, 
and  here's  the  Definition. 

Reach. 

'  E/ight  Lines  are  said  to  be  parallel  when  they  are 
equally  and  similarly  inclined  to  the  same  right  Line,  or 
make  equal  angles  with  it  towards  the  same  side.' 

Min,  That  is  very  soothing.  So  far  as  I  can  make 
it  out,  Mr.  Cooley  quietly  assumes  that  a  Pair  of  Lines, 
w^hich  make  equal  angles  with  one  Line,  do  so  with  all 
Lines.  He  might  just  as  well  say  that  a  young  lady,  who 
was  inclined  to  07ie  young  man,  was  '  equally  and  similarly 
inclined '  to  all  young  men  ! 

Bhad.  She  might  'make  equal  angling'  with  them  all, 
anyhow.     But,  seriously,  what  are  we  to  do  with  Cooley? 

Min.  (flioiiglii fully)  Well,  if  we  had  him  in  the  Schools, 
I  think  we  should  pluck  him. 

B  2 


M/NOS    AND  [Act  I. 


Bltacl.  But  as  to  this  answer  ? 

Min.  Oh,  give  it  full  marks  !  What  have  we  to  do 
with  logic,  or  truth,  or  falsehood,  or  right,  or  wrong? 
'We  are  but  markers  of  a  larger  growth^ — only  that  we 
have  to  mark  foul  strokes,  which  a  respectable  billiard- 
marker  doesn't  do,  as  a  general  rule ! 

Rhacl.  There's  one  thing  more  I  want  joxjl  to  look  at. 
Here's  a  man  who  puts  '  Wilson '  at  the  top  of  his  paper, 
and  proves  Euc.  I.  32  from  first  principles,  it  seems  to 
me,  without  using  any  other  Theorem  at  all. 

Min.  The  thing  sounds  impossible. 

Rhad.  So  /  should  have  said.     Here's  the  proof. 


'  Slide  Z  DBA  along  BF  into  position  GAF,  GA  having 
same  direction  as  BC  (Ax.  9) ;  similarly  slide  Z  BCE 
along  AE  into  position  GAG.  Then  the  ext.  Is—CAF, 
FAG,  GAC=one  revolution  =  two  straight  Zs.  But  the 
ext.  and  int.  Zs  =  3  straight  Z  s.  Therefore  the  int.  Zs  = 
one  straight  Z  =  2  right  angles.     Q.  E.  D.' 

I'm  not  well  up  in  ^  Wilson' :  but  surely  he  doesn^t  beg 
the  whole  question  of  Parallels  in  one  axiom  like  this  ! 

3Iin.  Well,  no.  There's  a  Theorem  and  a  Corollary.  But 
this  is  a  sharp  man  :  he  has  seen  that  the  Axiom  does  just 


Sc.  I.]  RHADAaMANTHUS. 


as  well  by  itself.  Did  you  ever  see  one  of  those  conjurers 
bring  a  globe  of  live  fish  out  of  a  pocket-handkerchief? 
That's  the  kind  of  thing  we  have  in  Modern  Geometry. 
A  man  stands  before  you  with  nothing  but  an  Axiom  in 
his  hands.  He  rolls  up  his  sleeves.  '  Observe,  gentlemen, 
T  have  nothing  concealed.  There  is  no  deception !  '  And 
the  next  moment  you  have  a  complete  Theorem,  Q.  E.  D. 
and  all ! 

Rhad.  Well,  so  far  as  1  can  see,  the  proof's  worth 
nothing.     What  am  I  to  mark  it  ? 

3Ibi.  Full  marks  :  we  must  accept  it.  Why,  my  good 
fellow,  I'm  getting  into  that  state  of  mind,  I'm  ready  to 
mark  any  thing  and  aiif/  body.  If  the  Ghost  in  Hamlet 
came  up  this  minute  and  said  '  Mark  me ! '  I  should  say 
'  I  w  ill  I    Hand  in  your  papers  ! ' 

Rhad.  Ah,  it^s  all  very  well  to  chaflp,  but  it's  enough 
to  drive  a  man  wild,  to  have  to  mark  ^11  this  rubbish ! 
Well,  good  night !     I  must  get  back  to  my  work.       \_ExU. 

Mill,  [hidisliiidlj/)  I'll  just  take  forty  winks,  and — 


[Snores.) 


ACT    I. 


Scene  II. 

Oi/K  ayaBuv  TtoKvKoipaviri'    us  Koipavcs  earoj, 
E~s  PaaiKels. 

[Minos  sleejjwg :  to  him  enter  the  I*hantasm  o/' Euclid. 
Minos  opens  his  eyes  and  regards  him  with  a  blank  and 
Hony  gaze,  without  betrayivg  the  slightest  surprise  or  even 
interest.'] 


J  I.     A  priori  reasons  for  retaining 
Euclid s  Manual. 


Euc,  Now  what  is  it  you  really  require  in  a  Manual 
of  Geometry  ? 

Min.  Excuse  me,  but — with  all  respect  to  a  shade  whose 
name  I  have  reverenced  from  early  boyhood — is  not  that 
rather  an  abrupt  way  of  starting  a  conversation  ?  Remem- 
ber, we  are  twenty  centuries  apart  in  history,  and  con- 
sequently have  never  had  a  personal  interview  till  now. 
Surely  a  few  preliminary  remarks — 


EUCLID'S    MANUAL. 


Emc.  Centuries  are  long",  my  good  sir,  but  mi/  time 
to-night  is  short :  and  I  never  was  a  man  of  many  words. 
So  kindly  waive  all  ceremony  and  answer  my  question. 

M'm.  Well,  so  far  as  I  can  answer  a  question  that  comes 
upon  me  so  suddenly,  I  should  say — a  book  that  will  exer- 
cise the  learner  in  habits  of  clear  definite  conception,  and 
enable  him  to  test  the  logical  value  of  a  scientific  argument. 

Euc.  You  do  not  require,  then,  a  complete  repertory  of 
Geometrical  truth  ? 

Min.  Certainlv  not.  It  is  the  evepy^ta  rather  than  the 
€pyov  that  we  need  here. 

Euc.  And  yet  many  of  my  Modern  Rivals  have  thus 
attempted  to  improve  upon  me — by  filling  up  what  they 
took  to  be  my  omissions. 

Mi7i.  I  doubt  if  they  are  much  nearer  to  completeness 
themselves. 

Euc.  I  doubt  it  too.  It  is,  I  think,  a  friend  of  yours 
who  has  amused  himself  by  tabulating  the  various  Theorems 
which  might  be  enunciated  in  the  single  subject  of  Pairs  of 
Lines.     How  many  did  he  make  them  out  to  he? 

Min.  About  two  hundred  and  fifty,  I  believe. 

Euc.  At  that  rate,  there  would  probably  be,  within  the 
limits  of  my  First  Book,  about  how  many  ? 

Min.  A  thousand,  at  least. 

Euc.  What  a  popular  school-book  it  will  be!  How 
boys  will  bless  the  name  of  the  writer  who  first  brings 
out  the  complete  thousand  ! 

Min.  I  think  your  Manual  is  fully  long  enough  already 
for  all  possible  purposes  of  teaching.  It  is  not  in  the 
region  of  new  matter  that  you  need  fear   your  ^Modern 


8  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  1. 

Rivals :  it  is  in  quality^  not  in  quantity^  that  they  claim 
to  supersede  you.  Your  methods  of  proof,  so  they  assert, 
are  antiquated,  and  worthless  as  compared  with  the  new 
lights. 

Euc.  It  is  to  that  very  point  that  I  now  propose  to 
address  myself:  and,  as  we  are  to  discuss  this  matter 
mainly  with  reference  to  the  wants  of  leginners^  we  may 
as  well  limit  our  discussion  to  the  subject-matter  of  Books 
I  and  II. 

Min.  I  am  quite  of  that  opinion. 

T^nc.  The  first  point  to  settle  is  whether,  for  purposes  of 
teaching  and  examining,  you  desire  to  have  one  fixed 
logical  sequence  of  Propositions,  or  would  allow  the  use 
of  conflicting  sequences,  so  that  one  candidate  in  an  ex- 
amination might  use  X  to  prove  J,  and  another  use  Y to 
prove  X — or  even  that  the  same  candidate  might  offer 
hoik  proofs,  thus  'arguing  in  a  circle.' 

Min.  A  very  eminent  Modern  Rival  of  yours,  Mr.  Wilson, 
seems  to  think  that  no  such  fixed  sequence  is  really  neces- 
sary. He  says  (in  his  Preface,  p.  lo)  '  Geometry  when 
treated  as  a  science,  treated  inartificially,  falls  into  a 
certain  order  from  which  there  can  be  no  very  wide 
departure ;  and  the  manuals  of  Geometry  will  not  differ 
from  one  another  nearly  so  widely  as  the  manuals  of 
algebra  or  chemistry ;  yet  it  is  not  difficult  to  examine 
in  algebra  and  chemistry.' 

Hue.  Books  may  differ  very  '  widely '  without  differing 
in  logical  sequence — the  only  kind  of  difference  which 
could  bring  two  text-books  into  such  hopeless  collision 
that  the  one  or  the  other  would  have  to  be  abandoned. 


Sc.  11.  §  I.]  EUCLID'S    MANUAL. 


Let  me  give  you  a  few  instances  of  conflicting"  logical 
sequences  in  Geometry.  Legendre  proves  my  Prop.  5  by 
Prop.  8,  18  by  19,  19  by  20,  27  by  28,  29  by  32.  Cuth- 
bertson  proves  '>^']  by  41.  Reynolds  proves  5  by  20. 
When  Mr.  Wilson  lias  produced  similarly  conflicting  se- 
quences in  the  manuals  of  algebra  or  chemistry,  we  may 
then  compare  the  subjects  :  till  then,  his  remark  is  quite 
irrelevant  to  the  question. 

Mbi,  I  do  not  think  he  will  be  able  to  do  so :  indeed 
there  are  very  few  logical  chains  at  all  in  those  subjects — 
most  of  the  Propositions  being  proved  from  first  principles. 
I  think  I  mav  grant  at  once  that  it  is  essential  to  have 
one  definite  logical  sequence,  however  many  manuals  we 
employ :  to  use  the  words  of  another  of  your  Rivals, 
Mr.  Cuthbertson  (Pref.  p.  viii.),  '  enormous  inconvenience 
would  arise  in  conducting  examinations  with  no  recog- 
nised sequence  of  Propositions.'  This  however  applies  to 
logical  sequences  only,  such  as  your  Props.  13^  15,  16^ 
i8_,  19,  20,  11,  which  form  a  continuous  chain.  There 
are  many  Propositions  whose  place  in  a  manual  would  be 
partly  arbitrary.  Your  Prop.  8,  for  instance,  is  not  wanted 
till  we  come  to  Prop.  48,  so  that  it  might  occupy  any 
intermediate  position,  without  involving  risk  of  circular 
argument. 

Uluc.  Now,  in  order  to  secure  this  uniform  logical 
sequence,  we  should  require  to  know,  as  to  any  particular 
Proposition,  what  other  Propositions  were  its  logical  de- 
scendants, so  that  we  might  avoid  using  any  of  these 
in  proving  it  ? 

Mill.  Exactly  so. 


10  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [AcT  I. 

Tiuc.  We  might  of  course  give  this  information  by 
attaching  to  each  enunciation  references  to  its  logical 
descendants :  but  this  would  be  a  very  cumbrous  plan. 
A  better  way  would  be  to  give  them  in  the  form  of 
a  genealogy,  but  this  would  be  very  bulky  if  the  enuncia- 
tions themselves  were  inserted :  so  that  it  would  be  de- 
sirable to  have  numbers  to  distinguish  the  enunciations. 
In  that  case  (supposing  my  logical  sequence  to  be  adopted) 
the  genealogy  would  stand  thus  : — {see  Frontispiece). 

Min.  Would  it  not  be  enough  to  publish  an  arranged 
list  (which  would  be  all  the  better  if  numbered  also),  and 
to  enact  that  no  Proposition  should  be  used  to  prove  any 
of  its  predecessors  ? 

Euc.  That  would  hamper  the  writers  of  manuals  very 
much  more  than  the  genealogy  would.  Suppose,  for 
instance,  that  you  adopted,  in  the  list,  the  order  of 
Theorems  in  my  First  Book,  and  that  a  writer  wished 
to  prove  Prop.  8  by  Prop.  47  :  this  would  not  interfere 
with  my  logical  sequence,  and  yet  your  list  would  bar  him 
from  doing  so. 

Min.  But  we  might  place  8  close  before  48,  and  he 
would  then  be  free  to  do  as  you  suggest. 

Euc.  And  suppose  some  other  writer  wished  to  prove 
24  by  8  ? 

Min.  I  see  now  that  any  single  list  must  necessarily 
prevent  many  possible  arrangements  which  would  not 
conflict  with  the  agreed-on  logical  sequence.  And  yet 
this  is  what  the  Committee  of  the  Association  for  the 
Improvement  of  Geometrical  Teaching  have  approved  of, 
namely,   '  a  standard  sequence  for  examination  purposes,' 


Sc.  II.  §  I.]  EUCLID'S    MANUAL.  11 

and  ^^  hat  the  Association  have  published  in  their  '  Sylla- 
bus of  Plane  Geometry.' 

Knc.  I  think  they  have  overlooked  the  fact  that  they 
are  enacting-  many  more  sequences,  as  binding  on  writers, 
than  the  one  logical  sequence  which  they  desire  to  secure. 
Their  'standard  sequence'  would  be  fitly  replaced  by  a 
^standard  genealog}'.'  But  in  any  case  we  are  agreed 
that  it  is  desirable  to  have,  besides  a  standard  logical 
soquencCj  a  standard  list  of  enunciations,  numbered  for 
reference  ? 

M'ln.  We  are. 

FjUC.  The  next  point  to  settle  is,  ichat  sequence  and 
numbering  to  adopt.  You  will  allow,  I  think,  that  there 
are  strong  a  jiriori  reasons  for  retaining  m?/  numbers.  The 
Propositions  have  been  known  by  those  numbers,  for  two 
thousand  years ;  they  have  been  referred  to,  probably,  by 
hundreds  of  writers — in  many  cases  by  the  numbers  only, 
without  the  enunciations  :  and  some  of  them,  I.  5  and  I.  47 
for  instance — ^  the  Asses'  Bridge '  and  '  the  Windmill ' — 
are  now  historical  characters,  and  their  nicknames  are 
'  familiar  as  household  words.' 

Min.  Even  if  no  better  sequence  than  yours  could  be 
found,  it  might  still  be  urged  that  a  new  set  of  numbers 
must  be  adopted,  in  order  to  introduce,  in  their  proper 
places,  some  important  Theorems  which  have  been  added 
to  the  subject  since  your  time. 

Euc.  That  want,  if  it  were  proved  to  exist,  might, 
I  think,  be  easily  provided  for  without  discarding  my 
system  of  numbers.  If  you  wished,  for  instance,  to  insert 
two  new  Propositions  between  I.  13  and  I.  14,  it  would  be 


12  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  I. 

far  less  inconvenient  to  call  them  13  B  and  13  C  than 
to  abandon  the  old  numbers. 

Min.  I  give  up  the  objection. 

Euc.  You  will  allow  then,  I  think,  that  my  sequence 
and  system  of  numbers  should  not  be  abandoned  without 
good  cause  ? 

Min.  Oh,  certainly.  And  the  omis  prohandi  lies  clearly 
on  your  Modern  Rivals,  and  not  on  you. 

Euc.  Unless,  then,  it  should  appear  that  one  of  my 
Modern  Rivals,,  whose  logical  sequence  is  incompatible 
with  mine,  is  so  decidedly  better  in  his  treatment  of  really 
important  topics,  as  to  make  it  worth  while  to  suffer  all 
the  inconvenience  of  a  change  of  numbers,  you  would  not 
recognise  his  demand  to  supersede  my  Manual  ? 

Min.  On  that  point  let  me  again  quote  Mr.  Wilson.  In 
his  Preface,  p.  15,  he  says,  '  In  a  few  years  I  hope  that  our 
leading  mathematicians  will  have  published,  perhaps  in  con- 
cert, one  or  more  text-books  of  Geometry,  not  inferior^  to 
say  the  least,  to  those  of  France,  and  that  they  will  supersede 
Euclid  by  the  sheer  force  of  superior  merit. ^ 

Euc.  And  I  should  be  quite  content  to  be  so  superseded. 
*  A  fair  field  and  no  favour  Ms  all  I  ask. 


\  2.     Method   of  iiroceclure  in  examining 
Modern  Rivals. 


Min.  You  wish  me   then  to  compare  your  book  with 
those  of  your  Modern  Rivals? 

Euc.  Yes.     But,  in  doing  this,  I  must  beg  you  to  bear 


Sc.  II.  §  2.]  MODERN    RIVALS.  13 

in  mind  that  a  Modern  Rival  will  not  have  proved  his 
case  if  he  only  succeeds  in  showing* 

(i)  that  certain  Propositions  mig-ht  w^ith  advantage  be 
omitted  (for  this  a  teacher  would  be  free  to  do,  so  long- 
as  he  left  the  logical  sequence  complete) ; 

or  (2)  that  certain  proofs  mig-ht  with  advantag'e  be 
changed  for  others  (for  these  might  be  interpolated  as 
'  alternative  proofs  ^) ; 

or  (3)  that  certain  new  Propositions  are  desirable  (for 
these  also  might  be  interpolated,  without  altering  the 
numbering  of  the  existing  Propositions). 

All  these  matters  will  need  to  be  fully  considered  here- 
after, if  you  should  decide  that  my  Manual  ought  to  be 
retained :  but  they  do  not  constitute  the  evidence  on  which 
that  decision  should  be  based. 

Wn.  That.,  I  think,  you  have  satisfactorily  proved.  But 
what  would  you  consider  to  be  sufficient  grounds  for 
abandoning  your  Manual  in  favour  of  another  ? 

Euc.  Many  grave  charges  have  been  brought  against 
my  Manual;  but,  of  all  these,  there  are  only  two  which 
I  regard  as  crucial  in  this  matter.  The  first  concerns 
my  arrangement  of  Problems  and  Theorems  :  the  second 
my  treatment  of  Parallels. 

If  it  be  agreed  that  Problems  and  Theorems  ought  to 
be  treated  separately,  my  system  of  numbering  must  of 
course  be  abandoned,  and  no  reason  will  remain  why  my 
Manual  should  then  be  retained  as  a  ichole ;  which  is  the 
only  point  I  am  concerned  with.  This  question  you  can, 
of  course,  settle  on  its  own  merits,  without  examining 
any  of  the  new  Manuals. 


14  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [AcT  I. 

If,  again,  it  be  agreed  tliat^  in  treating  Parallels,  some 
other  method,  essentiallij  different  from  mine,  ought  to  be 
adopted,  I  feel  that,  after  so  vital  a  change  as  that,  in- 
volving (as  no  doubt  it  would)  the  abandonment  of  my 
sequence  and  system  of  numbering,  the  remainder  of  my 
Manual  would  not  be  worth  fighting  for,  though  portions 
of  it  might  be  embodied  in  the  new  Manual.  To  settle 
this  question,  you  must,  of  course,  examine  one  by  one  the 
new  methods  that  have  been  proposed. 

Min.  You  would  not  even  ask  to  have  your  Manual 
retained  as  an  alternative  for  the  new  one  ? 

Hue.  No.  For  I  think  it  essential  for  purposes  of  teach- 
ing, that  in  treating  this  vital  topic  one  uniform  method 
should  be  adopted ;  and  that  this  method  should  be  the 
best  possible  (for  it  is  almost  inconceivable  that  two 
methods  of  treating  it  should  be  equally  good).  An 
alternative  proof  of  a  minor  Proposition  may  fairly  be 
inserted  now  and  then  as  about  equal  in  merit  to  the 
standard  proof,  and  may  make  a  desirable  variety :  but 
on  this  one  vital  point  it  seems  essential  that  nothing 
but  the  best  proof  existing  should  be  offered  to  the  limited 
capacity  of  a  learner.  Vacuis  committere  venis  nil  nisi  lent 
decet. 

Min.  I  agree  with  you  that  we  ought  to  have  one 
system  only,  and  that  the  best,  for  treating  the  subject 
of  Parallels.  But  would  you  have  me  limit  my  examina- 
tion of  your  '  Modern  Rivals  '  to  this  single  topic  ? 

Euc.  No.  There  are  several  other  matters  of  so  great 
importance,  and  admitting  of  so  much  variety  of  treat- 
ment, that  it  would  be  well  to   examine  any  method  of 


Sc.  II.  §  2.]  MODERN    RIVALS.  15 

dealing  with  them  which  differs  much  from  mine — not 
with  a  view  of  substituting*  the  new  Manual  for  mine, 
but  in  order  to  make  such  changes  in  my  proofs  as  may 
be  thought  desirable.  There  are  other  matters  again, 
where  changes  have  been  suggested,  which  you  ought 
to  consider,  but  on  general  grounds,  not  by  examining 
particular  writers. 

Let  me  enumerate  what  I  conceive  should  be  the  sub- 
jects of  your  enquiry,  arranged  in  order  of  importance. 

(i)  The  combination,  or  separation,  of  Problems  and 
Theorems. 

(a)  The  treatment  of  Pairs  of  Lines,  especially  Parallels, 
for  which  various  new  methods  have  been  suggested. 
These  may  be  classified  as  involving — 

(a)  Infinite  series  :  suggested  by  Legexuee. 

(^)  Angles  made  with  transversals  :  Cooley. 

(y)  Equidistance :  Cuthbertsox. 

(6)   Revolving  Lines  :  Henrici. 

(e)  Direction:  Wilson,  Pierce,  AVillock. 

[Qj   The   substitution  of  '  Playfair's   Axiom  '   for   my 
Axiom  12. 

If  your  decision,  on  these  two  crucial  questions,  be 
given  in  my  favour,  we  may  take  it  as  settled,  I  think, 
that  my  Manual  ought  to  be  retained  as  a  wJiole :  how 
far  it  should  be  modified  to  suit  modern  requirements  will 
be  matter  for  further  consideration. 

(3)  The  principle  of  superposition. 

(4)  The  use  of  diagonals  in  Book  II. 


16  Ml.yOS    AND     EUCLID.  [AcT  I. 

These  two  are  general  questions,  and  will  not  need  the 
examination  of  particular  authors. 

Besides  this,  it  will  be  well,  in  order  that  your  en- 
quiry into  the  claims  of  my  Modern  Rivals  may  be  as 
complete  as  possible,  to  review  them  one  by  one,  with 
reference  to  their  treatment  of  matters  not  already  dis- 
cussed, especially : — 

(5)  Right  Lines. 

(6)  Angles,  including  right  angles. 

(7)  Propositions  of  mine  omitted. 

(8)  Propositions  of  mine  treated  by  a  new  method. 

(9)  New  Propositions. 

(10)  And  you  may  as  well  conclude,  in  each  case,  with  a 
general  survey  of  the  book,  as  to  style,  &c. 

The  following  may  be  taken  as  a  fairly  complete  cata- 
logue of  the  books  to  be  examined  : — 

T.  Leerendre.  8.  Chauvenet. 

2.  Cooley.  9.  Loomis. 

3.  Cuthbertson.  10.  Morell. 

4.  Henrici.  11.  Reynolds. 

5.  Wilson.  3  2.  Wright. 

6.  Pierce.  13.  Wilson's  '  Syllabus '- 

7.  Willock.  Manual. 

You  should  also  examine  the  Syllabus,  published  by  the 
Association  for  the  Improvement  of  Geometrical  Teach- 
ing, on  which  the  last-named  Manual  is  based.  Not  that 
it  can  be  considered  as  a  '  Bival ' — in  fact,  it  is  not  a 
text-book  at  all,  but  a  mere  list  of  enunciations — but 
because,  first,  it  comes  with  an  array  of  imposing  names 


Sc.  II.  §  2.]  MODERN    RIVALS.  17 

to  recommend  it,  and  secondly,  it  discards  x:£iY  system  of 
numbers,  so  that  its  adoption,  as  a  standard  for  exami- 
nations, would  seriously  interfere  with  the  retention  of 
my  Manual  as  the  standard  text-book. 

Now,  of  these  questions,  I  shall  be  most  happy  to  dis- 
cuss with  you  the  general  ones  (I  mean  questions  i,  2  (Q, 
3,  and  4)  before  we  conclude  this  interview:  but,  when  it 
comes  to  criticising"  particular  authors,  I  must  leave  you 
to  yourself,  to  deal  with  them  as  best  you  can. 

M'ln.  It  will  be  weary  work  to  do  it  all  alone.  And 
yet  I  suppose  you  cannot,  even  with  your  supernatural 
powers,  fetch  me  the  authors  themselves  ? 

Euc.  I  dare  not.  The  living  human  race  is  so  strangely 
prejudiced.  There  is  nothing  men  object  to  so  emphati- 
cally as  being  transferred  by  g-hosts  from  place  to  place. 
I  cannot  say  they  are  consistent  in  this  matter :  they 
are  for  ever  ^  raising '  or  '  laying '  us  poor  ghosts — we 
cannot  even  haunt  a  garret  without  having  the  parish 
at  our  heels,  bent  on  making  us  change  our  quarters  : 
whereas  if  /  were  to  venture  to  move  one  single  small 
boy — say  to  lift  him  by  the  hair  of  his  head  over  only 
two  or  three  houses,  and  to  set  him  down  safe  and  sound 
in  a  neighbour's  garden — why,  I  give  you  my  word,  it 
would  be  the  talk  of  the  town  for  the  next  month  ! 

M'ln.  I  can  well  believe  it.  But  what  can  you  do  for 
me  ?     Are  their  Boppelgdnger  available  ? 

Euc.  I  fear  not.  The  best  thing  I  can  do  is  to  send 
you  the  Phantasm  of  a  German  Professor,  a  great  friend 
of  mine.  Pie  has  read  all  books,  and  is  ready  to  defend 
any  thesis,  true  or  untrue. 

c 


18  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  I. 

Mln.  A  cliarming  companion  !     And  his  name  ? 

Euc.  Phantasms  have  no  names — only  numbers.  You 
may  call  him  '  Herr  Niemand/  or,  if  you  prefer  it^, 
*  Number  one  -  hundred  -  and  -  twenty-  three  -  million  -four 
hundred-and-fifty-six-thousand-seven-hundred-and-eighty- 
nine.' 

Mm.  For  constant  use,  I  prefer  '  Herr  Niemand.'  Let 
us  now  consider  the  question  of  the  separation  of  Pro- 
blems and  Theorems. 


\  3.    The,  comhinatioyi,  or  separation,  of 
Frohlems  and  Theorems. 


Eiic.  I  shall  be  glad  to  hear,  first,  the  reasons  given 
for  separating  them,  and  will  then  tell  you  m?/  reasons  for 
mixing  them. 

Mln.  I  understand  that  the  Committee  of  the  Associa- 
tion for  the  Improvement  of  Geometrical  Teaching,  in 
their  Report  on  the  Syllabus  of  the  Association,  consider 
the  separation  as  *  equivalent  to  the  assertion  of  the 
principle  that,  while  Problems  are  from  their  very  nature 
dependent  for  the  form,  and  even  the  possibility,  of  their 
solution  on  the  arbitrary  limitation  of  the  instruments 
allowed  to  be  used,  Theorems,  being  truths  involving  no 
arbitrary  element,  ought  to  be  exhibited  in  a  form  and 
sequence  independent  of  sucb  limitations.'  They  add 
however  that  'it  is  probable  that  most  teachers  would 
prefer  to  introduce  Problems,  not  as  a  separate  section  of 


Sc.  II.  §  3.]   PROBLEMS    AXD     THEOREMS.  19 

Geometry,  but  rather  in  connection  with  the  Theorems 
with  which  they  are  essentially  related/ 

Ekc.  It  seems  rather  a  strange  proposal,  to  print  the 
Propositions  in  one  order  and  read  them  in  another.  But 
a  stronger  objection  to  the  proposal  is  that  several  of 
the  Problems  are  Theorems  as  well — such  as  I.  46,  for 
instance. 

311)1.  How  is  that  a  Theorem  ? 

Euc.  It  proves  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  Square. 
The  definition,  of  course,  does  not  assert  real  existence : 
it  is  merely  provisional.  Now,  if  you  omit  I.  46,  what 
right  would  you  have,  in  I.  47,  to  say  ^  draio  a  Square'? 
How  would  you  know  it  to  be  possible  ? 

Mill.  AYe  could  easily  deduce  that  from  I.  34. 

Euc.  No  doubt  a  Theorem  might  be  introduced  for  that 
purpose :  but  it  would  be  very  like  the  Problem  :  you 
would  have  to  say  '  '\f  a  figure  were  drawn  under  such  and 
such  conditions,  it  would  be  a  Square.'  Is  it  not  quite  as 
simple  to  draw  it  ? 

Then  again  take  I.  31,  where  it  is  required  to  draw 
a  Parallel.  Although  it  has  been  proved  in  I.  27  that 
such  things  as  parallel  Lines  exist,  that  does  not  tell  us 
that,  for  every  Line  and  for  every  point  without  that 
Line,  there  exists  a  real  Line,  parallel  to  the  given  Line 
and  iiassing  tlirov.gU  the  given  point.  And  yet  that  is  a  fact 
essential  to  the  proof  of  I.  32. 

2Hn.  I  must  allow  that  I.  31  and  I.  46  have  a  good 
claim  to  be  retained  in  their  places  :  and  if  two  are  to 
be  retained,  we  may  as  well  retain  all. 

Euc.   Another   argument,   for    retaining   the   Problems 

c  2 


20  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  I. 

where  they  are,  is  the  importance  of  keeping*  the  number- 
ing- unchanged — a  matter  we  have  already  discussed. 

But  perhaps  the  strongest  argument  is  that  it  saves 
you  from  '  hypothetical  constructions,'  the  danger  of 
which  has  been  so  clearly  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Tod- 
hunter  (see  pp.  222,  241). 

Min.  I  think  you  have  proved  your  case  very  satis- 
factorily. The  next  subject  is  '  the  treatment  of  Pairs  of 
Lines.'  Would  it  not  be  well,  before  entering  on  this 
enquiry,  to  tabulate  the  Propositions  that  have  been 
enunciated,  whether  as  Axioms  or  Theorems,  respecting 
them  ? 

Eiic.  That  will  be  an  excellent  plan.  It  will  both  give 
you  a  clear  -view  of  the  field  of  your  enquiry,  and  enable 
you  to  recognise  at  once  any  doubtful  Axioms  which  you 
may  meet  with. 

Min,  Will  you  then  favour  me  with  your  views  on  this 
matter  -? 

Euc.  Willingly.  It  is  a  subject  which  I  need  hardly  say 
I  considered  very  carefully  before  deciding  what  Definitions 
and  A^xioms  to  adopt. 


^  4.     Syllabus  of  j^roj^ositioiis  relating  to 
Fairs  of  Lines. 


Let  us  begin  with  the  simplest  possible  case,  a  Pair 
of  infinite  Lines  which  have  two  common  points,  and 
which  therefore  coincide  wholly,  and  let  us  consider  how 


Sc.  II.  §  4.]  PA  IKS     OF    LINES.  21 

such  a  Pair  may  be  defined,  and  what  other  properties 
it  possesses. 

After  that  wo  will  take  a  Pair  of  Lines  which  have 
a  common  point  and  a  separate  point  ('a  separate  point' 
being"  one  that  lies  on  one  of  the  Lines  but  not  on  the 
other),  and  which  therefore  have  no  other  common  point, 
and  treat  it  in  the  same  way. 

And  in  the  third  place  we  will  take  a  Pair  of  Lines 
which  have  no  common  point. 

And  let  us  understand,  by  '  the  distance  between  two 
points,'  the  length  of  the  right  Line  joining  them  ;  and, 
by  '  the  distance  of  a  point  from  a  Line,'  the  length  of  the 
perpendicular  drawn,  from  the  point,  to  the  Line. 

Now  the  properties  of  a  Pair  of  Lines  may  be  ranged 
under  four  headings  : — 

(i)  as  to  common  or  separate  points  ; 

(2)  as  to  the  angles  made  with  transversals  ; 

(3)  as  to  the  equidistance,  or  otherwise,  of  points  on  the 
one  from  the  other  ; 

(4)  as  to  direction. 

We  might  distinguish  the  first  two  classes,  which  I  hav-e 
mentioned,  as  '  coincident '  and  '  intersecting  ' :  and  these 
names  would  serve  very  well  if  we  were  going  to  consider 
only  infinite  Lines;  but,  as  all  the  relations  of  infinite 
Lines,  with  regard  to  angles  made  with  transversals, 
equidistance  of  points,  and  direction,  are  equally  true  of 
finite  portions  of  them,  it  will  be  well  to  use  names  which 
will  include  them  also.  And  the  names  I  would  suggest 
are  '  coincidental '  '  intersectional,'  and  '  separational.' 


22  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  T. 

By  '  coincidental  Lines,'  then,  I  shall  mean  Lines  which 
either  coincide  or  would  do  so  if  produced  :  and  by  '  inter- 
sectional  Lines  '  I  shall  mean  Lines  which  either  intersect 
or  would  do  so  if  produced ;  and,  by  '  separational  Lines,' 
Lines  which  have  no  common  point,  however  far  produced. 

In  the  same  way,  when  I  speak  of  '  Lines  having"  a  com- 
mon point,'  or  of  '  Lines  having  two  common  points,'  I 
shall  mean  Lines  which  either  have  such  points  or  would 
have  them  if  produced. 

It  will  also  save  time  and  trouble  to  agree  on  the  use 
of  a  certain  conventional  phrase  respecting  transversals. 

It  admits  of  easy  proof  that,  if  a  Pair  of  Lines  mnte, 
with  a  certain  transversal,  either  [a)  a  pair  of  alternate 
angles  equal,  or  (b)  an  exterior  angle  equal  to  the  interior 
opposite  angle  on  the  same  side  of  the  transversal,  or 
(c)  a  pair  of  interior  angles  on  the  same  side  of  the  trans- 
versal supplementary ;  they  will  make,  with  the  same 
transversal,  [d)  each  pair  of  alternate  angles  equal,  and 
(e)  every  exterior  angle  equal  to  the  interior  opposite  angle 
on  the  same  side  of  the  transversal,  and  (/")  each  pair  of 
interior  angles  on  the  same  side  of  the  transversal  sup- 
plementary. 

You  will  accept  that  as  a  simple  Theorem,  though  with 
a  somewhat  lengthy  enunciation  ? 

Min.  Certainly. 

Eiic.  The  phrase  I  propose  is  as  follows.  When  I  speak 
of  a  Pair  of  Lines  as  'equally  inclined  to'  a  transversal, 
I  wish  it  to  be  understood  that  they  fulfil  some  one  of 
the  three  conditions  [a),  (6),  {c),  and  therefore  all  the  three 
conditions  (W)^  (e),  (/). 


Sc.  II.  §  4.]  PAIRS     OF    LINES.  23 

Min.  A  most  convenient  abridgment. 

Ehc.  Similarly,  it  admits  of  easy  proof  that,  if  a  Pair 
of  Lines  make,  with  a  certain  transversal,  either  {11)  a  pair 
of  alternate  angles  unequal,  or  {h)  an  exterior  angle  un- 
equal to  the  interior  opposite  angle  on  the  same  side  of 
the  transversal,  or  (c)  a  pair  of  interior  angles  on  the  same 
side  of  the  transversal  not  supplementary  ;  they  will  make, 
with  the  same  transversal,  (il)  each  pair  of  alternate  angles 
unequal,  and  (e)  every  exterior  angle  unequal  to  the  in- 
terior opposite  angle  on  the  same  side  of  the  transversal, 
and  (y)  each  j^air  of  interior  angles  on  the  same  side 
of  the  transversal  not  supplementary. 

And  when   I   speak  of  a  Pair  of  Lines  as  '  unequally 
inclined  to'  a  transversal^  I  wish  it  to  be  understood  that 
they  fulfil  some   one  of  the  three   conditions  («),  (b),  (c), 
and  therefore  all  the  three  conditions  (^),  (e)^  (/). 
^lin.  Very  well. 

Euc.  Now  the  Propositions  relating  to  Pairs  of  Lines  may 
be  divided  into  two  classes,  the  first  covering  the  ground 
occupied  by  my  Axiom  10  ('  two  straight  Lines  cannot  en- 
close a  space')  and  my  Propositions  I.  16,  ij,  27,  28,  31  ; 
the  second  that  occupied  by  my  Axiom  12  and  Propositions 
I.  29, 30,  32.  Those  in  the  first  class  are  logical  deductions 
from  Axioms  which  have  never  been  disputed :  the  second 
class  has  furnished,  through  all  ages,  a  battle-field  for  rival 
mathematicians.  That  some  one  of  the  Propositions  in  this 
class  must  be  assumed  as  an  Axiom  is  agreed  on  all  hands, 
and  each  combatant  in  turn  proclaims  his  own  special 
favourite  to  be  the  one  axiomatic  truth  of  the  series,  in- 
sisting that  all  the  rest  ought  to  be  proved  as  Theorems. 


24  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [AcT  I. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  properties  of  Pairs  of  Lines. 

Sucii  pairs  may  be  arranged  in  three  distinct  classes. 
I  will  take  them  separately,  and  enumerate,  for  each  class-, 
first  th«  '  subjects,'  and  secondly  the  '  predicates,'  of  Pro- 
positions concerning  it. 

Mm.  Let  us  make  sure  that  we  understand  each  other 
as  to  those  two  words.  I  presume  that  a  'subject'  will 
include  just  so  much  '  property '  as  is  needed  to  indicate 
the  Pair  of  Lines  referred  to,  i.e.  to  serve  as  a  sufficient 
Definition  for  them  ? 

Eiic.  Exactly  so.  Now,  if  we  are  told  that  a  certain  Pair 
of  Lines  fulfil  some  one  of  the  following  conditions  :— 

(i)  they  have  two  common  points  ; 

or  (2)  they  have  a  common  point,  and  are  equally 
inclined  to  a  certain  transversal; 

or  (3)  they  have  a  common  point,  and  one  of  them 
has  two  points  on  the  same  side  of,  and  equidistant  from, 
the  other; 

or  (4)  they  have  a  common  point  and  identical 
directions ; 

we  may  conclude  that  they  fulfil  all  the  following 
conditions :  — 

(i)  they  are  coincidental ; 

(2)  they  are  equally  inclined  to  any  transversal ; 

(3)  they  are  '  equidistantial,  i.  e.  any  two  points  on  one 
are  equidistant  from  the  other  ; 

(4)  they  have  identical  directions. 


Sc.  II.  §  4.]  PAIRS     OF    LIASES.  25 

Min.  You  mean,  Ly  '  conclude,' that  we  may  prove  our 
conclusion  ? 

Ekc.  Yes,  wherever  proof  is  needed.  Conclusions  (1) 
and  (4)  need  none,  and  are  usually  stated  as  Axioms. 

Mfn.  In  subject  (4),  instead  of  ^  identical  directions,^ 
why  not  say  '  the  same  direction '  ? 

Enc.  Because  I  want  to  keep  clearly  in  view  that  there 
are  t?vo  Lines. 

3Ii?i.  In  predicate  (2),  you  speak  of  ^  an^  transversal': 
a  little  while  ago,  you  spoke  of  '  evety  exterior  angle.' 
Do  you  make  any  distinction  between  '  any'  and  ^ every"? 

Uuc.  Where  the  things  spoken  of  are  limited  in  number, 
I  use  ^  every';  where  infinite,  I  use  'any'  in  order  to 
bring  the  idea  within  the  grasp  of  our  finite  intellects. 
For  instance,  you  may  talk  of  '  every  grain  of  sand  in  the 
world ' :  there  are,  no  doubt,  what  country-folk  would 
call  'a  good  few'  of  them,  but  still  the  number  is  limited, 
and  the  mind  can  just  grasp  the  idea.  But  if  you  tell 
me  that  '  every  cubic  inch  of  Space  contains  eight  cubic 
half-inches,'  my  mind  is  unable  to  form  a  distinct  con- 
ception of  the  subject  of  your  Proposition  :  you  would 
convey  the  same  truth,  and  in  a  form  I  could  grasp,  by 
saying  '  any  cubic  inch.'' 

Min.  The  angles  made  with  the  transversal  are  a  little 
bewildering  when  the  Pair  of  Lines  shrinks,  as  it  does 
in  this  case,  into  one  Line.  For  instance,  what  becomes 
of  the  pair  of  interior  angles  on  the  same  side  of  the 
transversal  ? 

Euc.  A  diacrram  will  make  it  clear. 


26  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  I. 

\ 

A 


C 


C  H\  D 


il^ 


F 


By  examining'  the  second  figure  (in  which,  as  you  see, 
there  are  three  points  with  double  names)  we  find  that  the 
alternate  angles  AGF,  EHD,  have  become  vertical  angles  ; 
that  the  exterior  and  interior  opposite  angles  EGB,  EHD, 
have  become  the  same  angle ;  and  that  the  two  interior 
angles  BGF^  DHE^  have  become  adjacent  angles. 

3Iin,  That  is  quite  clear. 

Euc.  Let  us  o-o  on  to  the  second  class  of  Pairs  of  Lines. 

If  we  are  told  that  a  certain  Pair  of  Lines  fulfil  some 
one  of  the  following  conditions  : — 

(i)  they  have  a  common  point  and  a  separate  point ; 

or  (2)  they  have  a  common  point,  and  are  unequally 
inclined  to  a  certain  transversal ; 

or  (3)  they  have  a  common  point,  and  one  of  them  has 
two  points  not-equidistant  from  the  other ; 

or  (4)  they  have  a  common  point  and  different  direc- 
tions ; 

we  may  conclude  that  they  fulfil  all  the  following  con- 
ditions : — 

( 1 )  they  are  separational ; 

(2)  they  are  unequally  inclined  to  any  transversal ; 

(3)  any  two  points  on  one,  which  are  on  the  same  side 
of  the  other^  are  not  equidistant  from  it ; 


Sc.  II.  §  4.]  PAIRS     OF    LINES.  27 

(4)  a  point  may  be  found  on  each,  whose  distance 
from  the  other  shall  exceed  any  assigned  length ; 

(5)  they  have  different  directions. 

And  thirdly,  if  we  are  told  that  a  certain  Pair  of  Lines 
fulfil  some  one  of  the  following  conditions  : — 

(1)  they  have  a  separate  point,  and  are  equally  inclined 
to  a  certain  transversal ; 

or  (2)  they  have  a  separate  point,  and  one  of  them  has 
two  points  on  the  same  side  of,  and  equidistant  from,  the 
other ; 

we  may  conclude  that  they  are  separational. 

Mill.  AVh}^  not  use  your  own  word  '  parallel '  ? 

Euc.  Because  that  word  is  not  uniformly  employed,  by 
modern  writers,  in  one  and  the  same  sense.  I  would 
advise  you,  in  discussing  the  works  of  my  Modern  Rivals, 
to  disallow  the  use  of  the  word  '  parallel '  altogether,  and 
to  oblige  each  writer  to  adopt  a  word  which  shall  express 
his  own  definition. 

Min.  When  you  speak  of  two  points  on  one  Line,  2vhich 
are  on  the  same  side  of  the  othei\  being  ^  equidistant  from 
it,'  do  you  include  the  case  of  their  lying  on  the  other 
Line  ? 

Iiuc.  Certainly.  You  may  take  them  as  lying  on  either 
side  you  like,  and  at  zero -distances.  The  only  case 
excluded  is,  where  both  points  are  outside  the  other  Line, 
and  on  o^^josite  sides  of  it. 

Min.  I  understand  you. 


28 


MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [AcT  I. 


EuG.  We  shall  find  the  Table  of  Propositions,  which  1  now 
lay  before  you,  very  convenient  to  refer  to.  I  have  placed 
contranominal  Propositions  (i.  e.  Propositions  of  the  form 
'All  X  is  IV '  All  not-Fis  not-A^')  in  the  same  section. 


Table  I. 

Containing  tioenty  Fro])ositions,  of  ivhicJi  some 
are  undisputed  Axioms,  and  the  rest  real 
and.  valid  Theorems,  deducihle  from  undis- 
puted Axioms. 

[N.B.    Those  marked  ^  have  been  pro])osed  as  Axioms.] 


■^1.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  two  common  points_, 
are  coincidental. 

or 

■^.  Two  Lines  cannot  enclose  a  space.  [Euc.  Ax.] 

2.  {a)  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  a  separate  point, 

have  not  two  common  points. 

{h)  A  Pair  of  Lines,  w^hich  have  a  common  point 

and  a  separate  point,  are  intersectional. 


3.  If  there  be  given  a  Line  and  a  point,  it  is  possible 
to  draw  a  Line,  through  the  given  point,  intersectional 
with  the  given  Line. 


4.  A  Pair  of  intersectional  Lines  are  unequally  in- 
clined to  any  transversal. 

Cor.  I.  In  either  pair  of  alternate  angles,  that, 
which  is  on  the  side,  of  the  transversal,  remote  from  the 
point  of  intersection,  is  the  greater.  [I.  16.] 

Cor.  2.  Every  exterior  angle,  which  is  on  the  side, 
of  the  transversal,  next  to  the  point  of  intersection,  is 


Sc.  II.  §  4.]  PAI/^S    OF    LINES.  29 


greater  than  the  interior  opposite  angle  on  the  same 
side.  [I.  16.] 

Cor.  3.  The  pair  of  interior  angles^  which  are  on 
the  side,  of  the  transversal,  next  to  the  point  of  inter- 
section, are  together  less  than  two  right  angles.  [I.  17.] 

5.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  a  common  point  and 
are  equally  inclined  to  a  certain  transversal,  are  co- 
incidental. 

6.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  a  separate  point  and 
are  equally  inclined  to  a  certain  transversal,  are  separa- 
tional.  [I.  27,  28.] 


7.  If  there  be  given  a  Line  and  a  point  without  it, 
it  is  possible  to  draw  a  Line,  through  the  given  point, 
separational  from  the  given  Line.  [I.  31.] 


8.  A  Pair  of  intersectional  Lines  are  such  that  any 
two  points  on  one,  which  are  on  the  same  side  of  the 
other,  are  not  equidistant  from  it. 

Cor.   That   which  is    the   more    remote    from    the 
point  of  intersection  has  the  greater  distance. 

9.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  a  common  point  and 
of  which  one  has  two  points  on  the  same  side  of  and 
equidistant  from  the  other,  are  coincidental. 

10.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  a  separate  point  and 
of  which  one  has  two  points  on  the  same  side  of  and 
equidistant  from  the  other,  are  separational. 


11.  Each  of  a  Pair  of  intersectional  Lines  has,  in  each 
portion  of  it,  a  point  whose  distance  from  the  other  ex- 
ceeds any  given  length. 

or 

A  Pair  of  intersectional  Lines  diverge  without  limit. 


MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  I. 


12.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  two  common  points, 
have  identical  directions. 

^13.  (a)  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  different  direc- 
tions, have  not  two  common  points. 

{li)  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  a  common  point 
and  different  directions,  are  intersectional. 


■^14.  A  Pair  of  intersectional  Lines  have  different 
directions. 

■^15.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  a  common  point 
and  identical  directions,  are  coincidental. 

■^16.  If  there  be  given  a  Line  and  a  point  without  it: 
it  is  possible  to  draw  a  Line,  through  the  given  point, 
having  a  direction  different  from  that  of  the  given  Line. 

17.  A  Line,  which  has  a  point  in  common  with  one 
of  two  coincidental  Lines  has  a  point  in  common  with 
the  other  also. 

18.  A  Line,  which  has  a  point  in  common  with  one 
of  two  separational  Lines,  has  a  point  separate  from 
the  other. 

"^19.  A  Line,  which  has  a  point  in  common  with  one 
of  two  separational  Lines  and  also  a  point  in  common 
with  the  other,  is  intersectional  with  both. 

^20.  If  there  be  three  Lines ;  the  first  a  right  Line ; 
the  second,  not  assumed  to  be  right,  having  a  point 
separate  from  the  first  and  being  equidistantial  from 
it ;  the  third  a  right  Line  intersecting  the  first  and 
diverging  from  it  without  limit  on  the  side  next 
to  the  second :  the  third  is  intersectional  with  the 
second. 


Sc.  II.  §  4.]  PAIRS     OF    LLVES.  31 

Min.  I  see  that  2  (a)  is  the  contranominal  of  1.  But 
where  does  2  [h)  come  from  ? 

Euc.  It  is  o-ot  from  2  (^)  by  adding",  to  each  term,  the 
property  '  having-  a  common  point ' — ;just  as  if  we  were  to 
deduce,  from  '  all  men  are  mortal,'  '  all  fat  men  are  fat 
mortals.' 

Min.  You  mean  5  to  be  contranominal  to  4,  I  suppose. 
But  *  coincidental  '  is  not  equivalent  to  '  non-inter- 
sectional.' 

Euc.  True :  but  I  have  added  a  new  condition,  viz. 
'  which  have  a  common  point,'  to  the  subject.  Non- 
intersectional  Lines^  which  have  a  common  point,  are 
coincidental,  just  as,  in  the  next  Proposition,  non-inter- 
sectional  Lines,  which  have  a  separate  point,  are  sepa- 
ration al. 

Mhi.  20  is  rather  a  difficult  enunciation  to  grasp. 


1^ 

Euc.  A  diagram  will  make  it  clear.  As  a  matter  of 
fact.  No.  2  would  be  a  right  Line  :  but,  as  we  have  no 
right,  at  present,  to  assume  this,  I  have  drawn  it  as  a 
wavy  line. 

Min.  I  can  suggest  two  Contranominals  which  you 
have  omitted:  one,  deducible  from  13  (/>),  'Two  Lines, 
which  are  not  intersectional  and  which  have  different 
directions,  have  no  common  point,  i.e.  are  separational ' ; 
the  other,  deducible  from  15,  'Two  Lines,  which  have  a 


32  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  I. 

separate  point  and  identical  directions,  have  no  common 
point,  i.e.  are  separational.' 

Etic.  They  are  val'td  deductions,  but  in  neither  case  do 
we  know  the  ^  subject '  to  be  real. 

Mill.  The  ^  oontranominality  ' — if  such  a  fearful  word  be 
allowable — of  17,  18^  19^  seems  obscure. 

Eiic.  I  will  do  what  I  can  to  make  it  less  so. 

Let  us  name  the  three  Lines  'A,  B,  C 

Then  17  may  be  read  ^  A  Line  (C),  which  has  a  point  in 
common  with  one  [A)  of  two  coincidental  Lines  (zf,  B), 
has  a  point  in  common  with  the  other  [B)  also.' 

From  this  we  may  deduce  two  Contranominals. 

The  first  is  '  If  A,  C,  have  a  common  point ;  and  B,  C, 
are  separational  :  A,  B  have  a  separate  point.'  That  is, 
'  a  Line  (A),  which  has  a  point  in  common  with  one  {C)  of 
two  separational  Lines  [B,  C),  hns  a  point  separate  from 
the  other  (i?)' :  and  thus  we  ofet  18. 

The  other  Contranominal  is  '  If  A,  C,  have  a  common 
point;  and  A,  B,  have  a  common  point;  and  B,  C,  are 
separational:  A,  B,  are  intersectional.'  That  is,  'A  Line 
[A),  which  has  a  point  in  common  with  one  (C)  of  two 
separational  Lines  (B,  C),  and  also  a  point  in  common 
with  the  other  [B),  is  intersectional  with  that  other  (5).' 

But  we  may  evidently  interchange  B  and  C  without 
interfering  with  the  argument,  and  thus  prove  that  A  is 
also  intersectional  with  C.  Hence  A  is  intersectional  with 
loth  :  and  thus  we  get  19. 

Min.  That  is  quite  clear. 

Eiic.  We  will  now  go  a  little  further  into  the  subject  of 
separational  Lines,  as  to  which  Table  I.  has  furnished  us 


Sc.  II.  §  4.]  FAIRS    OF    LINES.  '  33 

with  only  three  Propositions.  There  are,  however,  many 
other  Propositions  concerning  them,  which  are  fully  ad- 
mitted to  be  true^  though  no  one  of  them  has  yet  been 
proved  from  undisputed  Axioms :  and  we  shall  find  that 
they  are  so  related  to  one  another  that,  if  any  one  be 
granted  as  an  Axiom,  all  the  rest  may  be  proved ;  but, 
unless  some  one  be  so  granted,  none  can  be  proved.  Two 
thousand  years  of  controversy  have  not  yet  settled  the 
knotty  question  ivliicJi  of  them,  if  any,  can  be  taken  as 
axiomatic. 

If  we  are  told  that  a  certain  Pair  of  Lines  fulfil  some 
one  of  the  following  conditions : — 
(i)  they  are  separational ; 

(2)  they  have  a  separate  point  and  are  equally  inclined 
to  a  certain  transversal ; 

(3)  they  have  a  separate  point,  and  one  of  them  has 
two  points  on  the  same  side  of  and  equidistant  from  the 
other ; 

we  may  prove  (though  not  without  the  help  of  some 
disputed  Axiom)  that  they  fulfil  loth  the  following  con- 
ditions: — 

(1)  they  are  equally  inclined  to  any  transversal ; 

(2)  they  are  equidistantial  from  each  other. 

These  Propositions,  with  the  addition  of  my  own  I.  30, 
I.  32,  and  certain  others,  I  will  now  arrange  in  a  tabular 
form,  placing  Contranominals  in  the  same  section. 


34  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  I. 


Table  II. 

Containing  eighteen  Propositions,  of  ivliich  no 
one  is  an  undisputed  Axiom,  hut  all  are  real 
and  valid  Theorems,  ivhich,  though  not  de- 
ducihle  from,  undisputed  Axioms,  are  such 
that,  if  any  one  he  admitted  as  an  Axiom, 
the  rest  can  he  proved. 

[N.  B.   Those  marked  ^  have  been,  or  parts  of  them 
have  been,  proposed  as  Axioms. 

1.  A  Pair  of  separational  Lines  are  equally  inclined 
to  any  transversal.  [I.  29.] 

■^2.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  are  unequally  inclined  to 
a  certain  transversal,  are  intersectional.  [Euc.  Ax.] 

3.  Through  a  given  Point,  without  a  given  Line, 
a  Line  may  be  drawn  such  that  the  two  Lines  are 
equally  inclined  to  any  transversal. 

4.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  are  equally  inclined  to 
a  certain  transversal,  are  so  to  any  transversal. 

5.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  are  unequally  inclined  to 
a  certain  transversal,  are  so  to  any  transversal. 

6.  A  Pair  of  separational  Lines  are  equidistantial 
from  each  other. 

^7.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  of  which  one  has  two  points  on 
the  same  side  of,  and  not  equidistant  from,  the  other, 
are  intersectional. 


Sc.  II.  §  4.]  PAIRS     OF    LINES.  35 

^8.  Through  a  given  point,  without  a  given  Line, 
a  Line  may  be  drawn  such  that  the  two  Lines  are 
equidistantial  from  each  other. 

9.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  of  which  one  has  two  points  on 
the  same  side  of,  and  equidistant  from,  the  other,  are 
equally  inclined  to  any  transversal. 

10.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  are  unequally  inclined  to 
a  certain  transversal,  are  such  that  any  two  points  on 
one,  which  are  on  the  same  side  of  the  other,  are  not 
equidistant  from  it. 

11.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  are  equally  inclined  to  a 
certain  transv^ersal,  are  equidistantial  from  each  other. 

12.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  of  which  one  has  two  points  on 
the  same  side  of,  and  not  equidistant  from,  the  other, 
are  unequally  inclined  to  any  transversal. 

13.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  of  which  one  has  two  points  on 
the  same  side  of,  and  equidistant  from,  the  other,  are 
equidistantial  from  each  other. 

14.  A  Pair  of  Lines,  of  which  one  has  two  points  on 
the  same  side  of,  and  not  equidistant  from,  the  other, 
are  such  that  any  two  points  on  one,  which  are  on  the 
same  side  of  the  other,  are  not  equidistant  from  it. 

15.  (a)  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  are  separational  from 
a  third  Line,  are  not  intersectional  with  each  other. 

(Jj)  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  a  common  point 


D  2 


36  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [AcT  I. 


and  are  separational  from  a  third  Line,  are  coincidental 
with  each  other. 

or. 

If  there  he  given  a  Line  and  a  point  without  it, 
only  one  Line  can  be  drawn,  through  the  given  point, 
separational  from  the  given  Line. 

(c)  A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  a  separate  point 
and  are  separational  from  a  third  Line,  are  separational 
from  each  other.  [I.  30.] 

^16.   (a)  A  Pair  of  intersectional  Lines  cannot  both 
be  separational  from  the  same  Line. 

{l})  A  Line,  which  is  intersectional  with  one  of  two 
separational  Lines,  is  intersectional  with  the  other  also. 


■^17.  A  Line  cannot  recede  from  and  then  approach 
another  ;  nor  can  one  approach  and  then  recede  from 
another  while  on  the  same  side  of  it. 


18.  {a)  If  a  side  of  a  Triangle  be  produced,  the  ex- 
terior angle  is  equal  to  each  of  the  interior  opposite 
angles.  [I.  32.] 

{h)  The  angles  of  a  Triangle  are  together  equal  to 
two  right  angles.  [I.  32.] 


You  will  find  it  convenient  to  have  the  Propositions, 
that  have  been  proposed  as  Axioms,  repeated  in  a  Table 
by  themselves. 


Sc.  II.  §  4.]  PAIRS     OF    LINES.  37 


Table  III. 


Containing  Jive  Propositions,  taken  from 
Table  II,  ivJiich  have  been  proposed  as  Aa^ioms. 


Euclid's  Axiom. 

A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  a  separate  point  and 
make,  with  a  certain  transversal,  two  interior  angles 
on  one  side  of  it  together  less  than  two  right  angles, 
are  intersectional  on  that  side. 

[This  is  one  case  of  II.  2,  with  an  additional 
statement  as  to  the  side  of  the  transversal  on  which 
the  Lines  will  meet.] 


T.  Simpson's  Axiom. 
A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  have  a  separate  point  and  of 
which  one  has  two  points  on  the  same  side  of,  and  not 
equidistant  from_,  the  other,  are  intersectional. 
[This  is  11.  7.] 


Clavius^  Axiom. 

Through  a  given  Point,  without  a  given  Line,  a  Line 
may  be  drawn  equidistantial  from  the  given  Line. 
[This  is  jmrt  of  11,  8.] 


Playfair's  Axiom. 
A  pair  of  intersectional  Lines  cannot  both  be  separa- 
tional  from  the  same  Line. 

[This  is  11.  16  (a).] 


38 

MINOS    AND    EUCLID. 

[Act  I. 

E/.  Simpson's  Axioii. 

A   Line 

cannot    recede    from    and 

then 

approach 

another :    nor  can  one  approach  and  then  recede  from 

another  while  on  the  same  side  of  it. 

\T]m  is  II.  17.] 

Mi?i.  In  the  predicate  of  2,  what  right  have  yon  to  say 
'  are  intersectional '  ?  The  true  contradictory  of  '  separa- 
tional^  would  be  'have  a  common  point.' 

Una.  True :  but  we  may  assume  as  an  Axiom  '  A  Pair 
of  coincidental  Lines  are  equally  inclined  to  any  trans- 
versal.' This,  combined  with  1,  gives  '  A  Pair  of  not- 
intersectional  Lines  are  equally  inclined  to  any  trans- 
versal,' whose  Contranominal  is  2. 

Similarly,  we  may  combine^  with  6,  the  Axiom  '  A  Pair 
of  coincidental  Lines  are  equidistantial  from  each  other,' 
and  thus  get  a  Theorem  whose  Contranominal  is  7. 

Iliti.  In  classing  15  {a),  (d),  and  (c)  under  one  number, 
you  mean,  I  suppose,  that  they  are  so  related  that,  if  any 
one  of  them  be  granted,  the  others  may  be  deduced  ? 

Mic.  Certainly. 

Min.  I  see  that  if  («)  be  given,  (b)  may  be  deduced  by 
simply  adding  'having  a  common  point'  to  subject  and 
predicate.  And  I  see  that  [b)  and  (c)  are  Contranominals, 
so  that,  if  either  be  given,  the  other  follows.  But  I  don't 
see  how,  if  [b)  only  were  given,  you  would  prove  (a). 

Euc.  You  can  prove  (c)  from  it,  as  you  say :  and  then, 
from  {b)  and  (c)  combined,  you  can  prove  (a)  thus  : — 

Any  Pair  of  Lines,  which  are  separational  from  a  third 
Line,  must  belong  to  one  or  both  of  the  two  classes, '  having 


Sc.  II.  §  4.]  FAIRS    OF    LINES.  39 

a  common  point,'  '  having"  a  separate  point.'  Hence  if  we 
take  these  two  classes  together,  we  include  any  Pair  that 
can  be  proposed.  Thus  we  get  the  Theorem  ^  Any  Pair  of 
Lines,  which  are  separational  from  a  third  Line,  are  either 
coincidental  or  separational ' ;  the  predicate  of  which  is 
equivalent  to  'are  not  intersectional.' 

Min.  I  see.    And  how  are  16  [ci)  and  16  {h)  related  to  15  ? 

Euc.  Each  of  them  is  a  Contranominai  of  15  (a) ;  and 
they  are  also  contranominai  to  each  other. 

Min.  I  should  like  to  see  that  drawn  out. 

3uc,  Let  '  A^  B,  C  be  three  Lines.  Then  16  [a]  may 
be  written  '  A  Pair  of  Lines  [A^  B)^  which  are  separational 
from  a  third  Line  (6'),  are  not  intersectional  with  each 
other.' 

This  yields  three  Contranominai s.  The  first  is  '  If  A, 
B,  are  intersectional ;  it  cannot  be  true  that  B^  (7,  are 
separational,  and  also  A^  C'  i.  e.  ^  A  Pair  of  intersectional 
Lines  (^,  B^  cannot  both  be  separational  from  a  third  Line 
(Cy  :  the  second  is  '  If  ^^  C  are  separational,  and  A^  B  in- 
tersectional; then  Aj  C  are  not  separational.'  i.  e.  ^A  Line 
{A)  which  is  intersectional  with  one  (B)  of  two  separa- 
tional Lines  [B^  C),  is  not  separational  from  the  other  (C) ' : 
and  the  third  proves  a  similar  Theorem  for  B. 

Min.  Yes,  but  your  conclusion  no?v  is  '  A  is  not  separa- 
tional from  C^ :  whereas  16  (b)  says  '  is  intersectional.' 

Bnc.  That  is  so  :  but  since  A  is  intersectional  with  a 
Line  (B)  which  is  separational  from  C,  it  is  axiomatic  that 
it  has  a  point  separate  from  C,  and  so  cannot  be  coinci- 
dental with  it.  Hence,  its  being  '^not  separational  from 
C"  proves  that  it  must  be  intersectional  with  it. 


40  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [AcT  I. 

M'ln.  I  suppose  I  must  take  it  on  trust  that  any  one  of 
these  1 8  is  sufficient  logical  basis  for  the  other  17  :  I  can 
hardly  ask  you  to  go  through  306  demonstrations  ! 

T^ue.  I  can  do  it  with  1 1 .  You  will  grant  me  that,  when 
two  Propositions  are  contranominal,  so  that  each  can  be 
proved  from  the  other,,  I  may  select  either  of  the  two  for 
my  series  of  proofs,  but  need  not  include  both  ? 

Min.  Certainly. 

Hue,  Here  are  the  proofs,  which  you  can  read  afterwards 
at  your  leisure.     (See  Appendix  III.) 


\  5.  Flay  fair's  Axiom. 


Eiw.  The  next  general  question  to  be  discussed  is  the 
proposed  substitution  of  Playfair's  Axiom  for  mine.  With 
regard  to  mine,  I  am  quite  ready  to  admit  that  it  is  not 
axiomatic  until  Prop.  17  has  been  proved.  What  is  an 
Axiom  at  one  stage  of  our  knowledge  is  often  anything 
but  an  Axiom  at  an  earlier  stage. 

Min.  The  great  question  is  whether  it  is  axiomatic  then. 

Euc.  I  am  quite  aware  of  that :  and  it  is  because  this  is 
not  only  the  great  question  of  the  whole  First  Book,  but 
also  the  crucial  test  by  which  my  method,  as  compared 
with  those  of  my  '  Modern  Rivals,'  must  stand  or  fall, 
that  I  entreat  your  patience  in  speaking  of  a  matter  which 
cannot  possibly  be  dismissed  in  a  few  words. 

Min.  Pray  speak  at  whatever  length  you  think  necessary 
to  so  vital  a  point. 


Sc.  II.  §  5.]  PL  A  YF AIR'S    AXIOM.  41 

Euc.  Let  me  remark  in  the  first  place — it  is  a  minor 
matter,  but  yet  one  that  must  come  in  somewhere,  and 
I  do  not  want  to  Lreak  the  thread  of  my  argument — that 
we  need,  in  any  complete  geometrical  treatise,  some  prac- 
tical geometrical  test  by  which  we  can  prove  that  two 
given  finite  Lines  will  meet  if  produced.  My  Axiom 
serves  this  purpose — a  secondary  purpose  it  is  true — but  it 
is  incumbent  on  any  one,  who  proposes  to  do  away  with 
it,  to  provide  some  sufficient  substitute. 

Min,  I  admit  all  that. 

Hue.  Now,  if  the  test  I  propose — that  the  two  Lines 
make  with  a  certain  transversal  two  interior  angles  on  the 
same  side  of  it  together  less  than  two  right  angles — be 
objected  to  as  not  sufficiently  simple,  the  question  arises, 
what  simpler  test  can  be  proposed  ? 

Mm.  The  supporters  of  Playfair's  Axiom  would  of  course 
reply  '  that  one  of  the  two  Lines  should  cut  a  Line  known 
to  be  parallel  to  the  other.' 

Hue.  Assuming  that  what  is  needed  is  a  distinct  con- 
ception of  the  geometrical  relationship  of  the  two  Lines, 
whose  future  meeting  we  are  asked  to  believe  in,  which 
picture,  think  you,  is  the  more  likely  to  yield  us  such 
a  conception — two  finite  Lines,  both  intersected  by  a 
transversal,  and  having  a  known  angular  relation  to  that 
transversal  and  so  to  each  other — or  two  Lines  '  known  to 
be  parallel,'  that  is  two  Lines  of  whose  geometrical  re- 
lationship, so  far  as  our  field  of  vision  extends,  we  know 
absolutely  nothing,  but  can  only  say  that,  in  the  far-away 
region  of  infinity,  they  do  7iot  meet  ? 

Min.  In  clearness  of  conception,  your  picture  seems  to 


42  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  I. 

have  the  advantage.  In  fact,  I  could  not  form  any  mental 
picture  at  all  of  the  relative  position  of  two  finite  Lines, 
if  all  I  knew  about  them  was  their  never  meeting  however 
far  produced :  and  it  would  be  equally  impossible  to  form 
any  mental  picture  of  the  position  which  a  Line,  crossing 
one  of  them,  would  have  relatively  to  the  other.  But, 
though  your  picture  may  be  more  easy  to  conceive,  I  doubt 
if  it  is  enough  so  to  constitute  an  axiom. 

Euc.  Taken  by  itself,  it  may  be,  as  you  say,  not  entirely 
axiomatic.  But  I  think  I  can  put  before  you  a  few  con- 
siderations which  will  make  it  more  acceptable. 

Min.  They  will  be  well  worth  having.  An  absolute 
proof  of  it,  from  first  principles,  would  be  received,  I  can 
assure  you,  with  absolute  rajjtiire^  being  an  ignis  fatuus 
that  mathematicians  have  been  chasing  from  your  age 
down  to  our  own. 

Euc.  I  know  it.  But  I  cannot  help  you.  Some  mysteri- 
ous flaw  lies  at  the  root  of  the  subject.  Probabilities  are 
all  I  have  to  offer  you. 

Now  suppose  you  were  assured,  with  regard  to  two 
finite  Lines  placed  before  you,  that,  when  produced  in  a 
certain  direction,  one  of  them  approached  the  other,  that 
is,  contained  two  points,  of  which  the  second  was  nearer, 
to  the  other  Line,  than  the  first,  would  you  not  think  it 
probable — if  not  absolutely  certain — that  they  would  meet 
at  last  ? 

Min.  Utilising — as  I  suppose  you  will  allow  m^  to  do — 
my  knowledge  of  the  properties  of  asymptotes^  I  should  say 
'No.  The  mere  fact  oi approach,  granted  as  to  two  Lines, 
does  not  secure  a  future  meeting.' 


Sc.  II.  §  5-]  PLAYFAIR'S    AXIOM.  43 

I>uc.  But,  if  you  look  into  the  depths  of  your  own  con- 
sciousness— assuming  such  depths  to  exist — you  will  find, 
I  believe,  an  eternal  distinction  maintained,  in  this  respect, 
between  straight  and  curved  Lines :  so  that  Lines  of  the 
one  kind  imist,  if  they  approach,  ultimately  meet,  whereas 
those  of  the  other  kind  need  not. 

Min.  I  will  grant  it,  provisionally,  if  only  to  know  what 
you  are  going  to  deduce  from  it. 

Iluc.  I  will  now  ask  you  to  consider  this  diagram. 


Suppose  it  given  that  the  Lines  BJ),  CE,  make  with  BC 
two  angles  together  less  than  two  right  angles.  My 
object  is  to  show  that  probably — if  not  certainly — they 
will  meetj  if  produced  towards  B,  E. 

Let  BE  be  so  drawn  that  the  angles  FBC,  BCE,  may 
be  together  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

Now,  if  any  point  in  BB  be  nearer  to  CE  than  B  is, 
what  is  required  is  proved,  since  BB  ap/jroac/ies  CE. 

But,  if  this  be  not  so,  then  F  (which  is  obviously  further 
from  CE  than  some  point  in  BB  is)  must  also  be  further 
from  CE  than  ^  is;  i.e.  EB  must  ajjj)roac/i  EC;  i.e.  FB 
and  EC  must  ultimately  meet,  below  BC,  and  so  form  a 
Triangle^,  whose  angles  at  B  and  C  will  be  (by  my  Prop.  17) 
less  than  two  right  angles.  Hence  the  angles  FBC,  BCE, 
must  be  greater  than  two  right  angles,  since  the  four  angles 


44  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  '  [AcT  I. 

are  (by  my  Prop.  13)  equal  to  four  right  angles.  But  this 
is  absurdj  since  they  were  made  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

Hence  I)  is  nearer  to  CU  than  i^  is  ;  i.  e.  JBI)  approaches 
CU,  and  so  will  meet  it  if  produced. 

Min.  You  certainly  have  made  your  Axiom  a  little  more 
axiomatic.  It  is,  I  presume,  an  afterthought  of  yours: 
otherwise  you  would  have  made  your  Axiom  deal  with  ap- 
proacliing  Lines,  and  would  then  have  proved  your  present 
Axiom  as  a  Theorem. 

EuG.  Excuse  me.  Whatever  the  habits  of  modern  geo- 
metricians may  be,  in  our  day  we  always  investigated  a 
subject  down  to  the  very  roots.  No  'afterthought'  was 
possible.  You  of  the  nineteenth  century  may  'look  before 
and  after,'  if  it  so  please  you,  so  long  as  loe  have  liberty  to 
look  at  what  is  at  our  feet :  you  may  ^  sigh  for  what  is 
not,'  and  welcome,  so  long  as  we  may  chuckle  at  what  is ! 

Min.  Flippancy  will  not  serve  your  turn.  If  you  have 
no  better  reason  than  that — 

Eiic.  I  have  a  better  reason.  How  could  I  have  dealt 
with  approachi7ig  Lines  without  first  strictly  defining  '  the 
distance  of  a  point  from  a  Line  '  ? 

Min.  Nohow,  I  grant  you. 

Uuc.  Which  would  have  entailed  a  definition  of  '  the 
distance  of  a  point  from  a  point,'  i.  e.  the  length  of  the 
shortest  path  by  which  the  one  can  pass  to  the  other — 
which  again  would  have  entailed  the  comparison  of  all 
possible  paths  —  which  again  would  have  entailed  the 
estimation  of  the  lengths  of  curved  Lines — which  again — 

Min.  This  is  uncanny !    It  is  whichcraft ! 

Euc.  [preserves  a  disgusted  silence). 


Sc.  II.  §  5.]  PL  A  YF AIR'S    AXIOM.  45 

Min.  I  beg  your  pardon.  I  grant  that  you  have  made 
out  a  very  good  case  for  your  own  Axiom,  and  but  a  bad 
one  for  Playfair's. 

Euc.  I  will  make  it  worse  yet,  before  I  have  done.  My 
next  remark  will  be  best  explained  with  the  help  of 
a  diagram. 


Let  AB  and  CB  make,  with  EF^  the  tw^o  interior  angles 
BBF^  EFB,  together  less  than  two  right  angles.  Now  if 
through  E  we  draw  the  Line  GH  such  that  the  angles 
HEF,  EFB  may  be  equal  to  two  right  angles,  it  is  easy 
to  show  (by  Prop.  28)  that  GH  and  CB  are  '  separational.' 

Min.  Certainly. 

Euc.  We  see,  then,  that  any  Lines  which  have  the 
property  (let  us  call  it  'a')  of  making,  with  a  certain 
transversal,  two  interior  angles  together  less  than  two 
right  angles,  have  also  the  property  (let  us  call  it  '  /3  ^) 
that  one  of  them  intersects  a  Line  which  is  separational 
from  the  other. 

Min.  I  grant  it. 

Eicc.  Now  suppose  you  decline  to  grant  my  12th  Axiom, 
but  are  ready  to  grant  Playfair's  Axiom,  that  two  inter- 
sectional  Lines  cannot  both  be  separational  from  the  same 
Line  :  then  you  have  in  fact  granted  my  Axiom. 

Min.  Be  good  enough  to  prove  that. 

Euc.   Lines,   which   have    property   'a/   have   property 


46  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  I. 

'  /3.'  Lines,  which,  have  property  '  ^,'  meet  if  produced  ; 
for,  if  not,  there  would  be  two  Lines  both  separational 
from  the  same  Line,  which  is  absurd.  Hence  Lines_, 
which  have  property  'a,'  meet  if  produced. 

Min.  I  see  now  that  those  who  grant  Playfair's  Axiom 
have  no  right  to  object  to  yours :  and  yours  is  certainly 
the  more  simple  one. 

Euc.  To  make  assurance  doubly  sure,  let  me  give  you 
two  additional  reasons  for  preferring  my  Axiom. 

In  the  first  place,  Playfair's  Axiom  (or  rather  the  Contra- 
nominal  of  it  which  I  have  been  using,  that  '  a  Line  which 
intersects  one  of  two  separational  Lines  will  also  meet  the 
other')  does  not  tell  us  which  way  we  are  to  expect  the 
Lines  to  meet.  But  this  is  a  very  important  matter  in 
constructing  a  diagram. 

Min,  We  might  obviate  that  objection  by  re- wording  it 
thus : — '  If  a  Line  intersect  one  of  two  separational  Lines, 
that  portion  of  it  which  falls  between  them  will,  if  pro- 
duced, meet  the  other.' 

Euc.  We  might :  and  therefore  I  lay  little  stress  on 
that  objection. 

Eiic.  In  the  second  place,  Playfair's  Axiom  asserts  more 
than  mine  does :  and  all  the  additional  assertion  is  super- 
fluous, and  a  needless  strain  on  the  faith  of  the  learner. 

Min.  I  do  not  see  that  in  the  least. 

Euc.  It  is  rather  an  obscure  point,  but  I  think  I  can 
make  it  clear.  We  know  that  all  Pairs  of  Lines,  which 
have  property  'a,'  have  also  property  '/3';  but  we  do 
not  know  as  yet  (till  we  have  proved  I.  29)  that  all,  which 
have  property  '  /3/  have  also  property  'a.' 


Sc.  II.  §  5.]  PLA  YFAIR'S    AXIOM.  47 

Min.  That  is  so. 

Euc.  Then,  for  anything  we  know  to  the  contrary,  class 
'^'  may  be  larger  than  class  ^a.'  Hence,  if  you  assert 
anything  of  class  '  /3,'  the  logical  effect  is  more  extensive 
than  if  you  assert  it  of  class  'a':  for  you  assert  it,  not 
only  of  that  portion  of  class  '/3'  whitjh  is  known  to  be 
included  in  class  ^a,'  but  also  of  the  unknown  (but 
possibly  existing)  portion  whicb  is  not  so  included. 

Min.  I  see  that  now,  and  consider  it  a  real  and  very 
strong  reason  for  preferring  j^our  axiom. 

But  so  far  you  bave  only  answered  Playfair.  What  do 
you  say  to  the  objection  raised  by  Mr.  Potts?  ^A  stronger 
objection  appears  to  be  that  the  converse  of  it  forms  Euc.  I. 
1 7  ;  for  both  the  assumed  Axiom  and  its  converse  sbould  be 
so  obvious  as  not  to  require  formal  demonstration.' 

Euc.  Why,  I  say  that  I  deny  the  general  law  whicb 
he  lays  down.  (It  is,  of  course,  the  technical  converse  that 
he  means,  not  the  logical  one.  '  All  X  is  Z'  has  for  its 
technical  converse  'All  Y  is  A^' ;  for  its  logical,  'Some  Y 
is  X')  Let  him  try  his  law  on  the  Axiom  'All  right 
angles  are  equal,'  and  its  technical  converse  ^All  equal 
angles  are  right ' ! 

Min.  I  withdraw  the  objection. 


\  6.  Tlie  Principle  of  Superposition. 


Min.  The  next  subject  is  the  principle  of  '  superposition.^ 
You  use  it  twice  only  (in  Props.  4  and  8)  in  the  First 


48  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  I. 

Eook :  but  the  modern  fancy  is  to  use  it  on  all  possible 
occasions.  The  Syllabus  indicates  (to  use  the  words  of 
the  Committee)  '  the  free  use  of  this  principle  as  desirable 
in  many  cases  where  Euclid  prefers  to  keep  it  out  of 
sight/ 

Muc,  Give  me  an  instance  of  this  modern  method. 

Mill.  It  is  proposed  to  prove  I.  5  by  taking  up  the 
isosceles  Triangle,  turning  it  over^  and  then  laying  it  down 
again  iijpon  itself. 

Euc.  Surely  that  has  too  much  of  the  Irish  Bull  about 
it,  and  reminds  one  a  little  too  vividly  of  the  man  who 
walked  down  his  own  throat,  to  deserve  a  place  in  a 
strictly  philosophical  treatise  ? 

31in.  I  suppose  its  defenders  would  say  that  it  is  con- 
ceived to  leave  a  trace  of  itself  behind,  and  that  the 
reversed  Triangle  is  laid  down  upon  the  trace  so  left. 

Euc.  That  is,  in  fact,  the  same  thing  as  conceiving  that 
there  are  two  coincident  Triangles,  and  that  one  of  them 
is  taken  up,  turned  over,  and  laid  down  upon  the  other. 
And  what  does  their  subsequent  coincidence  prove  ?  Merely 
this :  that  the  right-hand  angle  of  the  first  is  equal  to  the 
left-hand  angle  of  the  second,  and  vice  versa.  To  make 
the  proof  complete,  it  is  necessary  to  point  out  that, 
owing  to  the  original  coincidence  of  the  Triangles,  this 
same  '  left-hand  angle  of  the  second '  is  also  equal  to  the 
le/lt-hsLud  angle  of  the  first :  and  then,  and  not  till  then, 
we  may  conclude  that  the  base-angles  of  the  first 
Triangle  are  equal.  This  is  the  full  argument,  strictly 
drawn  out.  The  Modern  books  on  Geometry  often  attain 
their  much-vaunted  brevity  by  the  dangerous  process  of 


Sc.  II.  §  6.]      PRINCIPLE     OF    SUPERPOSITION.  49 

omitting  links  in  the  chain  ;  and  some  of  the  new  proofs, 
which  at  first  sight  seem  to  be  shorter  than  mine,  are 
really  longer  when  fully  stated.  In  this  particular  case 
I  think  you  will  allow  that  I  had  good  reason  for  not 
adopting  the  method  of  superposition  ? 

Mill.  You  had  indeed. 

Euc.  Mind,  I  do  not  object  to  that  proof,  if  appended 
to  mine  as  an  alternative.  It  will  do  very  well  for  more 
advanced  students.  But,  for  beginners,  I  think  it  much 
clearer  to  have  two  non-isosceles  Triangles  to  deal  with. 

Mill.  But  your  objection  to  laying  a  Triangle  down 
upon  itself  dioe^  not  apply  to  such  a  case  as  I.  24. 

Euc.  It  does  not.  Let  us  discuss  that  case  also.  The 
Moderns  would,  I  suppose,  take  up  the  Triangle  ABC, 
and  apply  it  to  BEF  so  that  AB  should  coincide  with 
BE? 

Mill.  Yes. 

Euc.  Well,  that  w^ould  oblige  you  to  say  '  and  join  C,  in 
its  new  position,  to  E  and  F.'  The  words  '  in  its  new 
position  ■*  would  be  necessary,  because  you  would  now 
have  two  points  in  your  diagram,  both  called  ^C'  And 
you  w^ould  also  be  obliged  to  give  the  points  B  and  E 
additional  names,  namely  '^ '  and  '  5.'  All  which  would 
be  very  confusing  for  a  beginner.  You  will  allow,  I  think, 
that  I  w^as  right  here  in  constructing  a  new  Triangle 
instead  of  transferring  the  old  one  ? 

21171.  Cuthbertson  evades  that  difficulty  by  re-naming 
the  point  C,  and  calling  it  '  §.' 

Euc.  And  do  the  points  A  and  B  take  their  names  with 
them  ? 

E 


50 


MINOS    AND    EUCLID. 


[Act  I. 


Min.  No.     They  adopt  the  names  'i)'  and  'E' 
Euc.  It  is  very  like  making  a  new  Triangle  ! 
Min.  It  is  indeed.     I  think  you  have  quite  disposed  of 
the  claims  of  '  superposition.'     The  only  remaining  subject 
for  discussion  is  the  omission  of  the  diagonals  in  Book  II. 


^   7.     Tlie  omission  of  diagonals  in  Euc.  II. 


Euc.  Let  us  test  it  on  my  II.  4.  We  will  go  through 
mi/  proof  of  it,  and  then  the  proof  given  by  some  writer 
who  ignores  the  diagonal,  supplying  if  necessary  any  of 
those  gaps  in  argument  which  my  Modern  Rivals  so  often 
indulge  in,  and  which  give  to  their  proofs  a  delusive  air  of 
neatness  and  brevity. 

'  If  a  Line  be  divided  into  any  two  parts ,  the  square  of  the 
Line  is  equal  to  the  squares  of  the  two  parts  with  twice 
their  rectangle. 


A                C         B 

r                G 

/, 

I              ■/ 

1 

D               1 

E 

Let  AB  be  divided  at  C.  It  is  to  be  proved  that  square 
of  AB  is  equal  to  squares  of  AC,  CB,  with  twice  rectangle 
o^AC,  CB. 

On    AB    describe    Square   ABEB ;  join   BB ;    from  C 


8c.  II.  §  7.]         OMISSION    OF    DIAGONAIS.  51 

draw  CF  parallel  to  AI)  or  BF,  cutting  BI)  at   G -,  and 
through  G  draw  UK  parallel  to  AB  or  BE. 

-:  BB  cuts  Parallels  AB,  CF, 

.-.  exterior  angle  C(?^  =  interior  opposite  angle  ABB. 

[I.  29 

also  '.'  AD  =  AB, 

.-.  angle  ^D^^angle  ABB  ;  [I.  5 

.-.  angle  CG^5=:angle  ^5i); 

..CG=CB\  [1.6 

but  ^Z=  C6^,  and  (^Z^  CT  ;  [I.  34 

.-.  C^is  equilateral. 

also,  •.'  angle  CBK  is  right, 

•.•  CZ  is  rectangular;  [I.  46.  Cor. 

.-.  CK  is  a  Square. 

Similarly  KF  is  a  Square  and  =  square  of  AC,  for 
JIG  =  AC.  [I.  34 

Also,  •.•  AG,  (jjB'are  equal,  being  complements,       [I.  43 

.'.AG  2.-^^  GE  =t^\cQ  AG', 

=  twice  rectangle  of  AC,   CB, 

But  these  four  figures  make  up  AE. 

Therefore  the  square  oi  AB  &c.  Q.  E.  D.' 

That  is  just  128  words^  counting  from  '  On  AB  describe  ' 
down  to  the  words  'rectangle  of  AC,  CB^  What  author 
shall  we  turn  to  for  a  rival  proof? 

Min.  I  think  Wilson  will  be  best. 

Euc.  Very  well.  Do  the  best  you  can  for  him.  You 
may  use  all  my  references  if  you  like,  and  if  you  can  do 
so  legitimately. 

Min.  'Describe  Square  ABEB  on  AB.  Through  C 
draw  CjP parallel  to  AB,  meeting ' 

E  2 


52  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [AcT  I. 

Eiic.  Yau  must  insert  '  or  BE^  to  make  the  comparison 
fair. 

Mm.  Certainly.  I  will  mark  the  necessary  insertions 
by  parentheses.  ^Through  C  draw  CF  parallel  to  AJ)  (or 
BE\  meeting  BE  in  I! 

Eiic.  You  may  omit  those  four  words,  as  they  do  not 
occur  in  my  proof, 

Min.  Very  well.  '  Cut  off  (from  CF)  CG=  CB.  Through 
G  draw  HK  parallel  to  AB  (or  BE).  It  is  easily  shewn 
that  CK,  HE  2Lre  squares  of  CB,  AC-,  and  that  AG,  GE, 
are  each  of  them  rectangle  of  AC,  CB.^ 

Euc.  We  can't  admit  '  it  is  easily  shewn ' !  He  is  bound 
to  give  the  proof. 

M'm.  I  will  do  it  for  him  as  briefly  as  I  can.  ^  •.•  CG=z 
CB,  and  BK=CG,  and  GK=CB,  .'.  CK is  equilateral.  It 
is  also  rectangular,  since  angle  CBK  is  right.  .-.  CK  is 
a  Square.'  I'm  afraid  I  mustn't  say  '  Similarly  HE  is  a 
Square '  ? 

Enc.  Certainly  not :  it  requires  a  different  proof. 

Min.  'Because  CE=AB  =  AB,  and  CG,  CB,  parts  of 
them,  are  equal,  .'.  remainder  G^i^=  remainder  AC,  =  HG. 
But  IW=  GF,  and  BE=HG;  :.  HE  is  equilateral.  It  is 
also  rectangular,  since  angle  IIBE  is  right.  .-.  HE  is  a 
Square,  and  =  square  of  AC.  Aiso  AG  is  rectangle  of  AC, 
CB.^     I  fear  I  can't  assume  GE  to  be  equal  to  AG? 

Euc.  I  fear  I  cannot  permit  you  to  assume  the  truth 
of  my  I.  43. 

3Ihi.  'Also  GE  is  rectangle  of  AC,  CB,  since  GF 
—  AC,  and  GK  —  CB.  .'.  AG  and  GE=  twice  rectangle  of 
AC,  CB.' 


Sc.  II.  §  7.]         OMISSION    OF    DIAGONALS.  53 

Euc.  That  will  do.     How  many  words  do  you  make  it  ? 

Min.  145. 

Euc.  Then  the  omission  of  the  diagonal,  instead  of  short- 
ening* the  proof,  has  really  lengthened  it  by  seventeen 
words  !  Well !  Has  it  any  advantage  in  the  way  of  neat- 
ness to  atone  for  its  greater  length  ? 

3Hn.  Certainly  not.  It  is  quite  unsymmetrical.  I  very 
much  prefer  your  method  of  appealing  to  the  beautiful 
Theorem  of  the  equality  of  complements. 

Euc.  Then  that  concludes  our  present  interview  :  we  will 
meet  again  when  you  have  reviewed  my  Modern  Rivals 
one  by  one.  If  you  had  any  slow  music  handy,  I  w'ould 
vanish  to  it :  as  it  is 

(Vanishes  without  slow  music.) 


ACT    11. 

Manuals  ivliicli  reject  Euclid's  treatment 
of  Parallels. 


Scene  I. 


'  E  fumo  dare  luceni.' 


[Minos  sleeping.  To  him  enter,  first  a  cloud  of  tobacco- 
smoke  ;  secondly  the  howl,  and  thirdly  the  stem,  of  a  gigantic 
meerschaum ;  fourthly  the  phantasm  of  Heer  Niemand, 
carrying  a  pile  of  phantom-tjoohs,  the  loorhs  of  E2iclid''s 
Modern  Rivals,  phantastically  ho2tnd.'\ 

Niemand.  The  first  author  we  have  to  consider  is 
M.  Legendre,  is  it  not? 

Minos,  {aside)  Not  a  single  word  of  greeting!  He 
plunges  in  medias  res  with  a  more  fearful  suddenness  than 
Euclid  himself!     [Aloud)  It  is  so,  mein  lieber  Herr. 

Nie.  No  time  to  waste  in  civil  speeches  !  It  is  for  you 
to  question,  for  me  to  answer.  I  have  read  M.  Legendre's 
book.  Ach !  It  is  beautiful !  You  shall  find  in  it  no 
flaw  ! 

Min.  I  do  not  expect  to  do  so. 


ACT   II. 

SCE^^E   II. 

Treatment  of  Parallels  hy  methods 
involving  infinite  series. 


Legexdre. 

'  Fine  by  degrees,  and  beautifully  less.' 

Nie.  I  lay  before  you  ^  illements  de  Geometrie  '  by  Mons. 
A.  M.  Legendre,  the  14th  edition,  i860. 

Min.  Let  me  begin  by  asking  you  (since  I  consider  you 
and  your  client  as  one  in  this  matter)  how  you  define 
a  straight  Line. 

Nie.  As  '  the  shortest  path  from  one  point  to  another.' 

3Iin.  This  does  not  seem  to  me  to  embody  the  primary 
idea  which  the  w^ord  '  straight '  raises  in  the  mind.  Is 
not  the  natural  process  of  thought  to  realise  first  the 
notion  of  'a  straight  Line,'  and  then  to  grasp  the  fact 
that  it  is  the  shortest  path  between  two  points  ? 


56  LEGENDRE.  [Act  II. 

Nie.  That  may  be  the  natural  process :  hut  surely  you 
will  allow  our  Definition  to  he  a  legitimate  one  ? 

Mm.  I  think  not :  and  I  have  the  great  authority  of 
Kant  to  support  me.  In  his  ^  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,'  he 
says  (I  quote  from  Meiklejohn's  translation,  in  Bohn's 
Philosophical  Library,  pp.  9,  10),  'Mathematical  judg- 
ments are  always  synthetical  ..."  A  straight  Line  between 
two  points  is  the  shortest "  is  a  synthetical  Proposition. 
For  my  conception  of  straiglit  contains  no  notion  of  q^iian- 
tity^  but  is  merely  qualitative.  The  conception  of  the 
shortest  is  therefore  wholly  an  addition,  and  by  no  analysis 
can  it  be  extracted  from  our  conception  of  a  straight  Line.' 

This  may  fairly  be  taken  as  a  denial  of  the  fitness  of  the 
Axiom  to  stand  as  a  Definition.  For  all  Definitions  ought 
to  be  the  expressions  of  analytical,  not  of  synthetical,  judg- 
ments :  their  predicates  ought  not  to  introduce  anything 
which  is  not  already  included  in  the  idea  corresponding  to 
the  subject.  Thus,  if  the  idea  of  'shortest  distance'  cannot 
be  obtained  by  a  mere  analysis  of  the  conception  repre- 
sented by  '  straight  Line/  the  Axiom  ought  not  to  be  used 
as  a  Definition. 

Nie.  We  are  not  particular  as  to  whether  it  be  taken  as 
a  Definition  or  Axiom  :  either  will  answer  our  purpose. 

31in.  Let  us  then  at  least  banish  it  from  the  Dejitdtions. 
And  now  for  its  claim  to  be  regarded  as  an  Axiom.  It 
involves  the  assertion  that  a  straight  Line  is  shorter  than 
any  curved  Line  between  the  two  points.  Now  the  length 
of  a  curved  Line  is  altogether  too  difficult  a  subject  for 
a  beginner  to  have  to  consider :  it  is  moreover  unnecessary 
that  he  should  consider  it  at  all^  at  least  in  the  earlier 


Sc.  II.]  PARALLELS.  57 

parts  of  Geometry :  all  he  really  needs  is  to  grasp  the  fact 
that  it  is  shorter  than  any  hroheii  Line  made  up  of  straight 
Lines. 

ISlie.  That  is  true. 

M'ln.  And  all  cases  of  broken  Lines  may  be  deduced 
from  their  simplest  case,  which  is  Euclid's  I.  20. 

I^ie.  Well,  we  will  abate  our  claim  and  simply  ask  to 
have  I.  20  granted  us  as  an  Axiom. 

M'ln.  But  it  can  be  proved  from  your  own  Axioms  :  and 
it  is  a  generally  admitted  principle  that,  at  least  in  dealing 
with  beginners,  we  ought  not  to  take  as  axiomatic  any 
Theorem  which  can  be  proved  by  the  Axioms  we  already 
possess. 

ISie.  For  beginners  we  must  admit  that  Euclid's  method 
of  treating  this  point  is  the  best.  But  you  will  allow  ours 
to  be  a  legitimate  and  elegant  method  for  the  advanced 
student  ? 

Mill.  Most  certainly.  The  whole  of  your  beautiful 
treatise  is  admirably  fitted  for  advanced  students :  it  is 
only  from  the  beginner^s  point  of  view  that  I  venture  to 
criticise  it  at  all. 

Your  treatment  of  angles  and  right  angles  does  not, 
I  think,  differ  much  from  Euclid's? 

Nie.  Not  much.  We  prove ^  instead  of  assuming,  that 
all  right  angles  are  equal,  deducing  it  from  the  Axiom 
that  two  right  Lines  cannot  enclose  a  space. 

Min.  I  think  some  such  proof  a  desirable  interpolation. 

I  will  now  ask  you  how  you  prove  Euc.  I.  29. 

Nie.  What  preliminary  Propositions  will  you  grant  us 
as  proved  ? 


58  LEGENDRE.  [AcT  II. 

Min.  Euclid's  series  consists  of  Ax.  12,  Props.  4,  5, 
7,  8,  13,  15,  16,  27,  28.  I  will  grant  you  as  much  of 
that  series  as  you  have  proved  by  methods  not  radically 
differing  from  his. 

Nie,  That  is,  you  grant  us  Props.  4^  13,  and  15.  Prop. 
16  is  not  in  our  treatise.     The  next  we  require  is  Prop.  6. 

Min.  That  you  may  take  as  proved. 

Nie.  And,  next  to  that.  Prop.  20 :  that  we  assume  as 
an  Axiom,  and  from  it,  with  the  help  of  Prop.  6,  we  deduce 
Prop.  19. 

Min.  For  our  present  purpose  you  may  take  Prop.  19 
as  proved. 

Nie.  From  Props.  13  and  1.9  we  deduce  Prop.  32  ;  and 
from  that,  Ax.  12  ;  from  which  Prop.  29  follows  at  once. 

Min.  Your  proof  of  Prop.  32  is  long,  but  beautiful. 
I  need  not,  however,  enter  on  a  discussion  of  its  merits. 
It  is  enough  to  say  that  what  we  require  is  a  proof  suited 
to  the  capacities  of  hegimiers^  and  that  this  Theorem  of 
yours  (Prop,  xix,  at  p.  20)  contains  an  infinite  series  of 
Triangles,  an  infinite  series  of  angles,  the  terms  of  which 
continually  decrease  so  as  to  be  ultimately  less  than  any 
assigned  angle,  and  magnitudes  which  vanish  simulta- 
neously. These  considerations  seem  to  me  to  settle  the 
question.  I  fear  that  your  proof  of  this  Theorem,  though 
a  model  of  elegance  and  perspicuity  as  a  study  for  the 
advanced  student,  is  wholly  unsuited  to  the  requirements 
of  a  beginner. 

Nie.  That  we  are  not  prepared  to  dispute. 

Min.  It  seems  superfluous,  after  saying  this,  to  ask 
what  test  for   the  meeting  of  Lines  you  have  provided  : 


Sc.  II.]  PARALLELS.  59 

but  we  may  as  well  have  that  stated,  to  complete  the 
enquiry. 

Nie.  We  give  Euclid's  12th  Axiom,  which  we  prove 
from  Prop.  32,  using  the  principle  of  Euc.  X.  i  (second 
part),  that  '  if  the  greater  of  two  unequal  magnitudes  be 
bisected,  and  if  its  half  be  bisected,  and  so  on ;  a  magni- 
tude will  at  length  be  reached  less  than  the  lesser  of  the 
two  magnitudes.' 

M'ln,  That  again  is  a  mode  of  proof  entirely  unsuited  to 
beginners. 

The  general  style  of  your  admirable  treatise  I  shall  not 
attempt  to  discuss :  it  is  one  I  would  far  rather  take  as 
a  model  to  imitate  than  as  a  subject  to  criticise. 

I  can  only  repeat,  in  conclusion,  what  I  have  already 
said,  that  your  book,  though  well  suited  for  advanced 
students,  is  not  so  for  beginners. 

Nie.  At  this  rate  we  shall  make  short  work  of  the 
twelve  Modern  Rivals ! 


ACT   11. 

Scene  III. 

Treatment  of  Parallels  by  angles 
made  ivith  transversals. 


COOLEY. 


The  verbal  solemnity  of  a  hollow  logic/ 

CooLEY,  Pre/,  p.  20. 


Nie.  I  have  now  the  honour  to  lay  before  you  '  T/ie 
Elements  of  Geometry^  simplified  and  explained,^  by  W.  D. 
CooLEY,  A.B.,  published  in  i860. 

3Iin,  Please  to  hand  me  the  book  for  a  moment.  I  wish 
to  read  you  a  few  passages  from  the  Preface.  It  is  always 
satisfactory — is  it  not? — to  know  that  a  writer,  who 
attempts  to  '  simplify '  Euclid,  begins  his  task  in  a  be- 
coming spirit  of  humility,  and  with  some  reverence  for 
a  name  that  the  world  has  accepted  as  an  authority  for 
two  thousand  years. 

Nie.  Truly. 


Act  II.  Sc.  III.]  PARALLELS.  61 

Minos  reads, 

'  The  Elements  of  Plane  Geometry  .  .  .  are  here  pre- 
sented in  the  reduced  compass  of  '^d  Propositions,,  perfectly 
coherent,  fully  demonstrated,  and  reaching  quite  as  far  as 
the  173  Propositions  contained  in  the  first  six  books  of 
Euclid.'     Modest,  is  it  not  ? 

N'le.  A  little  high-flown,  perhaps.  Still,  you  know,  if 
they  really  are  '  fully  demonstrated  ' 

Mm.  If  I  In  page  4  of  the  Preface  he  talks  of  '  Euclid^s 
circumlocutory  shifts':  in  the  same  page  he  tells  us  that 
'  the  doctrine  of  proportion,  as  propounded  by  Euclid,  runs 
into  prolixity  though  wanting  in  clearness':  and  again,  in 
the  same  page,  he  states  that  most  of  Euclid's  ex  ahsurdo 
proofs  'though  containing  little,'  yet  'generally  puzzle 
the  young  student,  who  can  hardly  comprehend  why 
gratuitous  absurdities  should  be  so  formally  and  solemnly 
dealt  with.  These  Propositions  therefore  are  omitted  from 
our  Book  of  Elements,  and  the  Problems  also,  for  the 
science  of  Geometry  lies  wholly  in  the  Theorems.  Thus 
simplified  and  freed  from  obstructions,  the  truths  of 
Geometry  may,  it  is  hoped,  be  easily  learned,  even  by 
the  youngest.'  But  perhaps  the  grandest  sentence  is  at 
the  end  of  the  Preface.  '^Then  as  to  those  Propositions 
(the  first  and  last  of  the  6th  Book),  in  which,  according 
to  the  same  authority ''  (he  is  alluding  to  the  Manual  of 
Euclid  by  Galbraith  and  Haughton),  '  Euclid  so  beautifully 
illustrates  his  celebrated  Definition,  they  appear  to  our 
eyes  to  exhibit  only  the  verbal  solemnity  of  a  hollow  logic, 
and  to  exemplify  nothing  but  the   formal  application  of 


62  COOLEY.  [Act  II. 

a  nugatory  principle.'  Now  let  us  see,  mein  Herr,  whether 
Mr.  Cooley  has  done  anything  worthy  of  the  writer  of 
such  '  brave  'orts '  (as  Shakespeare  has  it) :  and  first  let 
me  ask  how  you  define  Parallel  Lines. 

NiEMAND  reads. 

'  Right  Lines  are  said  to  be  parallel  when  they  are 
equally  and  similarly  inclined  to  the  same  right  Line,  or 
make  equal  angles  with  it  towards  the  same  side.' 

Min.  That  is  to  say,  if  we  see  a  Pair  of  Lines  cut  by 
a  certain  transversal,  and  are  told  that  they  make  equal 
angles  with  it,  we  say  'these  Lines  are  parallel'';  and 
conversely,  if  we  are  told  that  a  Pair  of  Lines  are  parallel, 
we  say  'then  there  is  a  transversal,  somewhere,  which 
makes  equal  angles  with  them '? 

Nie.  Surely,  surely. 

Min.  But  we  have  no  means  of  finding  it?  We  have 
no  right  to  draw  a  transversal  at  random  and  say  '  tJiis  is 
the  one  which  makes  equal  angles  with  the  Pair '? 

Nie.  Ahem !    Ahem  !    Ahem ! 

Min.  You  seem  to  have  a  bad  cough. 

Nie.  Let  us  go  to  the  next  subject. 

Mi7i.  Not  till  you  have  answered  my  question.  Have 
we  any  means  of  finding  the  particular  transversal  which 
makes  the  equal  angles  ? 

Nie.  I  am  sorry  for  my  client,  but,  since  you  are  so 
exigeant,  I  fear  I  must  confess  that  we  have  no  means  of 
finding  it. 

Min.  Now  for  your  proof  of  Euc.  I.  32. 

Nie.  You  will  allow  us  a  preliminary  Theorem  ? 


Sc.  III.]  PARALLELS.  63 

Mm.  As  many  as  you  like. 

Nie.  Well,  here  is  our  Theorem  ii.  '  When  two  jparallel 
straight  Lines  AB^  CD,  are  cut  hy  a  third  straight  Line  EF, 
they  make  with  it  the  alternate  angles  AGH,  GHD,  equal; 
and  also  the  ttoo  internal  angles  at  the  same  side  BGH,  GHD 
equal  to  two  right  angles. 


A 


For  AGH  ?iTLdi  EGB  are  equal  because  vertically  opposite, 
and  EGB  is  also  equal  to  GHD  (Definition) ;  therefore — ' 

Min.  There  I  must  interrupt  you.  How  do  you  know 
that  EGB  is  equal  to  GRB^.  I  grant  you  that,  by  the 
Definition,  AB  and  CB  make  equal  angles  with  a  certain 
transversal :  but  have  you  any  ground  for  saying  that  EF 
is  the  transversal  in  question  ? 

Nie.  We  have  not.  We  surrender  at  discretion.  You 
will  permit  us  to  march  out  with  the  honours  of  war  ? 

3Iin.  We  grant  it  you  of  our  royal  grace.  March  him 
off  the  table,  and  brino-  on  the  next  K/ival. 


ACT   11. 

Scene  IV. 
Treatment  of  Parallels  hy  equidistances. 


CUTHBERTSON. 


*  Thou  art  so  near,  and  yet  so  far. ' 

Modern  Sonrj. 

Nie.  I  now  lay  before  you  ^'Euclidian  Geometry^  by 
Francis  Cuthbertson,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  C.  C.  C,  Cam- 
bridge ;  Head  Mathematical  Master  of  the  City  of  London 
School ;  published  in  1874. 

Mill.  It  will  not  be  necessary  to  discuss  with  you  all  the 
innovations  of  Mr.  Cuthbertson^s  book.  The  questions  of 
the  separation  of  Problems  and  Theorems,  the  use  of  super- 
position, and  the  omission  of  the  diagonals  in  Book  II,  are 
general  questions  which  I  have  considered  by  themselves. 
The  only  points,  which  you  and  I  need  consider,  are  the 
methods  adopted  in  treating  Right  Lines,  Angles,  and 
Parallels,  wherever  those  methods  differ  from  Euclid's. 

The  first  subject,  then,  is  the  Right  Line.  How  do  you 
define  and  test  it  ? 


Sc.  IV.]  RIGHT  LINES.  65 

iS'ie.  As  in  Euclid.  But  we  p'ove  what  Euclid  has 
assumed  as  an  Axiom,  namely,  that  two  right  Lines  cannot 
have  a  common  segment. 

M'ln.  I  am  glad  to  hear  you  assert  that  Euclid  has 
assumed  it  '  as  an  Axiom/  for  the  interpolated  and  illogical 
corollary  to  Euc.  I.  ii  has  caused  many  to  overlook  the 
fact  that  he  has  assumed  it  as  early  as  Prop.  4,  if  not 
in  Prop.  1.     What  is  your  proof? 

NiEMAND  reads. 
'  Two  straight  Lines  cannot  have  a  common  segment,'' 


'  For  if  two  straight  Lines  ABC,  ABH  could  have  a 
common  segment  AB  ;  then  the  straight  Line  ^^C  might 
be  turned  about  its  extremity  A,  towards  the  side  on  which 
BHisj  so  as  to  cut BH;  and  thus  two  straight  Lines  would 
enclose  a  space,  which  is  impossible.' 

Min.  You  assume  that,  be/ore  C  crosses  BH,  the  portions 
coinciding  along  AB  will  diverge.  But,  if  ABH  is  a 
right  Line,  this  will  not  happen  till  C  has  passed  H. 

Nie.  But  you  would  then  have  one  portion  of  the  re- 
volving Line  in  motion,  and  another  portion  at  rest. 

Min.  Well,  why  not  ? 

Nie,  We  may  assume  that  to  be  impossible ;  and  that, 

F 


66  CUTHBERTSON.  [AcT  II. 

if  a  Line  revolves  about  its  extremity,  it  all  moves  at 
once. 

Min.  Which,  I  take  the  liberty  to  think,  is  quite  as 
great  an  assumption  as  Euclid's.  I  think  the  Axiom  quite 
plain  enough  without  any  proof. 

Your  treatment  of  angles,  and  right  angles,  is  the  same 
as  Euclid's,  I  think  ? 

JSIie.  Yes,  except  that  we  jprove  that  '  all  right  angles 
are  equal.' 

Min.  Well,  it  u  capable  of  proof,  and  therefore  had 
better  not  be  retained  as  an  Axiom. 

I  must  now  ask  you  to  give  me  your  proof  of  Euc.  I. 

32. 

Nie.  We  prove  as  far  as  I.  28  as  in  Euclid.  In  order 
to  prove  I.  29,  we  first  prove,  as  a  Corollary  to  Euc.  I.  20, 
that  '  the  shortest  distance  between  two  points  is  a  straight 
Line.' 

Min.  What  is  your  next  step  ? 

Nie.  A  Problem  (Pr.  F.  p.  52)  in  which  we  prove  the 
Theorem  that,  of  all  right  Lines  drawn  from  a  point  to  a 
Line,  the  perpendicular  is  the  least. 

Min.  We  will  take  that  as  proved. 

Nie.  We  then  deduce  that  the  perpendicular  is  the 
shortest  path  from  a  point  to  a  Line. 

Next  comes  a  Definition.  '  By  the  distance  of  a  point 
from  a  straight  Line  is  meant  the  shortest  path  from  the 
point  to  the  Line.' 

Min.  Have  you  anywhere  defined  the  distance  of  one 
point  from  another? 

Nie.  No. 


Sc.  IV.]  PARALLELS.  67 

Mhu  We  had  better  have  that  first. 

Nie.  Very  well.  'The  distance  of  one  point  from 
another  is  the  shortest  path  from  one  to  the  other.'' 

Min.  Might  we  not  say  ^  is  the  length  of  the  right  Line 
joining  them  ? ' 

N'le,  Yes,  that  is  the  same  thing. 

M'ln.  And  similarly  we  may  modify  the  Definition  you 
gave  just  now. 

Nie.  Certainly.  '  The  distance  of  a  point  from  a  right 
Line  is  the  length  of  the  perpendicular  let  fall  upon  it  from 
the  given  point.' 

Mill,  What  is  your  next  step  ? 

NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  '^'^.  Bed.  G.  'If  points  be  taken  along  one  of  the  arms 
of  an  angle  farther  and  farther  from  the  vertex,  their  dis- 
tances from  the  other  arm  will  at  length  be  greater  than 
any  given  straight  line.' 

In  proving  this  we  assume  as  an  Axiom  that  the  lesser 
of  two  magnitudes  of  the  same  kind  can  be  multiplied  so 
as  to  exceed  the  greater. 

Min.  I  accept  the  Axiom  and  the  proof., 

NiEMAND  reads. 
P.  34.  Ax.  '  If  one  right  Line  be   drawn  in  the  same 
Plane   as   another,  it  cannot  first   recede  from    and   then 
approach  to    the   other,  neither  can  it  first  approach  to 
and  then  recede  from  the  other  on  the  same  side  of  it.' 

Min.  Here,  then,  you  assume,  as  axiomatic,  one  of  the 
Propositions  of  Table  II.     After  this,  you  ought  to  have 

F  2, 


68  CUTHBERTSON.  [Act  II. 

no  further  difficulty  in  proving  Euc.  I.  32  and  all  other 
properties  of  Parallels.     How  do  you  proceed  ? 

Nie,  We  prove  (p.  34.  Lemma)  that,  if  two  Lines  have 
a  common  perpendicular,  each  is  equidistant  from  the 
other. 

Min.  What  then  ? 

Nie.  Next,  that  any  Line  intersecting  one  of  these  will 
intersect  the  other  (p.  0^^. 

Mm.  That,  I  think,  depends  on  Deduction  G^  at  p.  o^'>^  ? 

Me.  Yes. 

Min,  A  short,  but  not  very  easy,  Theorem ;  and  one 
containing  a  somewhat  intricate  diagram.  However,  it 
proves  the  j)oint.     What  is  your  next  step  ? 


NiEMAND 

p.  34.  Lemma.  ^  Through  a  given  point  without  a  given 
straight  Line  one  and  only  one  straight  Line  can  be  drawn 
in  the  same  Plane  with  the  former,  which  shall  never  meet 
it.  Also  all  the  points  in  each  of  these  straight  Lines  are 
equidistant  from  the  other.' 

Min.  I  accept  all  that. 

Nie.  We  then  introduce  Euclid's  definition  of  ^  Parallels. 
It  is  of  course  now  obvious  that  parallel  Lines  are  equi- 
distant, and  that  equidistant  Lines  are  parallel. 

Min.  Certainly. 

Nie.  We  can  now,  with  the  help  of  Euc.  I.  27,  prove 
I.  29,  and  thence  I.  32. 

Min.  No  doubt.  We  see,  then,  that  you  propose^  as 
a  substitute  for  Euclid's  12th  Axiom,  a  new  Definition, 
two  new  Axioms,   and   what   virtually   amounts   to   five 


Sc.  IV.]  PARALLELS.  69 

new  Theorems.  In  point  of  '  axiomaticity  '  I  do  not  think 
there  is  much  to  choose  between  the  two  methods.  But 
in  point  of  brevity,  clearness,  and  suitability  to  a  beginner, 
I  give  the  preference  altogether  to  Euclid's  axiom. 

The  next  subject  to  consider  is  your  practical  test,  if 
any,  for  two  given  Lines  meeting  when  produced. 

Wie.  One  test  is  that  one  of  the  Lines  should  meet  a 
Line  parallel  to  the  other. 

Mm.  Certainly  :  and  that  will  suffice  in  such  a  case  as 
Euc.  I.  44  (Pr.  M.  p.  60,  in  this  book)  though  you  omit 
to  point  out  toliy  the  Lines  may  be  assumed  to  meet. 
But  what  if  the  diagram  does  not  contain  '  a  Line  parallel 
to  the  other  '  ?  Look  at  Pr.  (li)  p.  69,  where  we  are  told  to 
make,  at  the  ends  of  a  Line,  two  angles  which  are  together 
less  than  two  right  angles,  and  where  it  is  assumed  that  the 
Lines,  so  drawn,  will  meet.  That  is,  you  assume  the  truth 
of  Euclid's  liith  Axiom.  And  you  do  the  same  thing  at 
pp.  70,  123,  143,  and  185. 

Nie.  Euclid's  12th  Axiom  is  easily  proved  from  our 
Theorems. 

Min.  No  doubt:  but  you  have  not  done  it,  and  the  omis- 
sion makes  a  very  serious  hiatus  in  your  argument.  It  is 
not  a  thing  that  beginners  are  at  all  likely  to  be  able  to 
supply  for  themselves. 

I  have  no  adverse  criticisms  to  make  on  the  general 
style  of  the  book,  which  seems  clear  and  well  written. 
Nor  is  it  ^necessary  to  discuss  the  claims  of  the  book  to 
supersede  Euclid,  since  the  writer  makes  no  such  claim, 
but  has  been  careful  (as  he  states  in  his  preface)  to  avoid 
any  arrangement  incompatible  with  Euclid's  order.     The 


70  CUTHBERTSON.  [Act  II. 

chief  novelty  in  the  book  is  the  introduction  of  the 
principle  of  ^equidistance/  which  does  not  seem  to  me  a 
desirable  feature  in  a  book  meant  for  beginners  :  otherwise 
it  is  little  else  than  a  modified  version  of  Euclid. 


ACT   11. 

Scene  V. 
Treatment  of  Parallels  hy  revolving  Lines. 


Henrici. 


'  In  order  that  an  aggregate  of  elements  may  be  called  a  spread,  it  is  necessary 
that  they  follow  continuously.'— Henrici's  Art  o/Blnvui,  p.  12. 

Nie.  I  lay  before  you  'Elementary  Geometnj :  Congruent 
Figures'  by  Olaus  Henkici,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of 
Pure  Mathematics  in  University  College,  London,  1879. 

3Ii7i.  What  is  your  Definition  of  a  Line  ? 

Nie.  '  The  boundary  of  a  surface  or  of  part  of  a  sur- 
face is  called  a  Line  or  a  curved     (p.  5-) 

Min.  Good — ^  Line/  I  presume,  meaning  '  right  Line.' 
But  that  throws  us  back  upon  '  surface.'  Of  course  that 
is  defined  correctly  ? 

Me.  I  will  tell  you  in  a  moment.  (Ee  turns  over 
a  few  ][mges)  Yes,  here  it  is.  'A  surface  is  the — ''  (Ke 
gives  a  perce'ptiljle  start,  stojjs  reading,  and  turns  a  feio 
pages  Jjack)  Yes,  it's  all  right.  'That  w^hich  bounds 
a  solid  and  separates  it  from  other  parts  of  Space  is 
called  its  surface.'     (p.  4.) 

Min.  {aside)  There  is  more  here  than  meets  the  eye! 
{Aloud)  You  will  be  good  enough  to  read  that  other  De- 
finition of  '  surface.' 


72  HENRICI.  [Act  II. 

Nie.  (\,nnocently)  What  other  Definition? 

Min.  No  evasions,  Sir!  Read  it  at  once!  You  know 
the  one  I  mean. 

Nie.  (desperately)  It's  only  this  —  'A  surface  is  the 
path  of  a  moving  curve.'  (p.  9.)  Merely  another  way 
of  looking  at  it,  you  know. 

Min.  (contemptuoiishj)  Oh!  Merely  another  way  of 
looking  at  it,  is  it?  Of  course  the  curve  preserves  its 
shape  as  it  moves? 

Me.  No  doubt. 

Miyi.  Now  look  here.     Take  this  Jargonelle  pear — 

Nie.  Thank  you  very  much.     It  is  rather  dry  work — 

Min.  Stop !  Don't  eat  it  yet !  Look  at  it.  Would 
you  call  its  curvature  regular  ? 

Nie.  Certainly  not :  it  bulges  here  and  there,  in  all 
sorts  of  queer  ways. 

Min.  Well,  now  take  this  bit  of  wire  :  bend  it  into 
any  curve  you  like,  and  then  move  it  so  that  its  path 
may  coincide  with  the  surface  of  the  pear. 

Nie.  (imeasily)  I  cannot  do  it. 

Miyi.  Well,  eat  it,  then.  That  is  possible,  at  all  events. 
So!  We  start  with  a  Definition  which  is  simply  ridi- 
culous !  Now  for  the  distinction  between  '  right  Line ' 
and  '  curve  ' — 

Nie.  Here  my  client's  meaning  is  not  very  clear.  The 
first  Definition  I  can  find  is  that  of  a  curve.  He  says 
(p.  6)  '  a  point  may  be  moved,  and  then  it  will  describe 
a  path.     This  path  of  a  moving  point  is  a  curve.' 

Min.  Surely  he  does  not  mean  that  a  point  can  never 
move  straight  ?     He  must  mean  that  there  are  two  kinds 


Sc.  v.]  LINES  AND   CURVES.  73 

of  curves,  '  curved  curves,'  and  '  straight  curves  ' — as  the 
Irish  talk  of  '  tay-tay '  arid  '  coffee-tay.'  But,  if  so,  he 
makes  '  Line '  and  ^  curve ''  synonymous. 

N'le.  I  have  looked  a  little  further  on,  and  I  find  a 
description  of  a  '  Line,"  which  seems  to  limit  the  word 
to  lent  Lines.  He  says  (p.  7)  '  The  notion  of  a  Line  may 
be  obtained  directly  by  considering  a  wire  bent  into 
any  shape  and  abstracting  all  thickness  from  it.' 

Mm.  So  then  a  ^  Line '  must  be  bent,  though  a  ^  curve ' 
need  not  be  so  ?  Your  client  has  clearly  one  merit — 
great  originality  of  style ! 

Nie.  Here  is  another  definition  of  '  curve/  which  may 
be  more  to  your  taste,  'A  curve  is  a  one-ivay  sjyread, 
tvith  jooints  as  elements.'     (p.  10.) 

Min.  Too  much  like  a  dinner  a  la  Busse.  I  don't  like 
'  spread '  at  all. 

Nie.  He  illustrates  his  use  of  '  spread '  by  applying  it 
to  other  subjects.  For  instance,  'a  musical  tone  allows 
of  variations  which  form  a  two-way  spread,  with  dif- 
ferent degrees  of  intensity  and  of  pitch  as  elements.' 
(p.  12.) 

Mm.  That  explains  the  phrase  '  too-tooing  on  a  flute.' 
How  simple  and  intelligible  all  this  must  be  to  boys 
just  beginning  Geometry !  But  I  am  still  waiting  for 
a  definition  of  'right  Line.' 

Nie.  [after  turning  over  several  pages)  I  have  found 
it  at  last — after  passing  over  a  good  deal  about  '  con- 
tinuity' and  'space'  and  'congruence.'  We  say  (p.  17) 
'  If  we  suspend  a  weight  by  a  string,  the  string  becomes 
stretched ;   and  we  say  it  is  straight.' 


74  HENRICI.  [Act  II. 

Min.  That  will  serve  very  well  to  give  a  notion  of 
'  straight.'  For  a  2Vorking  definition  we  require  of  course 
some  practical  test,  such  as  'two  straight  Lines  cannot 
enclose  a  space.' 

Nie.  We  have  that.  At  p.  20  we  give  you  '  Axiom  IV. 
Through  two  points  always  one,  and  only  one,  Line  can 
be  drawn.'  And  at  p.  18  w^e  at  last  distinguish  'Line' 
and  '  curve.'  ^  A  straight  Line  will  in  future  be  called 
a  Line  simply.  All  other  Lines  will  be  called  curved 
Lines,  or  curves.^ 

Min.  Better  late  than  never :  thouo-h  it  makes  wild 
work  of  your  former  theory  —  in  which  you  got  the 
notion  of  '  Line '  from  a  bent  wire,  and  of  '  curve '  from 
the  path  of  a  moving  point.  Now  for  the  Definition  of 
'  angle.' 

Nie.  {after  turning  the  leaves  hachwards  and  forwards 
for  some  time,  begins  to  read  in  an  unsteady  voice)  'The 
part  of  a  pencil  of  half-rays^  described  by  a  half-ray  on 
turning  about  its  end  point  from  one  position  to  another, 
is  called  an  angle.'     (p.  47.) 

Min.  So  you  reject  the  notion  of  'inclination'  (or 
rather  '  declination ')  ?  Well !  This  is  an  innovation  ! 
We  must  investigate  it  thoroughly.  You  mean  by 
'half-ray,'  I  presume,  what  Euclid  calls  '^a  Line  termi- 
nated in  one  direction  but  not  in  the  other'? 

Nie.  Certainly. 

Min.  Now  what  is  a  '  pencil '  ? 

Nie.  '  The  aggregate  of  all  Lines  in  a  plane  which  pass 
through  a  given  point.'     (p.  38.) 

31in.  Aha!     And    where   will   you    get   your    angular 


Sc.  v.]  ANGLES. 


75 


maornitude,  I  should  like  to  know?  "What  kinds  of 
magnitude  is  a  Line  capable  of  possessing*? 

Nie.  Length  only,  of  course. 

Min.  Two  Lines? 

'Nie.  [nneasilt/)  Length  only. 

Min.  A  million  ? 

Nie.  [more  imeasily)  Length  only. 

Min.  A  pencil  ? 

Nie,  {^faintly)  Spare  me ! 

Min,  So  much  for  the  qualify  of  your  angular  mag- 
nitude !  Now  for  its  qiiantiiy.  What  is  the  length  of 
one  of  these  half-rays? 

Nie.  Infinite,  of  course. 

Mm.  And  the  aggregate  length  of  all  the  half-rays 
in  your  ^  angle '  cannot  well  be  less.  Thus  we  may 
deduce  a  truly  delightful  definition  of  angular  magni- 
tude. 'As  to  quality,  it  is  linear.  As  to  quantity^  it 
is  infinite ' ! 

Nie,  {ioritJies^  but  says  nothing). 

Min.  Will  you  not  throw  up  your  brief? 

Nie.  Not  yet :  I  must  fight  it  out. 

Min.  Then  we  must  review  this  marvellous  book  '  to 
the  bitter  end.'  What  have  you  to  say  about  '  right 
angles '  ? 

Nie,  We  have  '  angles  of  rotation '  and  *  angles  of  con- 
tinuation' (p.  48);  and  the  axiom  'all  angles  of  rotation 
are  equal '  (p.  49)  as  a  substitute  for  '  all  right  angles 
are  equal.' 

Min.  It  is  a  practicable  method,  but  not  so  suitable 
for  beginners  as  Euclid's.      This  matter  I  have  already 


76  ■  HENRICI.  [Act  II. 

discussed  (see  p.  74).  And  now  for  tlie  subject  of 
Parallels. 

Nie.  We  have  Playfair's  Axiom  (or  rather  its  equi- 
valent) '  Through  a  given  point  only  one  Line  can  be 
drawn  parallel  to  a  given  Line '  (p.  68),  but  this  we 
do  not  simply  lay  down  as  an  Axiom.  We  lead  up  to 
it  by  two  or  three  pages  of  reasoning. 

Min.  This  is  most  interesting !  Let  us  examine  the 
argument  minutely.  A  logical  proof  of  that  Axiom 
would  be  perhaps  the  greatest  advance  ever  made  in  the 
subject  since  the  days  of  Euclid. 

Nie,  'Two  indefinite  Lines  in  a  Plane  may  intersect, 
as  we  have  seen.  We  shall  now  consider  the  possibility 
of  there  being  such  Lines  which  do  not  intersect.'    (p.  6^?^ 

Mill.  That,  of  course,  you  can  easily  prove,  without 
appealing  to  any  disputable  Axiom.  It  is  simply  Euc.  I. 
27.     Do  you  prove  it  in  Euclid's  way  ? 

Nie.  Not  exactly.  Our  argument  is  quite  different 
from  Euclid's:  and  we  come  to  ttoo  conclusions  —  one 
being  the  real  existence  of  Parallels,  the  other  the  equi- 
valent of  Playfair's  Axiom. 

Min.  I  very  much  doubt  your  proving  the  first  by 
any  simpler  method  than  Euclid's :  and  as  to  proving 
the  second,  by  any  method  at  all,  without  assuming 
some  disputable  Axiom,  I  defy  you  to  do  it!  However, 
let  us  hear  your  argument. 

Nie.  We  take  a  Line,  and  a  point  without  it :  and  from 
the  point  we  draw  two  '  half- rays '  intersecting  the  line. 
These  half- rays  we  then  turn  about  the  point,  in  op- 
posite directions,  until  they  cease  to  intersect  the  Line. 


Sc.  v.] 


PL  A  YF AIR'S  AXIOM. 


77 


And  then  we  proceed  to  consider  where  their   '  produc- 
tions' have  got  to. 

Min.  Like  '  little  Bo-peep,'  you  are  anxious  about  their 
^tails''  in  fjict;  taking  their  'heads'  to  be  the  ends  which 
at  first  intersected  the  given  Line. 

Nie.  We  say  that  there  are  only  three  conceivable  cases : 
one,  where  the  tails  fall  next  to 
the  given  Line ;  another,  where 
the  Jieads  fall  next  to  it ;  the 
third,  where  the  tail  of  each  coin- 
cides with  the  head  of  the  other. 

Mill.  I  admit  all  that. 

Nie.  The  first  case  we  say  is 
inadmissible  because,  if  it  were 
true,  any  Line  through  P,  lying 
within  the  angle  formed  by  the 
head  of  one  ray  and  the  tail  of 

the  other,  would  cut  the  given      '— • 

Line  both  ways. 

Min,  A  reductio  ad  ahsnrdum,  no  doubt ;  but  it  only 
holds  good  on  the  supposition  that  you  can  draw  Lines 
through  P,  so  as  to  lie  within  that  angle.  But  this  sup- 
position requires  a  finite  angle.  If  we  suppose  that,  the 
moment  one  ray  begins  to  revolve  so  as  to  bring  its  head 
nearer  to  the  given  line,  it  instantly  coincides  with  the 
other  ray^  head  with  tail  and  tail  with  head,  it  will  not 
then  be  possible  to  draw  any  such  Line  as  you  suggest : 
and  then  where  is  your  reductio  ad  ahsurdum  ? 

Nie.  We  do  not  seem  to  have  noticed  that  case. 

Min,  In  point  of  fact,  your  three  cases  are  really  five. 


<r 


78  HENRICL  [Act  II. 

Before  going  any  further  let  us  have  them  all  clearly 
stated. 

We  assume,  in  all  three  figures,  that  the  ray-heads,  as 
drawn,  do  not  intersect  the  given  line ;  but  that  either 
of  them  would,  if  it  began  to  revolve  towards  the  given 
Line,  instantly  intersect  it.  In  other  words  we  assume 
that  any  half-ray,  drawn  from  P  in  the  dotted  angular 
space,  loould  intersect  the  given  Line :  but  that  any  half- 
ray,  drawn  from  P  in  the  undotted  angular  space,  as 
well  as  the  two  ray-heads  which  limit  that  angular  space, 
would  not  intersect  it.  And  as  to  the  ray -tails,  it  is 
obvious  that  in  fig.  i  they  do  intersect  the  given  Line, 
but  in  figs.  2,  3,  they  do  twt  do  so. 

Nie.  That  is  all  clear  enough. 

Min.  Then  these  are  the  five  cases : — 

(a)  Figure  i.  The  head  of  each  ray  must  revolve 
downwards  through  a  finite  angle  before  it  can  coincide 
with  the  tail  of  the  other  ray. 

(j8)  Same  figure.  The  head  of  each  ray,  on  beginning 
to  revolve  downwards,  instantly  coincides  with  the  tail 
of  the  other  ray. 

(7)  Figure  2.  The  head  of  each  ray  must  revolve  up- 
wards through  2i  finite  angle  before  it  can  coincide  with 
the  tail  of  the  other  ray. 

(6)  Same  figure.  The  head  of  each  ray,  on  beginning 
to  revolve  upwards,  instantly  coincides  with  the  tail  of 
the  other  ray. 

(e)  Figure  3. 

These  five  cases  suggest  a  few  observations. 

In  case  (a)  a  number  of  Lines  may  be  drawn  through 


Sc.  V.J  PLA  YFAIR'S  AXIOM.  79 

P,  in  the  angular  space  contained  between  the  head  of 
one  ray  and  the  tail  of  the  other  :  and  all  such  Lines  will 
intersect  the  given  line  both  ways. 

In  case  (/3)  this  absurdity  does  not  arise :  all  Lines, 
through  P,  intersect  the  given  Line  one  way  or  the  other : 
there  is  no  instance  of  a  Line  intersecting  it  botJi  ways, 
nor  of  one  wholly  separate  from  it. 

In  case  (y)  a  number  of  Lines  may  be  drawn  as  in  case 
(a)  :  and  all  such  Lines  will  be  wholly  separate  from  the 
given  Line. 

In  case  (5)  the  tw^o  rays  themselves,  as  drawn  in  the 
figure,  are  wholly  separate  from  the  given  Line :  but  no 
other  such  Line  can  be  drawn  through  P. 

In  case  (e)  there  is  only  one  Line  through  P  wholly 
separate  from  the  given  Line. 

Now  let  us  hear  what  you  make  of  these  five  cases. 

Nie.  We  exclude  case  (a),  as  I  told  you  just  now, 
by  a  reductio  ad  aisurdum.  Case  (/3)  we  have  failed  to 
notice. 

Mill.  True :  but  it  can  be  excluded  by  Euc.  I.  27  :  so 
that  if  you  can  manage,  by  pure  reasoning,  from  ordinary 
Axioms,  and  without  assuming  any  disputable  Axiom,  to 
exclude  cases  (y)  and  [h),  you  wdll  have  achieved  what 
geometricians  have  been  vainly  trying  to  do  for  the  last 
two  thousand  years ! 

Nie,  We  go  on  thus.  'But  our  Axioms  are  not  sufli- 
cient  to  decide  which  of  the  remaining  two  cases  actually 
does  occur.'     (p.  67.) 

Min.  Or  rather  '  the  remaining  three  cases.' 

Nie.  '  In  looking  at  the  figures  the  reader  will  at  once 


80  HENRI  CI.  [Act  II. 

feel  that  the  third  case'  (we  mean  your  'case  (e)')  ^is  the 
true  one.' 

Mln.  An  appeal  to  sentiment!  What  if  the  reader 
doesn't  feel  it  ? 

Nie.  'But  this  cannot  be  considered  decisive;' 

Mi7i.  It  cannot. 

Nie.  'for  the  two  Lines  may  include  a  very  small 
angle  — ' 

Min.  Kje,  or  even  a  large  one. 

Nie.  'that  is,  they  may  very  nearly  coincide  without 
actually  doing  so.  Or  it  may  be  that  sometimes  the  one, 
sometimes  the  other,  happens,  according  as  we  take  the 
point  P  at  a  smaller  or  greater  distance  from  the  Line.' 

Mi7i,  That  seems  a  fair  statement  of  the  difficulty.  And 
now,  how  are  you  going  to  grapple  with  it  ? 

Nie.  '  The  only  way  of  settling  this  point  is  to  make 
an  assumption,  and  to  see  whether  the  consequences  drawn 
from  it  do  or  do  not  agree  with  our  experience.' 

Min.  If  you  find  a  consequence  7iot  agreeing  with  ex- 
perience, you  may  of  course  conclude  that  your  assumption 
was  false  ;  but,  if  it  does  agree,  what  then  ? 

Nie.  Nothing,  I  fear,  unless  you  can  prove  that  this 
is  the  case  with  one  assumption  only,  and  that  all  other 
possible  assumptions  lead  to  absurd  results. 

Min.  Exactly  so.  If,  then,  you  want  to  prove  case  (e), 
your  logical  course  is  to  assume  case  (y)  as  true,  and  from 
that  assumption  to  deduce  some  consequence  which  is 
evidently  contrary  to  experience.  And  then  to  exclude 
case  (8)  by  a  similar  argument.     Is  that  your  method  ? 

Nie.  Well,   hardly.     We   say   'The   assumption   to    be 


Sc.  v.]  PLA  YFAIR'S  AXIOM.  81 

made  is,  that  the  third  case'  (i.e.  case  (e))  only  happens, 
and  this  will  give  us  a  new  axiom.'     (p.  6^].) 

Min.  You  may  assume  it  as  an  axiom,  if  you  like. 
Then  you  will  merely  he  in  the  same  boat  with  Playfair. 
But  if  you  are  going  to  discuss  the  consequences  of  its 
being  true,  and  get  anything  out  of  that,  look  to  your 
feet !   There  are  pitfalls  about ! 

Kie.  'In  the  second  case'  (i.e.  case  (y) )  'we  should 
have  to — ' 

Min.  Oho !  Tlien  it  is  case  (y),  after  all,  that  you  are 
provisionally  assuming  as  true  ? 

NiCi  Apparently  so. 

Min.  Well,  go  on.     You  are  on  the  right  track  now. 

Nie.  In  this  case  we  should  have  to  turn  the  ray 
'through  a  finite  angle'  before  its  tail  w^ould  cut  the 
given  Line :  '  or  there  would  be  an  indefinite  number  of 
Lines  through  P  which  do  not  cut''  it.     (p.  68.) 

3/m.  What  do  you  mean  by  'or'?  That  one  result 
would  follow,  or  the  other,  but  not  both  ? 

Nie.  We  mean  that  the  two  results  are  equivalent. 

Min.  Then  you  should  say  '  that  is.'  '  Or'  is  mislead- 
ing. However,  I  grant  you  that  this  consequence  would 
follow^  if  case  (y)  were  true.  What  then  ?  Is  there  any 
obvious  absurdity  in  such  a  consequence  ? 

Nie.  That  we  do  not  assert.  We  merely  make  the 
remark — and  we  now  proceed  to  case  (e). 

Mill.  A  weak  and  pointless  remark  :  but  let  that  pass. 
Do  you  omit  case  (8)  ? 

Nie.  We  do.  We  proceed  thus.  '  But  in  the  third 
case  (i.e.  in  case  (e))  there  would  be  only  one  Line  through 

G 


82  HENRICL  [Act  II. 

P  which  does  not  cut '  the  given  Line.  '  As  soon  as  we 
turn  this  Line  about  P  it  would  meet  it  to  the  right  or 
to  the  left; 

Ilin.  Certainly.  And  what  then?  Do  you  expect  me 
to  admit  that,  because  case  (e)  would  lead  to  a  conse- 
quence not  obviously  absurd,  therefore  it  is  the  case 
which  always  happens,  to  the  exclusion  of  cases  (y) 
and  (a)  ? 

N'le.  {JiesHatingly')  Well,  I  think  that  is  what  we  expect. 
But  we  first  deduce  the  real  existence  of  Parallels.  ^  Thus 
we  are  led  to  the  conclusion  that  there  exist  Lines  in  a 
Plane  which,  though  both  be  unlimited,  do  not  meet. 
Such  Lines  are  called  parallel! 

Min.  Oh  most  lame  and  impotent  conclusion !  After  all 
these  magnificent  Catherine-wheels  of  revolving  half-rays, 
to  deduce  Euc.  I.  27 !  And  even  tlih  wretched  result  you 
have  no  right  to.  Just  consider  what  your  argument  has 
been.  There  are  five  conceivable  cases,  (a),  (/3),  (y),  (5), 
and  (e).  If  (a)  or  (/3)  were  true,  no  Line  could  be  drawn, 
through  P,  parallel  to  the  given  Line :  if  (y),  many  such 
Lines  could  be  drawn :  if  (5),  two  such  Lines :  if  (e),  one 
such  Line.  Now  what  have  you  proved?  Positively  no- 
thing whatever  but  this — that  case  (a)  would  lead  to  an 
absurd  result.  You  leave  me  perfectly  free  to  range 
about  among  the  other  four  cases,  one  of  which,  (^), 
denies  the  real  existence  of  Parallels,  which  existence  you 
tell  me  you  have  proved !  And  so,  for  the  '  long  course 
of  logical  reasoning '  which  you  object  to  so  much  in 
Euclid,  you  substitute  a  sJiort  course  of  z'/logical  reasoning ! 
But  you  deduce  another  conclusion,  do  you  not  ? 


Sc.  v.]  PLA  YFAIR'S  AXIOM.  83 

Nie.  Yes,  one  other.  '  The  assumption  mentioned  in 
§  113'  (the  assumption  that  ease  (e)  is  the  only  true  one) 
'  may  now  be  stated  thus : — Axiom  VI.  Through  a  given 
point  only  one  Line  can  he  clraivn  parallel  to  a  given  Line.^ 

3Iin.  May  it  indeed  ?  And  why  '  now'  rather  than  three 
pages  back  ?  Is  there  a  single  word,  in  all  this  argument, 
which  tends  to  show  that  case  (e)  is — I  will  not  say  cer- 
tainly true,  but —  even  fairly  probable  ? 

Nie.  (cautiouslij)  I  will  not  assert  that  there  is. 

Min.  In  point  of  fact  the  odds  are  exactly  three  to  one 
against  it — since  you  have  only  excluded  one  of  the  five 
cases,  and  the  other  four  are,  for  anything  w^e  know  to 
the  contrary,  equally  probable. 

Nie.  I  will  not  dispute  it. 

Min.  Well!  Then  it  only  remains  to  say  that  j^our 
attempted  'proof  of  Playfair's  Axiom  is  an  utter  failure. 
Anything  more  hopelessly  illogical  I  have  never  met  with, 
not  even  in  Cooley — and  that  is  saying  a  great  deal ! 

Nie.  I  confess  I  do  not  see  my  way  to  defending  this 
proof.  But  even  if  we  abandon  the  whole  of  it,  we  are 
no  worse  off  than  any  other  writer  who  assumes  Play- 
fair's  Axiom. 

Min.  That  I  quite  admit. 

Nie.  And  then,  my  client  instructs  me  to  plead,  this 
Manual  {Itanding  it  to  Minos)  being  so  distinctly  better 
than  Euclid's  in  every  other  particular — 

Min.  Gently,  gently !  You  are  anticipating.  I  have 
not  yet  had  my  general  survey  of  the  book. 

Nie.  (I'efiUing  his  pijoe)  Well,  let  us  have  it  then. 

Min.  I  will  begin  with  the  general  remark  that  the 

G  2 


84  HENRICI.  [Act  II. 

first  151  pages  of  this  book  (the  rest  of  it  going  beyond 
the  limits  of  Euc.  I,  II)  contain  (excluding  7  pages  on 
Logic  and  22  pages  of  Exercises)  122  pages  of  text, 
which  I  presume  the  learner  is  expected  to  master. 

Nie.  A  great  deal  of  that  is  merely  explanatory. 

Mill.  True:  but  even  omitting  all  that,  we  have,  of 
Definitions,  80 :  and  of  Theorems,  145.  And  when  the 
unfortunate  learner  has  mastered  all  these — more  than 
there  are  in  Euclid's  first  six  Books — he  finds  he  has 
learned  no  more  Euclid  than  Props,  i  to  34! 

Nie,  But  he  will  have  learned  a  good  deal  that  is  not 
in  Euclid. 

Min.  Undoubtedly :  and  it  would  have  been  easy  to 
crowd  in  twice  as  many  Theorems  as  Mr.  Henrici  has 
done,  without  passing  Prop.  34.  I  believe  the  subject 
to  be  practically  inexhaustible.  But  fancy  having  to 
master  145  Theorems  before  even  hearing  of  so  important 
a  one  as  Prop.  47  ! 

Nie,  If  all  the  new  matter  is  good^  it  is  a  poor  objection 
to  raise  that  there  is  too  much  of  it. 

Min.  You  think  the  quantlti/  unassailable?  Well,  let 
us  test  its  quality  a  little,  then. 

The  book  begins  with  a  page  or  two  of  very  general 
considerations.  Time  and  Force,  Kinetics  and  Kinematics, 
Chemistry  and  Biology,  cross  the  stage  in  a  grand  but 
shadowy  procession.  Then  when  the  pupil  has  been  suf- 
ficiently crushed  by  the  spectacle  of  how  much  there  is 
to  know,  we  allow  him,  little  by  little,  to  contract  his 
view :  till  at  last  we  condescend  to  contemplate  so  trifling 
an  entity  as  Infinite  Space. 


Sc.  v.]  TWO  '  NON-SEQUITURS:  85 

And  here  I  notice  a  singular  mental  process.  '  Two 
material  bodies/  we  are  told,  '  cannot  occupy  the  same 
space.  We  are  thus  led  to  recognise  a  third  property 
common  to  all  bodies :  every  body  has  position.^  (p.  3.) 
The  word  '  thus^  is  what  I  want  to  call  your  special  at- 
tention to :  for  I  confess  I  can  see  no  such  sequence  of 
thought  as  it  would  seem  to  imply.  Suppose  bodies  could 
occupy  the  same  space:  wouldn^t  they  have  'position' 
just  as  much  as  if  they  couldn't?  Does  an  orange — to 
take  the  favourite  logical  entity — lose  its  position  because 
another  orange  most  uncivilly  insists  on  permeating  it 
and  occupying  the  same  portion  of  Space?  But  if  not, 
what  is  the  meaning  of  'thus'?  As  Artemus  Ward  would 
say,  '  why  this  thusness  ? ' 

Nie.  I  can't  say. 

Min.  A  little  further  on  I  find  a  'therefore'  which  is 
equally  shadowy.  The  writer's  logical  ideas — in  spite  of 
his  actually  introducing  a  '  Digression  on  Logic ' — are, 
I  fear,  a  little  vague.  He  says  '  If  we  bring  difierent 
points  together  into  the  same  position,  they  will  never 
give  us  anything  but  a  point;  w^e  never  obtain  any  ex- 
tension. We  cannot,  therefore,  say  that  Space  is  made 
up  of  points'  (p.  6).  I  venture  to  say  that  there  is  no 
such  sequence  as  '  therefore'  seems  to  imply :  he  has 
made  the  whole  argument  null  and  void  by  using  the 
words  Mnto  the  same  position.' 

JSie.  I  do  not  understand  you. 

Mlu.  I  w^ill  put  it  in  another  way.  The  real  reason 
why  3'ou  cannot  construct  Space  of  points  is  that  they 
have  no  size  :  if  they  /lad  size  you  coicld  do  it.     But,  under 


86  HENRICI.  [Act  II. 

the  condition  here  laid  down — of  bringing  them  '  together 
into  the  same  position' — you  make  the  thing  impossible, 
whether  they  have  size  or  not. 

I  have  often  found  it  the  best  way  for  exhibiting  the 
unsoundness  of  an  argument,  to  make  another  exactly 
like  it,  but  leading  to  an  absurd  conclusion.  I  will  try 
it  here.  You  grant  that  a  cubic  foot  can  be  made  up  of 
cubic  inches  ? 

Kie.  Certainly. 

Min.  Well,  I  will  prove  to  you  that  it  cannot ;  and 
I  will  do  so  by  an  argument  just  as  good  as  Mr.  Henrici's. 
'  If  we  bring  different  cubic  inches  together  into  the  same 
position  they  will  never  give  us  anything  but  a  cubic 
inch  ;    w^e  never  obtain  any  extension — ' 

Nie.  That  won't  do !  You  have  the  '  extension '  of  one 
cubic  inch. 

Min.  Yes,  but  you  had  that  to  begin  with.  You  don't 
'obtain'  any  extension  by  squeezing  in  other  cubic  inches, 
do  you  ? 

Nic.  No,  I  suppose  not. 

Min.  Then  the  argument  is  sound  so  far.  And  now 
comes  my  triumphant  conclusion,  a  la  Henrici.  '  We 
cannot,  therefore,  say  that  a  cubic  foot  is  made  up  of  cubic 
inches.' 

Nie.  I  see  your  meaning  now.  I  give  up  the  words 
'  into  the  same  position.' 

Min.  I  haven^t  quite  done  with  points  yet.  I  find 
an  assertion  that  they  never  jump.  Do  you  think  that 
arises  from  their  having  '  position,^  which  they  feel  might 
be  compromised  by  such  conduct? 


Sc.  v.]  MOTION  'PER  SALTUM:  87 

Kie.  I  cannot  tell  without  hearing  the  passage  read. 

Mill.  It  is  this : — '  A  point,  in  changing  its  position 
on  a  curve,  passes,  in  moving  from  one  position  to 
another,  through  all  intermediate  positions.  It  does 
not  move  by  jumps.'     (p.  I2.) 

JS^'ie.  That  is  quite  true. 

Min.  Tell  me,  then — is  every  centre  of  gravity  a  point? 

Nie.  Certainly. 

Mm.  Let  us  now  consider  the  centre  of  gravity  of 
a  flea.     Does  it — 

'Nie.  {indignantl?/)  Another  word^  and  I  shall  vanish !  I 
cannot  waste  a  nig-ht  on  such  trivialities. 

Min.  Forgive  me.  I  drop  the  flea.  My  next  remark 
shall  be  serious.  I  wish  to  point  out  to  you  the  il- 
logical ione  of  the  book.  I  do  not  say  that  the  in- 
stances I  am  o'oins:  to  ffive  are  crucial  or  fatal  to  the 
argument.  But,  however  unimportant^  and  however 
easily  corrected,  they  will,  I  think,  justify  me  in  asking 
'  Is  a  text-book,  which  contains  such  loosely  reasoned 
arguments  as  these,  to  be  trusted  ?  ' 

My  first  selection  is  §  52,  p.  23.  For  brevity's  sake 
I  shall  omit  superfluous  w^ords.  The  passages  in  paren- 
theses are  interpolations  of  my  owm. 

(see  He7irici,  p.  23.) 

'  If  v\^e  canceive  a  Plane  (and  a  point  A  chosen  any- 
where in  Space ;  then,  either  the  Plane  already  passes 
through  A^  or)  we  may  move  it  until  a  point  on  it 
comes  to  A,  which  has  been  chosen  anywhere  in  Space. 
(If  we  now  flx  a  second  point  B  ;  then,  either  the 
Plane  already  passes  through  B,  or)  if  we  keep  A  fixed 


88  HENRICL  [Act  II. 

we  may  turn  the  Plane  about  it,  until  the  Plane  comes 
to  pass  also  through  B,  likewise  chosen  arbitrarily  in 
Space.  (If  we  now  fix  a  third  point  C )  then_,  either 
the  Plane  already  passes  through  C,  or)  we  may  still 
move  the  Plane,  as  onl}^  two  points  of  it  are  fixed,  by 
turning  it  about  the  Line  joining  them,  until  the  Plane 
passes  through  C,  chosen  arbitrarily,  like  A  and  B. 
Thus  it  appears  that  we  may  place  a  Plane  so  as  to 
pass  through  three  points,  A^  B,  Cy  chosen  anywhere 
in  Space.' 

You  accept  that,  interpolations  and  all  ? 

Nie.  Certainly. 

Min.  Omit  the  interpolations,  and  what  do  you  say 
of  it  then? 

Nie.  It  remains  true.  The  three  successive  movings 
do  no  harm,  but  they  are  not  always  necessary. 

Mill.  Would  this  statement  be  correct  ?  '  Three  "  mov- 
ings "  are  generally  necessary :  but  there  are  three  ex- 
ceptions. If  the  Plane  at  first  passes  through  A,  the 
first  "  moving "  is  unnecessary ;  if,  after  being  made  to 
pass  through  A,  it  be  found  to  pass  through  B  also, 
the  second  "moving"  is  unnecessary;  and  if,  after  being 
made  to  pass  through  A  and  B,  it  be  found  to  pass 
through  C  also,  the  tldrcl  "^moving"  is  unnecessary'? 

Nie.  Certainly. 

Min.  You  would  not,  on  finding  some  one  '  moving ' 
unnecessary,  call  it  '  an  open  question '  whether  the 
result  were  attainable? 

iVf^.  What?  When  it  is  already  attained?  ^^  ^<^ 
means. 


Sc.  Y.]  A  STRANGE  HYPOTHESIS.  89 

Mill.  Now  read  this,  at  p.  23. 

(hands  the  hook) 

'  But  if  C  happens  to  lie  on  the  Line  joining*  A  and 
B,  then  a  Plane  through  A  and  B,  which  did  not  pass 
through  C,  could  never  be  made  to  pass  through  C  by 
being  rotated  about  A  and  B ;  for  if  it  did  contain  C 
in  one  position,  it  would  contain  it  in  all  positions,  as 
this  point  would  remain  fixed  during  rotation/  What 
do  you  say  to  that? 

Nie.  Well,  it  is  his  way  of  discussing  your  third  ex- 
ception. Of  course,  when  he  talks  of  'a  Plane  through 
A  and  B,  which  did  not  pass  through  C','  he  is  de- 
scribing a  nonentity  :  but  it  is  all  logical  as  an  argu- 
ment. 

Min.  What  kind  of  argument  ? 

Nie.  (douhifully)  I  should  call  it  a— kind  of — Reductio 
ad  Absurdum. 

Min.  I  don't  wonder  at  your  hesitation.  A  thoughtful 
boy  might  read  it  thus : — '  then  a  Plane  through  A  and 
B,  which  did  not  pass  through  C  (but  no  such  'Plane 
can  exist!),  could  never  be  made  to  pass  through  C 
by  being  rotated  about  A  and  B  (why,  it  needs  no 
'  making ' !) ;  for  if  it  did  contain  C  in  one  position 
(which  it  does !),  it  would  contain  it  in  all  positions 
(which  also  it  does  !)  ' 

You  and  I  can  recognise  the  Reductio  ad  Absurdum — 
though  so  abnormal  and  hideous — which  the  writer  in- 
tends. But  what  do  you  think  would  be  the  effect,  on 
a  thoughtful  boy,  of  a  course  of  such  arguments,  where 
he  is  expected  to  accept  as  data  what  he   knows  to  be 


90  HENRICl.  [Act  II. 

absurd,  and  to  recognise  as  an  absurdity  what  be  knows 
to  be  a  necessary  truth? 

Nie.  At  first,  Mania :  ultimately.  Dementia. 

Min,  Now  read  Mr.  Henrici's  deduction  from  this 
fearful  argument,  at  p.  24. 

'  We  ought,  therefore,  to  limit  the  conclusion  arrived 
at  as  follows : — Through  three  points  which  do  not  lie 
in  a  Line  we  may  always  pass  a  Plane.  Whether  a  Plane 
may  be  drawn  through  three  points  which  do  lie  in 
a  Line^  remains  for  the  moment  an  open  question.' 

Are  you  prepared  to  back  that  statement?  Is  it  an 
'  open  question  '  ? 

Nie.  I  cannot  say  that  it  is. 

Min.  Now  here  is  a  most  curious  bit  of  bad  Logic,   (reads) 

'  If  two  Planes  have  two  points,  A  and  B,  in  common, 
they  must  necessarily  have  more  points  in  common. 
For,  since  each  extends  continuously  without  limit,  a 
point  moving  in  the  one  Plane  through  A  or  B  will 
cross  the  other  Plane  at  this  point  ;^     (p.  25-) 

I  pause  to  ask — will  it  necessarily  do  so?  How  if  it 
moved  along  their  Line  of  intersection? 

Nie.  That  is  an  exception,  I  grant. 

Min.  (reads)  Mience  one  Plane  will  lie  partly  on  the 
one  and  partly  on  the  other  side  of  the  second  Plane. 
They  must  therefore  intersect.' 

Now  the  conclusion — that  the  Planes  intersect — is  un- 
doubtedly true,  so  long  as  we  assume  that,  by  'two 
planes/  the  writer  means  'two  different  Planes.'  But 
does  it  follow  from  the  p7'emisses?  Have  the  words 
'  hence '  and  '  therefore '  any  logical  value  ? 


Sc.  v.] 


SYMMETRY, 


91 


Nie.  I  fear  not. 

Mill.  At  p.  74  I  observe  '  If  two  Lines  be  each  per- 
pendicular to  a  third,  they  will  be  parallel  to  one  another.' 
This  is  not  true.  They  might  be  coincidental.  The  same 
mistake  is  made  in  p.  75. 

Now  comes  a  wonderful  specimen  of  slipshod  wa-iting. 
'  We  understand  by  the  angles  of  a  Polygon  those 
angles  of  which  the  part  near  the  vertex  lies  within 
the  Polygon.'  Does  not  this  oblige  us  to  contemplate 
an  angle  as  consisting  of  two  parts — one  '  near  the  ver- 
tex,' the  other  further  off? 

Nie.  Undoubtedly. 

Mill.  And  if  either  part  were  gone,  the  angle  would 
be  less? 

Nie.  {uneasily)  It  would  seem  so. 

Mm.  And  this  might  be  effected  by  shortening  the 
Lines,  so  that  they  would  not  reach  beyond  the  region 
'  near  the  vertex  '  ? 

Nie.  I  fear  you  have  got  us  into  a  corner.     Be  merciful ! 

3Iln.  You  mean  that  I  have  driven  you  into  '  that  part 
of  an  angle  which  lies  near  the  vertex.'  Well,  you  may 
come  out  now.    We  will  seek  '  fresh  fields  and  pastures  new.' 

At  pages  91  to  96  I  find  no  less  than  forty-six  theorems 
on  Symmetry,  arranged  in  tw^o  columns — one  headed 
'  Axial  Symmetry,'  the  other  '  Central  Symmetry .''  Here 
is  a  specimen  pair,  at  p.  95. 


'  Corresponding  Polygons 
are  congruent  but  of  oppo- 
site sense.' 


'  Corresponding  Polygons 


are 


congruent 


and    of  like 


sense. 


92  HENRICI.  [Act  II. 

I  hardly  know  which  to  pity  most — the  master  who  has 
to  teach  these  Theorems,  or  the  boy  who  has  to  learn 
them !    ' 

But  I  have  neither  the  '  one-way  spread  with  moments 
as  elements'  nor  the  'three-way  spread  with  points  as 
elements '  to — 

Nle,  (cjasping)  What  are  you  talking  about  ? 

Min.  Excuse  me.  I  fear  I  am  getting  demoralised.  I 
meant  to  say — I  have  neither  the  time  nor  the  space  to 
criticise  this  book  throughout. 

I  will,  however,  try  to  sum  up  its  faults  in  a  general 
description. 

^  011a  Podrida '  is  perhaps  the  best  name  for  it,  its  con- 
tents are  so  hopelessly  jumbled  together.  Most  of  the 
Axioms,  and  all  the  Theorems,  are  without  numbers,  and, 
as  there  is  no  index,  the  difficulty  of  finding  them  when 
wanted  is  obvious :  and  none  the  less  that  they  are 
imbedded  in  oceans  of  'padding.'  Dip  into  the  book 
anywhere,  and  you  find  yourself  in  the  midst  of  some 
discursive  talk,  which  perhaps  culminates  in  an  Axiom. 
Then  perhaps  comes  a  Definition.  Then  comes  a  little 
more  talk,  which,  after  appealing  to  sentiment,  or  proba- 
bility, or  some  other  motive  degrading  to  Pure  Mathe- 
matics, gradually  becomes  more  and  more  logical,  and  at 
last  warms  into  a  regular  proof — but  of  what  ?  The 
reader  has  no  warning  as  to  loliai  is  to  be  proved.  Un- 
suspectingly he  glides  on  with  the  stream,  till  with  a 
crash  he  is  landed  on  an  enunciation,  and  finds  himself 
committed  to  an  entire  Theorem.  This  singular  writer 
always  reserves  the  enunciation  for  the  end  of  the  Propo- 


Sc.  v.]  EUCLID  V.  HENRICr.  93 

sition.  It  may  be  prejudice,  but  I  cannot  help  thinking 
that  Euclid's  plan — of  first  clearly  stating  what  he  is 
going  to  prove  and  then  proving  it — is  to  be  preferred  to 
this  conjurer's  trick  of  '  forcing  a  card.' 

The  book  is,  I  think,  very  hard  for  beginners  to  master  : 
the  majority  of  the  new  Theorems  are  much  more  fitted  for 
'  exercises,'  than  to  be  embodied  in  a  text-book :  and,  to 
crown  all,  the  ambitious  attempt  to  construct  a  proof  of 
Playfair's  Axiom  is,  as  we  have  seen,  a  lamentable  failure. 

I  think  I  cannot  better  conclude  my  review  of  this  book 
than  by  giving  you,  in  two  parallel  columns,  Euclid's 
Props.  I.  1 8,  19,  and  Mr.  Henrici's  proposed  substitute 
for  them,  at  p.  107. 

(turn  over.) 


94 


HENRICl. 


[Act  II. 


Euclid. 

The  greater  side  of 
a  Triangle  is  oi^posite 
to  the  greater  angle. 


Let  ABC  be  a  tri- 
angle having  AC  > 
AB :  then  shall  the 
angle  ABC  he  >  the 
angle  C. 

From  AC  cut  off 
Al)  equal  to  AB -, 
and  draw  BJD. 

T:\ien,'.'AB  =  AI), 
.'.  the  angle  ABI)  = 
the  angle  ABB ; 

but  the  angle  ABB 
is  exterior  to  the  Tri- 
angle BCB,  and  .*. 
<  the  angle  C; 

,  • .  the  angle  ABB 
also  >  the  angle  C; 

much  more  is  the 
angle  ABC  >  the 
angle  C.      Q.  E.  D. 


Heneici. 


Let  us  now  suppose  a  Triangle 
ABC,  in  which  the  bisector  of  the 
angle  BAC  is  not  an  axis  of  sym- 
metiy.  Then  the  contra-positive 
form  of  the  theorem  of  §  162  tells 
us  that  AB  is  not  equal  to  AC, 
that  the  angle  B  is  not  equal  to 
the  angle  C,  and  that  the  bisector 
AD  of  the  angle  A  is  not  perpen- 
dicular to  BC,  and  hence,  that  the 
two  angles  ABB  and  ABC  are  un- 
equal. Between  these  angles  there 
exists  the  relation 

'  the  angle  ABC  +  the  angle  BBA 
=  the  angle  C+  the  angle  CBA,' 

for  each  sum  makes  with  half 
the  angle  A  an  angle  of  continua- 
tion. Hence  it  follows  that,  if  the 
angle  ABC  >  the  angle  C,  the 
angle  BBA  <  the  angle  CBA. 


Sc.  v.] 


EUCLID   V.   IIENRICI. 


95 


The  greater  angle 
of  a  Triangle  is  oppo- 
site to  the  greater  side. 


Let  J^C  be  a  Tri- 
angle having"  the  Z 
B  >  the  angle  C'. 
then  shall  AC  hQ  > 
AB. 

For  if  not,  it  must 
be  equal  or  less. 

It  is  not  equal,  for 
then  the  angle  B 
would  =  the  angle 
C. 

It  is  not  less,  for 
then  the  angle  B 
would  <  the  angle  C. 

.\AC>  AB. 
Q.E.D. 


If  we  now  fold  the  figure  along 
AJD,  then  AB  will  fall  along  AC; 
and  B  will  fall  between  A  and  C  if 
we  suppose  that  AB  is  the  shorter 
of  the  two  unequal  Lines  AB  and 
AC.  The  line  BB  therefore  takes 
the  position  BB"  within  the  angle 
ABC.  But  the  angle  AB'D,  which 
=  the  angle  ABC,  is  exterior  to 
the  triangle  BCB\  and  .-.  >  the 
angle  C. 

Conversely,  if  the  angle  ABB  < 
the  angle  ABC,  the  line  BB  will 
fall  within  the  angle  ABC,  and  .' .  B 
will  fall  between  A  and  C;  that  is, 
AB  will  be  less  than  AC.  This 
always  happens  (see  above)  if  the 
angle  ABC  >  the  angle  C,  for  then 
the  angle  BBA  <  the  angle  ABC. 

Theorem.  In  ever?/  Triangle  the 
greater  side  is  opposite  to  the 
greater  angle,  and  conversely,  the 
greater  angle  is  opposite  to  the  greater 
side. 


Now,  if  you  could  get  some  schoolmaster — one  who  had 
no  bias  whatever  in  favour  of  Euclid  or  of  Henrici — to 
teach  these  two  columns  (one  containing  169,  the  other 
282  words)  to  two  ordinary  boys  of  equal  intelligence^  or 
rather  of  equal  stupidity,  what  result  would  you  expect  ? 


96  HENRICI.  [Act  II.  Sc.  V. 

Nie.  (ivHh  a  cunning  smile)  I  don't  think  I  could  find 
such  a  schoolmaster. 

Min.  Ah,  crafty  man !  You  evade  the  question !  I 
can't  resist  giving  you  just  one  more  tit-bit — the  definition 
of  a  Square,  at  p.  123. 

'A  quadrilateral  which  is  a  kite,  a  symmetrical  tra- 
pezium, and  a  parallelogram  is  a  Square  ' ! 

And  now,  farewell,  Henrici !  '  Euclid,  with  all  thy 
faults,  I  love  thee  still  ! '  Indeed  I  might  say  '  with  twice 
thy  faults/  or  'with  thrice  thy  faults,'  if  the  alternative  be 
Henrici !  [returns  the  hook,  ivhich  Niemmid  receives  in  solemn 
silence.) 


ACT   11. 

Scene  YI. 
Treatment  of  Parallels  by  direction. 


I.  Wilson. 


'There  is  moreover  a  logic  besides  that  of  mere  reasoning.' 

Wilson,  Pr^.  p.  xiii. 

Nie.  You  have  made  but  short  work  of  four  of  the  five 
methods  of  treating  Parallels. 

3Ii7i.  We  shall  have  all  the  more  time  to  give  to  the 
somewhat  intricate  subject  of  Direction. 

Nie.  I  lay  on  the  table  'Elementary  Geometry'  by 
J.  M.  Wilson,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College, 
Cambridge,  late  Mathematical  Master  of  Rugby  School, 
now  Head  Master  of  Clifton  College.  The  second  edition, 
1869.  And  I  warn  you  to  be  careful  how  you  criticise 
it,  as  it  is  already  adopted  in  several  schools. 

Min.  Tant  pis  pour  les  ecoles.  So  you  and  your  client 
deliberately  propose  to  supersede  Euclid  as  a  text-book  ? 

H 


98  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

Nie.  '  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  time  is  come  for  making 
an  effort  to  supplant  Euclid  in  our  schools  and  universities.' 
(Pref.  p.  xiv.) 

Min.  It  will  be  necessary,  considering*  how  great  a 
change  you  are  advocating,  to  examine  your  book  veri/ 
minutely  and  critically. 

Nie.  With  all  my  heart.  I  hope  you  will  show,  in 
your  review,  'the  spirit  without  the  prejudices  of  a  geo- 
metrician.'    (Pref.  p.  XV.) 

Min.  We  will  begin  with  the  Right  Line.  And  first, 
let  me  ask,  how  do  you  define  it  ? 

Nie.  As  'a  Line  which  has  the  same  direction  at  all 
parts  of  its  length.'     (p.  3) 

Min.  You  do  not,  I  think,  make  any  practical  use  of 
that  as  a  test,  any  more  than  Euclid  does  of  the  property 
of  lying  evenly  as  to  points  on  it  ? 

Nie.  No,  we  do  not. 

Min.  You  construct  and  test  it  as  in  Euclid,  I  believe  ? 
And  you  have  his  Axiom  that  '  two  straight  Lines  cannot 
enclose  a  space  ? ' 

Nie.  Yes,  but  we  extend  it.  Euclid  asserts,  in  effect, 
that  two  Lines,  which  coincide  in  two  points,  coincide 
letween  those  points  :  we  say  they  '  coincide  wholly,'  which 
includes  coincidence  heyoncl  those  points. 

Min.  Euclid  tacitly  assumes  that. 

Nie.  Yes,  but  he  has  not  expressed  it. 

Min.  I  think  the  addition  a  good  one.  Have  you  any 
other  Axioms  about  it  ? 

Nie.  Yes,  'that  a  straight  Line  marks  the  shortest 
distance  between  any  two  of  its  points.'     (p.  5.  Ax.  i.) 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  ANGLES.  99 

Mill.  That  I  have  already  fully  discussed  in  reviewing* 
M.  Legendre's  book  (see  p.  ^^. 

Nie.  We  have  also  '  A  Line  may  be  conceived  as  trans- 
ferred from  any  position  to  any  other  position,  its  magni- 
tude being  unaltered.'     (p.  5.  Ax.  3.) 

Min,  True  of  aiii/  geometrical  magnitude :  but  hardly 
worth  stating,  I  think.  I  have  now  to  ask  you  how  you 
define  an  Angle  ? 

Nie.  '  Two  straight  Lines  that  meet  one  another  form 
an  angle  at  the  point  where  they  meet.'     (p.  5.) 

Min.  Do  you  mean  that  they  form  it  ^ at  the  point'  and 
nowhere  else  ? 

Nie.  I  suppose  so. 

Min.  I  fear  you  allow  your  angle  no  magnitude,  if  you 
limit  its  existence  to  so  small  a  locality ! 

Nie.  Well,  we  dont  mean  '  nowhere  else.' 

Min.  (ineditativelij)  You  mean  '  at  the  point — and  some- 
where  else.'     Where  else,  if  you  please  ? 

Nie.  We  mean — we  don't  quite  know  why  we  put  in  the 
words  at  all.  Let  us  say  '  Two  straight  Lines  that  meet 
one  another  form  an  angle.' 

Min.  Very  well.  It  hardly  tells  us  what  an  angle  «5, 
and,  so  far,  it  is  inferior  to  Euclid's  Definition  :  but  it  may 
pass.     Do  you  put  any  limit  to  the  size  of  an  angle  ? 

Nie.  We  have  not  named  any,  but  the  largest  here 
treated  of  is  what  we  call  '  one  revolution.'' 

Min.  You  admit  reentrant  angles  then  ? 

Nie.  Yes. 

Min.  Then  your  Definition  only  states  half  the  truth  : 
you  should  have  said  'form  two  angles.' 

H  2 


100  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

l^ie.  That  would  be  true,  no  doubt. 

Min,  But  this  extension  of  limit  will  require  several 
modifications  in  Euclid's  language :  for  instance,  what  is 
your  Definition  of  an  obtuse  angle  ? 

NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  8.  Def.  13.  'An  obtuse  angle  is  one  which  is  greater 
than  a  right  angle.' 

Min.  So  you  tumble  headlong  into  the  very  first  pitfall 
you  come  across !  Why,  that  includes  such  angles  as 
180°  and  360°.  You  would  teach  your  pupil,  I  suppose, 
that  one  portion  of  a  straight  Line  makes  an  obtuse 
angle  with  the  other,  and  that  every  straight  Line  has 
an  obtuse  angle  at  each  end  of  it ! 

Nie.  It  is  an  oversight — of  course  we  ought  to  have 
added  '  but  less  than  two  right  angles.' 

Min.  A  very  palpable  oversight.  I  fear  we  shall  find 
more  as  we  go  on.    What  Axioms  have  you  about  angles  ? 

NiEMAND  reads. 
P.  5.  Ax.  4.    ^  An  angle  may  be  conceived  as  transferred 
to  any  other  position,  its  magnitude  being  unaltered.' 
Min.  Hardly  worth  stating.     Proceed. 

NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  5.  Ax.  5.  'Angles  are  equal  when  they  could  be 
placed  on  one  another  so  that  their  vertices  would  coin- 
cide in  position,  and  their  arms  in  direction.^ 

Min.  ^  Placed  on  one  another ' !  Did  you  ever  see  the 
child's  gamCj  where  a  pile  of  four  hands  is  made  on  the 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  ANGLES.  101 

table,  and  each  player  tries  to  have  a  hand  at  the  top 
of  the  pile  ? 

Nie.  I  know  the  game. 

Min.  Well,  did  you  ever  see  both  players  succeed  at 
once  ? 

Nie.  No. 

Mm.  Whenever  that  feat  is  achieved,  you  may  then 
expect  to  be  able  to  place  two  angles  ^  on  one  another ' ! 
You  have  hardly,  I  think,  grasped  the  physical  fact  that, 
when  one  of  two  things  is  on  the  other,  the  second  is 
underneath  the  first.  But  perhaps  I  am  hypercritical. 
Let  us  try  an  example  of  3'our  Axiom  :  let  us  place  an 
angle  of  90°  on  one  of  270°.  I  think  I  could  get 
the  vertices  and  arms  to  coincide  in  the  w^ay  you 
describe. 

Nie.  But  the  one  angle  would  not  be  on  the  other; 
one  would  extend  round  one-fourth  of  the  circle,  and  the 
other  round  the  remaining  three-fourths. 

Ilin,  Then,  after  all,  the  angle  is  a  mysterious  entity, 
which  extends  from  one  of  the  Lines  to  the  other  ?  That 
is  much  the  same  as  Euclid's  Definition.  Let  us  now  take 
your  definition  of  a  Right  Angle. 

Nie.  We  first  define  '  one  revolution,'  which  is  the  angle 
described  by  a  Line  revolving,  about  one  extremity,  round 
into  its  original  position. 

Min.  That  is  clear  enough. 

Nie.  We  then  say  (p.  7.  Def.  9)  '  When  it  coincides  with 
what  was  initially  its  continuation,  it  has  described  half 
a  revolution^  and  the  angle  it  has  then  described  is  called 
a  straight  angle. ^ 


102  WILSON.  [Act  IL 

Min.  How  do  you  know  that  it  has  described  kalf 
a  revolution'^. 

Nie.  Well,  it  is  not  difficult  to  prove.  Let  that  portion 
of  the  Plane,  through  which  it  has  revolved,  be  rolled 
over,  using*  as  an  axis  the  arm  (in  its  initial  position)  and 
its  continuation,  until  it  falls  upon  the  other  portion  of 
the  Plane.  The  two  angular  magnitudes  will  now  together 
make  up  'one  revolution':  therefore  each  is  '  half  a  revo- 
lution.' 

3Iin.  A  proof,  I  grant :  but  you  are  veri/  sanguine  if 
you  expect  beginners  in  the  subject  to  supply  it  for 
themselves. 

Nie.  It  is  an  omission,  we  admit. 

Min.  And  then  '  a  straight  angle' !  '  Straight'  is  neces- 
sarily unbending :  while  '  angle '  is  from  ay/cos-,  '  a  bend 
or  hook'':  so  that  your  phrase  is  exactly  equivalent  to 
'  an  unbending  bend ' !  In  ^  the  Bairnslea  Poaks'  Al- 
manack '  I  once  read  of '  a  mad  chap '  who  spent  six  weeks 
'  a- trying  to  maak  a  straat  hook  ' :  but  he  failed.  He 
ought  to  have  studied  your  book.  Have  you  Euclid's 
Axiom  '  all  right  angles  are  equal '  ? 

Nie.  We  deduce  it  from  '  all  straight  angles  are  equal ' : 
and  that  we  prove  by  applying  one  straight  angle  to 
another. 

3Iin.  That  is  all  very  well,  though  I  cannot  think 
'  straight  angles '  a  valuable  contribution  to  the  subject. 
I  will  now  ask  you  to  state  your  method  of  treating  Pairs 
of  Lines,  as  far  as  your  proof  of  Euc.  I.  32. 

Nie.  To  do  that  we  shall  of  course  require  parallel 
Lines :    and,  as  our  definition  of  them  is  '  Lines  having 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.  DIRECTION.  103 

the  same  direction,'  we  must  begin  by  discussing-  direc- 
tion. 

Min.  Undoubtedly.     How  do  you  define  direction  ? 

Nie.  Well,  we  have  not  attempted  that.  The  idea 
seemed  to  us  to  be  too  elementary  for  definition.  But 
let  me  read  you  what  we  have  said  about  it. 

P.  1.  Def.  2.  '  K  geometrical  Line  has  position,  and  length, 
and  at  every  point  of  it  it  has  direction  .  .  .  .' 

P.  3.  Def.  4.  '  A  straight  Line  is  a  Line  which  has  the 
same  direction  at  all  parts  of  its  length.  It  has  also  the 
opposite  direction  ....  A  straight  Line  may  be  conceived 
as  generated  by  a  point  moving  always  in  the  same  direc- 
tion.' 

I  will  next  quote  what  we  have  said  about  two  Lines 
liaving  '  the  same  direction  '  and  ^  different  directions.' 

Min,  We  will  take  that  presently :  I  have  a  good  deal 
to  say  first  as  to  what  you  have  read.  I  gather  that  you 
consider  direction  to  be  a  projoerti/  of  a  geometrical  entity, 
but  not  itself  an  entity  ? 

Nie.  Just  so. 

Min.  And  you  ascribe  this  property  to  a  Line,  and  also  to 
the  motion  of  a  point  ? 

Nie.  We  do. 

Min.  For  simplicity's  sake,  we  will  omit  all  notice  of 
curved  Lines,  etc.,  and  will  confine  ourselves  to  straight 
Lines  and  rectilinear  motion,  so  that  in  future,  when  I  use 
the  word  ^  Line/  I  shall  mean  '  straight  Line.'  Now  may 
we  not  give  a  notion  of  ^  direction '  by  saying — that  a 


104  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

moving  point  must  move  in  a  certain  '  direction ' — that, 
if  two  points,  starting  from  a  state  of  coincidence,  move 
along  two  equal  straight  Lines  which  do  not  coincide  (so 
that  their  movements  are  alike  in  point  of  departure, 
and  in  magnitude),  that  quality  of  each  movement,  which 
makes  it  differ  from  the  other,  is  its  '  direction  ' — and 
similarly  that,  if  two  equal  straight  Lines  are  terminated 
at  the  same  point,  but  do  not  coincide,  that  quality  of  \ 
each  which  makes  it  differ  from  the  other,  is  its  '  direc- 
tion '  from  the  common  point  ? 

Nie.  It  is  all  very  true  :  but  you  are  using  '  straight 
Line  '  to  help  you  in  defining  '  direction.'  We^  on  the  con- 
trary, consider  ^  direction '  as  the  more  elementary  idea  of 
the  two,  and  use  it  in  defining  '  straight  Line.'  But  we 
clearly  agree  as  to  the  meanings  of  both  expressions. 

Min.  I  am  satisfied  with  that  admission.  Now  as  to 
the  phrase  ^the  same  direction,'  which  you  have  used  in 
reference  to  a  single  Line  and  the  motion  of  a  single 
point.  May  we  not  say  that  portions  of  the  same  Line 
have  '  the  same  direction '  as  one  another  ?  And  that,  if 
a  point  moves  along  a  Line  without  turning  back,  its 
motion  at  one  instant  is  in  '  the  same  direction  '  as  its 
motion  at  another  instant? 

Nie.  Yes.  That  expresses  our  meaning  in  other  lan- 
guage. 

Min.  I  have  altered  the  language  in  order  to  bring 
out  clearly  the  fact  that,  in  using  the  phrase  '  the  same 
direction,'  we  are  really  contemplating  tioo  Lines,  or  two 
motions.  We  have  now  got  (considering  '  straight  Line ' 
as  an  understood  phrase)  accurate  geometrical  Definitions 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  DIRECTION.  105 

of  at  least  two  uses  of  the  phrase.  And  to  these  we  may 
add  a  third,  viz.  that  two  coincident  Lines  have  '  the  same 
direction.' 

Nie.  Certainly,  for  they  are  one  and  the  same  Line. 

Mm.  And  you  intend,  I  suppose^  to  use  the  word  '  dif- 
ferent '  as  equivalent  to  '  not-same.' 

Nie.  Yes. 

Min.  So  that  if  we  have,  for  instance,  two  equal  Lines 
terminated  at  the  same  point,  but  not  coinciding,  w^e  say 
that  they  have  '  different  directions  '  ? 

Nie.  Yes,  with  one  exception.  If  they  are  portions  of 
one  and  the  same  infinite  Line,  we  say  that  they  have 
'  opposite  directions.'  Remember  that  we  said,  of  a  Line, 
'  it  has  also  the  opposite  direction.' 

Min.  You  did  so  :  but,  since  '  same '  and  '  different ' 
are  contradictory  epithets,  they  must  together  comprise 
tbe  whole  genus  of  '  pairs  of  directions.'  Under  which 
heading  will  you  put  '  opposite  directions  '  ? 

Nie.  No  doubt,  strictly  speaking,  '  opposite  directions ' 
are  a  particular  kind  of  'different  directions.'  But  we 
shall  have  endless  confusion  if  we  include  them  in  that 
class.  We  wish  to  avoid  the  use  of  the  word  '  opposite  ' 
altogether,  and  to  mean,  by  '  different  directions/  all  kinds 
of  directions  that  are  not  the  same,  with  the  exception 
of  '  opposite.' 

Mill.  It  is  a  most  desirable  arrangement :  but  you  have 
not  clearly  stated  it  in  your  book.  Tell  me  whether  you 
agree  in  this  statement  of  the  matter.  Every  Line  has  a 
pair  of  directions,  opposite  to  each  other.  And  if  two  Lines 
be  said  to  have  '  the  same  direction/  we  must  understand 


106  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

'  the  same  jpair  of  directions  ' ;  and  if  they  be  said  to  have 
'  different  directions,'  we  must  understand  '  different  'pairs 
of  directions/  And  even  this  is  not  enough :  for  suppose 
I  draWj  on  the  map  of  England,  a  straight  Line  joining 
London  and  York ;  I  may  say  '  This  Line  has  a  pair  of  di- 
rections, the  first  being  "  London-to-York"  and  the  second 
"  York-to -London."  '  I  will  now  place  another  Line  upon 
this,  and  its  pair  of  directions  shall  be,  first  '^  York-to- 
London"  and  second  "  London- to -York/'  Then  it  has  a 
different  first-direction  from  the  former  Line,  and  also  a 
different  second -direction  :  that  is,  it  has  a  '  different  pair 
of  directions/  Clearly  tliis  is  not  intended  :  but,  in  order 
to  exclude  such  a  possibility,  we  must  extend  yet  further 
the  meaning  of  the  phrase,  and,  if  two  Lines  be  said  to 
have  'the  same  direction,'  we  must  understand  'pairs  of 
directions  which  can  be  arranged  so  as  to  be  the  same ' ; 
and  if  they  be  said  to  have  '  different  directions,'  we  must 
understand  'pairs  of  directions  which  cannot  be  arranged 
so  as  to  be  the  same/ 

Nie,  Yes,  that  expresses  our  meaning. 

Mill.  You  must  admit,  I  think,  that  your  theory  of 
direction  involves  a  good  deal  of  obscurity  at  the  very 
outset.  However,  we  have  cleared  it  up,  and  will  not  use 
the  word  'opposite'  again.  Tell  me  now  whether  you 
accept  this  as  a  correct  Definition  of  the  phrases  '  the  same 
direction '  and  ^  different  directions,'  when  used  of  a  Pair 
of  infinite  Lines  which  have  a  common  point : — 

If  two  infinite  Lines,  having  a  common  point,  coincide, 
they  have  '  the  same  direction ';  if  not,  they  have  '  different 
directions.' 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  DIRECTION-.  107 

Nie.  We  accept  it. 

Min.  And,  since  a  finite  Line  has  the  same  direction  as 
the  infinite  Line  of  which  it  is  a  portion,  we  may  gene- 
ralise thus  : — '  Coincidental  Lines  have  the  same  direction. 
Non-coincidental  Lines,  which  have  a  common  pointy  have 
different  directions.' 

But  it  must  be  carefully  borne  in  mind  that  we  have 
as  yet  no  geometrical  meaning  for  these  phrases,  unless 
when  applied  to  two  Lines  which  have  a  common  j)Oint. 

Nie.  Allow  me  to  remark  that  what  i/ou  call  ^  coinci- 
dental Lines'  zee  call  'the  same  Line'  or  'parts  of  the 
same  Line,'  and  that  what  i/ou  call  '  non-coincidental 
Lines'  we  call  'different  Lines.' 

M'ln.  I  understand  you  :  but  I  cannot  employ  these  terms, 
for  two  reasons :  first,  that  your  phrase  '  the  same  Line ' 
loses  sight  of  a  fact  I  wish  to  keep  in  view,  that  we  are 
considering  a  Pair  of  Lines ;  secondly^,  that  your  phrase 
'  different  Lines '  might  be  used,  with  strict  truth,  of  two 
different  portions  of  the  same  infinite  Line,  so  that  it  is  not 
definite  enough  for  my  purpose. 

Let  us  now  proceed  '  to  consider  the  relations  of  two  or 
more  straight  Lines  in  one  Plane  in  respect  of  direction.' 

And  first  let  me  ask  which  of  the  propositions  of  Table 
II  you  wish  me  to  grant  you  as  an  axiom  ? 

Nie.  {jjroudli/)  Not  one  of  them !  We  have  got  a  new 
patent  process,  the  '  direction '  theory,  w^hich  will  dispense 
with  them  all. 

Min.  I  am  ver?/  curious  to  hear  how  you  do  it. 


108  WILSON,  [Act  II. 

NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  II.  Ax.  6.  '  Two  different  Lines  may  liave  either  tlie 
same  or  different  directions.' 

Mill.  That  contains  two  assertions,  which  we  will  con- 
sider separately.  First,  you  say  that  '  two  different  Lines 
(i.  e.  '  non-coincidental  Lines,'  or  '  Lines  having  a  separate 
point '')  '  may  have  the  same  direction '.  Now  let  us  under- 
stand each  other  quite  clearly.  We  will  take  a  fixed  Line 
to  begin  with,  and  a  certain  point  on  it :  there  is  no  doubt 
that  we  can  draw,  through  that  point,  a  second  Line  coin- 
cidino-  with  the  first :  the  direction  of  this  Line  will  of 
course  be  '  the  same '  as  the  direction  of  the  first  Line  ; 
and  it  is  equally  obvious  that  if  we  draw  the  second  Line 
in  any  other  direction,  so  as  not  to  coincide  with  the  first, 
its  direction  will  not  be  ^  the  same '  as  that  of  the  first : 
that  is,  they  will  have  ^  different '  directions.  If  we  want 
a  geometrical  definition  of  the  assertion  that  this  second 
Line  has  '  the  same  direction '  as  the  first  Line,  we  may 
take  the  following : — '  having  such  a  direction  as  will 
cause  the  Lines  to  be  the  same  Line.'  If  we  want  a  geo- 
metrical construction  for  it,  we  may  say  'take  any  other 
point  on  the  fixed  Line ;  join  the  two  points,  and  produce 
the  Line,  so  drawn,  at  both  ends':  this  construction  we 
know  will  produce  a  Line  which  will  be  ^  the  same '  as 
the  first  Line,  and  whose  direction  will  therefore  be  'the 
same '  as  that  of  the  first  Line.  If,  in  a  certain  diagram, 
whose  geometrical  history  we  know,  we  want  to  test 
whether  two  Lines,  passing  through  a  common  point,  have, 
or  have  not,  '  the  same  direction,''  we  have  simply  to  take 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  PAIRS    OF    LINES.  109 

any  other  point  on  one  of  the  Lines,  and  observe  whether 
the  other  Line  does,  or  does  not,  pass  through  it.  This 
relationship  of  direction,  which  you  call  '  having*  the  same 
direction,'  and  /  ^  having  identical  directions,'  we  may 
express  by  the  word  '  co-directional/ 

l^ie.  All  very  true.  My  only  puzzle  is,  why  you  have 
explained  it  at  such  enormous  length  :  my  meerschaum 
has  gone  out  while  I  have  been  listening  to  you ! 

M'ln.  Allow  me  to  hand  you  a  light.  As  to  the  '  enor- 
mous length '  of  my  explanation,  we  are  in  troubled  waters, 
my  friend !  There  are  breakers  ahead,  and  we  cannot 
^  heave  the  lead '  too  often. 

Isle.  It  is  '  lead '  indeed  ! 

Min.  Let  us  now  return  to  our  fixed  Line :  and  this 
time  we  will  take  a  point  not  on  it^  and  through  this  point 
we  will  draw  a  second  Line.  You  say  that  we  can,  if  we 
choose,  draw  it  in  '  the  same  direction '  as  that  of  the  first 
Line? 

Nie.  We  do. 

Min.  In  that  case  let  me  remind  you  of  the  warning 
I  gave  you  a  few  minutes  ago^  that  we  have  no  geometrical 
meaning  for  the  phrase  ^  the  same  direction,'  unless  lohen 
used  of  Lines  having  a  common  imnt.  What  geometrical 
meaning  do  you  attach  to  the  phrase  when  used  of  other 
Lines  ? 

Nie.  {after  a  pause)  I  fear  we  cannot  give  you  a  geome- 
trical definition  of  it  at  present. 

Min.  No  ?     Can  you  construct  such  Lines  ? 

Nie.  No,  but  really  that  is  not  necessary.  We  allow  of 
'  hypothetical  constructions  '  now-a-days. 


110  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

Min.  Well  tlien^  can  you  test  whether  a  given  Pair  of 
Lines  have  this  property?  I  mean,  if  I  give  you  a  certain 
diagram,  and  tell  you  its  geometrical  history,  can  you 
pronounce^  on  a  certain  Pair  of  finite  Lines,  which  have 
no  visible  common  point,  as  to  whether  they  have  this 
property  ? 

'Nie.  We  cannot  undertake  it. 

Min.  You  ask  me^  then_,  to  believe  in  the  reality  of  a 
class  of  '  Pairs  of  Lines '  possessing  a  property  which  you 
can  neither  define,  nor  construct,  nor  test? 

Nie.  We  can  do  none  of  these  things,  we  admit :  but 
yet  the.  class  is  not  quite  so  indefinite  as  you  think.  We 
can  give  you  a  geometrical  description  of  it. 

Mi7i.  I  shall  be  delighted  to  hear  it. 

Nie,  We  have  agreed  that  a  Pair  of  coincidental  finite 
Lines  have  a  certain  relationship  of  direction,  which  we 
call  '  the  same  direction,'  and  which  you  allow  to  be  an 
intelligible  geometrical  relation  ? 

Min.  Certainly. 

Nie.  Well,  all  we  assert  of  this  new  class  is  that  their 
relationship  of  direction  is  identical  wdth  that  which 
belongs  to  coincidental  Lines. 

Min.  It  cannot  be  identical  in  all  respects,  for  it  cer- 
tainly difiers  in  this,  that  we  cannot  reach  the  conception 
of  it  by  the  same  route.  I  can  form  a  conception  of  '  the 
same  direction,'  when  the  phrase  is  used  of  two  Lines 
which  have  a  common  point,  but  it  is  only  by  considering 
that  one  '  falls  on '  the  other — that  they  have  all  other 
points  common — that  they  coincide.  When  you  ask  me 
to  form   a    conception   of  this   relationship   of  direction, 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  PAIRS     OF    LINES.  Ill 

when  asserted  of  other  Lines,  you  know  that  none  of  these 
considerations  will  help  me,  and  you  do  not  furnish  me 
with  any  substitutes  for  them.  To  me  the  relationship 
does  not  seem  to  be  identical :  I  should  prefer  saying  that 
separational  Lines  have  '  collateral,'  or  '  corresponding,'  or 
'  separational '  directions,  to  using  the  phrase  '  the  same 
direction '  over  again.  It  is,  of  course,  true  that  '  col- 
lateral '  directions  produce  the  same  results,  as  to  angles 
made  with  a  transversal,  as  '  identical '  directions  ;  but  this 
seems  to  me  to  be  a  Theorem,  not  an  Axiom. 

Nie,  You  say  that  the  relationship  does  not  seem  to  you 
to  be  identical.  I  should  like  to  know  tvJiere  you  think 
you  perceive  any  difference  ? 

3rui.  I  will  try  to  make  my  meaning  clearer  by  an  illus- 
tration. 

Suppose  that  I  and  several  companions  are  walking 
along  a  railway,  which  will  take  us  to  a  place  we  wish  to 
visit.  Some  amuse  themselves  by  walking  on  one  of  the 
rails ;  some  on  another ;  others  wander  along  the  line, 
crossing  and  recrossing.  Now  as  we  are  all  bound  for  the 
same  place,  we  may  say,  roughly  speaking,  that  we  are  all 
moving  '  in  the  same  direction'  :  but  that  is  speaking  very 
roughly  indeed.  We  make  our  language  more  exact,  if 
we  exclude  the  wanderers,  and  say  that  those  who  are 
walking  along  the  rails  are  so  moving.  But  it  seems  to 
me  that  our  phrase  becomes  still  more  exact,  if  we  limit  it 
to  those  who  are  walking  on  one  and  the  same  rail. 

As  a  second  illustration,  suppose  two  forces,  acting  on  a 
certain  body  ;  and  let  them  be  equal  in  amount  and  oppo- 
site in  direction.     Now,  if  they  are  acting  along  the  same 


112  WILSON.  [Act  IT. 

Line,  we  know  that  they  neutralise  each  other,  and  that  the 
body  remains  at  rest.  But  if  one  be  shifted  ever  so  little 
to  one  side^  so  that  they  act  along  parallel  Lines,  then, 
though  still  equal  in  amount  and  (according  to  the  '  direc- 
tion' theory)  opposite  in  direction,  they  no  longer  neutralise 
each  other,  but  form  a  ^  couple/ 

As  a  third  illustration,  take  two  points  on  a  certain 
Plane.  We  may,  first,  draw  a  Line  through  them  and  cause 
them  to  move  along  that  Line  :  they  are  then  undoubtedly 
moving  '  in  the  same  direction.'  We  may,  secondly^  draw 
two  Lines  through  them,  which  meet  or  at  least  would  meet 
if  produced,  and  cause  them  to  move  along  those  Lines  : 
they  are  then  undoubtedly  moving  '  in  different  directions.' 
We  may,  thirdly,  draw  two  parallel  Lines  through  them, 
and  cause  them  to  move  along  those  Lines.  Surely  this  is 
a  new  relationship  of  motion,  not  absolutely  identical  with 
either  of  the  former  two  ?  But  if  this  new  relationship  be 
not  absolutely  identical  with  that  named  '  in  the  same 
direction,'  it  must  belong  to  the  class  named  '  in  different 
directions.' 

Still,  though  this  new  relationship  of  direction  is  not 
identical  with  the  former  in  all  respects,  it  is  in  some : 
only,  to  prove  this,  we  must  use  some  disputed  Axiom,  as 
it  will  take  us  into  Table  II.  For  instance,  they  are 
identical  as  to  angles  made  with  transversals  :  this  fact 
is  embodied  in  Tab.  IL  4.  (See  p.  34).  Would  you  like 
to  adopt  that  as  your  Axiom  ? 

Nie.  No.  We  are  trying  to  dispense  with  Table  II 
altogether. 

3Iin.  It  is  a  vain  attempt. 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  PAIRS     OF    LINES.  113 

There  is  another  remark  I  wish  to  make,  before  con- 
sidering" your  second  assertion.  In  asserting  that  there  is 
a  real  class  of  non-coincidental  Lines  that  have  'the  same 
direction,'  are  you  not  also  asserting*  that  there  is  a  real 
class  of  Lines  that  have  no  common  point  ?  For,  if  they 
had  a  common  point,  they  must  have  '  different  directions/ 

l^ie.  I  suppose  we  are. 

Mm.  We  will  then,  if  you  please,  credit  you  with  an 
Axiom  you  have  not  expressed,  viz.  '  It  is  possible  for  two 
Lines  to  have  no  common  point.'  And  here  I  must  ex- 
press an  opinion  that  this  ought  to  be  proved^  not  assumed. 
Euclid  has  proved  it  in  I.  27,  which  rests  on  no  disputed 
Axiom  ;  and  I  think  it  may  be  recorded  as  a  distinct  defect 
in  your  treatise,  that  you  have  assumed,  as  axiomatic,  a 
truth  which  Euclid  h^s  proved. 

My  conclusion,  as  to  this  first  assertion  of  yours,  is 
that  it  is  most  decidedly  not  axiomatic. 

Let  us  now  consider  your  second  assertion,  that  some 
non-coincidental  Lines  have  '  different  directions.'  Here 
I  must  ask,  as  before,  are  you  speaking  of  Lines  which 
have  a  common  point?  If  so,  I  am  quite  ready  to  grant 
the  assertion. 

Nie.  Not  exactly.  It  is  rather  a  difficult  matter  to 
explain.  The  Lines  we  refer  to  would,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
meet  if  produced,  and  yet  we  do  not  suppose  that  fact 
known  in  speaking  of  them.  What  we  ask  you  to  believe 
is  that  there  is  a  real  class  of  non-coincidental  finite  Lines, 
which  we  do  not  yet  know  to  have  a  common  point,  but 
which  have  'different  directions.'  We  shall  assert  pre- 
sently, in  another  Axiom,  that   such   Lines  will  meet    if 

1 


1 1 4  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

produced ;  but  we  ask  you  to  believe  their  reality  inde- 
pendently of  tbat  fact. 

Mill.  But  the  only  geometrical  meaning  I  know  of,  as 
yet  J  for  the  phrase  '  different  directions,'  refers  to  Lines 
known  to  have  a  common  point.  What  geometrical  mean- 
ing do  you  attach  to  the  phrase  when  used  of  other  Lines  ? 

Nie.  We  cannot  define  it. 

3Iin.  Nor  construct  it  ?     Nor  test  it  ? 

Me.  No. 

Mill.  You  ask  me^  then^  to  believe  in  the  reality  of  fAco 
classes  of  'pairs  of  Lines,'  each  possessing  a  property  that 
you  can  neither  define,  nor  construct^  nor  test  ? 

Nie.  That  is  true.  But  surely  you  admit  the  reality  of 
the  second  class  ?  Why,  intersectional  Lines  are  a  case  in 
point. 

Min.  Certainly.  And  so  much  I  am  willing  to  grant 
you.  I  allow  that  some  non-coincidental  Lines,  viz.  inter- 
sectional Lines,  have  *"  different  directions.'  But  as  to  '  the 
same  direction,'  you  have  given  me  no  reason  whatever  for 
believing  that  there  are  any  non-coincidental  Lines  which 
possess  that  property. 

ISie.  But  surely  there  are  two  real  distinct  classes  -of 
non-coincidental  Lines,  'intersectional^  and  ' separationaF? 

Min.  Yes.  Thanks  to  Euc.  I.  27,  you  may  now  assume 
the  reality  of  both. 

l^ie.  And  you  will  hardly  assert  that  the  relationship  of 
direction,  which  belongs  to  a  Pair  of  intersectional  Lines,  is 
identical  with  that  which  belongs  to  a  Pair  of  separational 
Lines  ? 

Min.  I  do  not  assert  it. 


Sc.  YI.  §  I.]  PAIRS    OF    LINES.  115. 

Nie.  And  you  allow  that  intersectional  Lines  have  '  dif- 
ferent directions '  ? 

Mm.  Yes.  Are  you  going*  to  argue,  from  that,  that 
separational  Lines  must  have  '  the  same  direction  '  ?  Why 
may  I  not  say  that  intersectional  Lines  have  one  kind 
of  '  different  directions '  and  that  separational  Lines  have 
another  kind  ? 

l^ie.  But  do  you  say  it  ? 

Min.  Certainly  not.  There  is  no  evidence^  at  present, 
one  way  or  the  other.  For  anything  we  know^  Pairs  of 
separational  Lines  may  always  have  ^  the  same  direction,' 
or  they  may  always  have  '  different  directions,''  or  there 
may  be  Pairs  of  each  kind.  I  fear  I  must  decline  to  grant 
the  first  part  of  your  Axiom  altogether^  and  the  second 
part  in  the  sense  of  referring  to  Lines  not  known  to 
have  a  common  point.     You  may  now  proceed, 

NiEMAND  reach. 

P.  II.  Ax.  7.  'Two  different  straight  Lines  which  meet 
one  another  have  different  directions.'' 

Mill.  That  I  grant  you_,  heartily.  It  is,  in  fact,  a 
Definition  for  the  phrase  '  different  directions,'  when  used 
of  Lines  w^hich  have  a  common  point. 

NiEMAND  reach. 
P.  II.  Ax.  8.  'Two  straight  Lines  which  have  different 
directions  would  meet  if  prolonged  indefinitely.' 

Mln.  Am  I  to  understand  that,  if  we  have  before  us  a 
Pair  of  finite  Lines  which  are  not  known  to  have  a 
common  point,  but  of  which  we  do  know  that  they  have 

I  2 


116  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

different  directions,  you  ask  me  to  believe  that  they  will 
meet  if  produced  ? 

Nie.  That  is  our  meaning*. 

Mm.  We  had  better  heave  the  lead  once  more,  and 
return  to  our  fixed  Line,  and  a  point  not  on  it,  through 
which  we  wish  to  draw  a  second  Line.  You  ask  me  to 
grant  that,  if  it  be  drawn  so  as  to  have  a  direction 
'different'  from  that  of  the  first  Line,  it  will  meet  it  if 
prolonged  indefinitely  ? 

Nie.  That  is  our  humble  petition. 

Min.  Will  you  be  satisfied  if  I  grant  you  that  some 
Lines,  so  drawn,  will  meet  the  first  Line?  That  I  would 
grant  you  with  pleasure.  I  could  draw  millions  of  Lines 
which  would  fulfil  the  conditions,  by  simply  taking*  points 
at  random  on  the  given  Line,  and  joining  them  to  the 
given  point.  Every  Line,  so  constructed,  would  have  a 
direction  'different'  from  that  of  the  given  Line,  and 
would  also  meet  it. 

Nie.  We  will  not  be  satisfied,  even  with  millions !  We 
ask  you  to  grant  that  every  Line,  draw^n  through  the 
given  point  w^th  a  direction  ^different'  from  that  of  the 
given  Line,  will  meet  the  given  Line :  and  we  ask  you 
to  grant  this  independently  of,  and  antecedently  to,  any 
other  information  about  the  Lines  except  the  fact  that 
they  have  'different'  directions. 

Min.  But  what  meaning  am  I  to  attach  to  the  phrase 
'different  directions,^  independently  of,  and  antecedently 
to,  the  fact  that  they  have  a  common  point? 

Nie.  [after  a  long  silence")  I  fear  we  can  suggest  none. 

Min.  Then  I  must  decline  to  accept  the  Axiom. 


Sc.  yi.  §  I.]  PAIRS    OF    LINES.  117 

l^ie.  And  yet  this  Axiom  is  the  converse  of  the  preced- 
ing, which  you  granted  so  readily. 

M'ln,  The  techucal  converse,  my  good  sir,  not  the 
logical  \  I  will  not  suspect  you  of  so  gross  a  logical  blunder 
as  the  attempt  to  convert  a  universal  affirmative  sinqdiciter 
instead  oi  per  accidens.  The  only  converse,  as  you  are  no 
doubt  aware,  to  which  you  have  any  logical  right,  is 
^  Some  Lines,  which  have  "different  directions,"  would 
meet  if  produced';  and  that  I  grant  you.  It  is  true  of 
intersectional  Lines,  and  I  would  limit  the  Proposition  to 
such  Lines,  so  that  it  would  be  equivalent  to  '  Lines, 
which  would  meet  if  produced,  would  meet  if  produced  ' — 
an  indisputable  truth,  but  not  remarkable  for  novelty  ! 
You  may  proceed. 

Nie.  I  beg  to  hand  in  this  diagram,  and  will  read  you 
our  explanation  of  it : — 


A 

B 


'Thus  A  and  B  in  the  figure  have  the  same  direction; 
and  C  and  B,  which  meet,  have  different  directions  ;  and  E 
and  F,  which  have  different  directions,  would  meet  if  pro- 
duced far  enough.' 

Mhi.  I  grant  the  assertion  about  C  and  D ;  but  I  am 
wholly  unable  to  guess  on  what  grounds  you  expect  me 
to  grant  that  A  and  B  '  have  the  same  direction,'  and 
that  E  and  F  '  have  different  directions.'  Do  you  expect 
me  to  judge  by  eye?  How  if  the  lines  were  several  yards 
apart  ?     Is  tJds  what  Geometry  is  coming  to  ?     Proceed. 


118  WILSON.  [Act  11. 

NiEMAND  reads. 

Def.  19.  ^Straight  Lines,  which  are  not  parts  of  the 
same  straight  Line,  but  have  the  same  direction,  are 
called   Parallels.'' 

3Iin.  A  Definition  is  of  course  unobjectionable,  since  it 
does  not  assert  the  existence  of  the  thing  defined  :  in  fact, 
it  asserts  nothing  except  the  meaning  which  you  intend  to 
attach  to  the  word  '  parallel.'  But,  as  this  word  is  used 
in  different  senses,  I  will  thank  you  to  substitute  for  it, 
in  what  you  have  yet  to  say  about  this  matter,  the  phrase 
'  having  a  separate  point,  but  the  same  direction,'  which 
you  may  condense  into  one  compound  word,  if  you  like : — 
'  sepuncto-codirectional.' 

Nie,  (sighing)  A  terrible  word!  And  I  shall  have  to 
use  it  so  often  ! 

Min.  I  will  try  to  abridge  it  for  you.  Let  us  take 
'  sep-'  and  '  cod-'  from  the  beginnings  of  the  two  words, 
and  '  -al'  for  a  termination.     That  will  give  us  ^  sepcodal.' 

Nie.  That  sounds  a  little  harsh. 

Min.     'What?    Is  it  harder.  Sirs,  than  Gordon, 
ColkittOj  or  Macdonald,  or  Galasp  ? ' 

Nie.  {doiibifully)  I  think  I  prefer  it  to  Colkitto.'  But 
it  is  from  you  Moderns  I  have  learned  to  be  so  sensitive 
■about  long  words.  How  I  would  have  liked  to  take  you 
to  an  Egyptian  restaurant  I  used  to  frequent,  centuries 
ago,  in  a  phantasmic  sort  of  way,  if  only  to  hear  the  names 
of  some  of  the  dishes !  Why,  one  thought  nothing  of 
seeing  a  gentleman  rush  in,  carpet-bag  in  hand,  and  shout 
out  '  vareo  ! '  (that  was  the  way  we  addressed  the  attendant 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  PAIRS    OF   LINES.  119 

in  those  days)  '  A  plate  of  XmahoTeixayocreKaxoyakeoKpavio- 
\iLylfavohpiixvT:oTpiixixaTO(7ik(l)LO-napaoixiXLTOKaTaKeyv\xevoKiy\^7:L- 
KO(rav({)0(paTTOiT€pL(TT€pa\€KTpvoi'077TeyK€(pa\oKLyKko7:e\€Lo\ay(ju- 
oaipaiolSacprjTpayavoiTTepvycoi;,  and  look  sharp  about  it !  I'm 
in  a  hurry ! ' 

Min.  If  the  gentleman  wanted  to  catch  his  train 

by  the  way,  had  they  trains  in  Egypt  in  ancient  days  ? 

Nie.  Certainly.  Read  your  '  Antony  and  Cleopatra,' 
Act  I,  Scene  I.  ^Exeunt  Antonij  and  Cleopatra  ivith  their 
trahi^ 

311)1,  In  that  case,  wouldn't  it  be  enough  to  say  *'A 
plate  of  AeTraSo^? 

Nie.  Most  certainly  not — at  least  not  in  a  fashionable 
restaurant.  But  this  is  a  digression.  I  am  willing  to 
adopt  the  word  '  sepcodal.' 

Min.  Now,  before  you  read  any  more,  let  us  get  a  clear 
idea  of  your  Definition.  We  know  of  two  real  classes  of 
Pairs  of  Lines,  'coincidental'  and  '  intersectional' ;  and  to 
these  we  may  (if  we  credit  you  with  a  Corollary  to  Euc. 
I.  27,  '  It  is  possible  for  two  Lines  to  have  no  common 
point')  add  a  third  class,  which  we  ma}^  call  '  separational.' 

We  also  know  that  if  a  Pair  of  Lines  has  a  common 
point,  and  no  separate  point,  it  belongs  to  the  first  class ; 
if  a  common  point,  and  a  separate  point,  to  the  second. 
Hence  all  Pairs  of  Lines,  having  a  common  point,  must 
belong  to  one  or  other  of  these  classes.  And  since  a  Pair, 
which  has  no  common  point,  belongs  to  the  third  class, 
we  see  that  everj/  conceivable  Pair  of  Lines  must  belong 
to  one  of  these  three  classes. 

We  also  know  that 


120  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

Nie.  {sigliing  deeply)  You  are  heaving  the  lead  again ! 

Mln.  I  am  :  but  we  shall  be  in  calmer  water  soon. 

We  also  know  that  the  '  Coincidental'  class  possesses 
two  properties — they  are  coincidental  and  have  identical 
directions;  and  that  the  '  Intersectional '  class  also  pos- 
sesses two  properties — they  are  intersectional  and  have 
different  directions. 

Now  if  you  choose  to  frame  a  Definition  by  denying 
one  property  of  each  of  these  two  classes,  any  Pair  of 
Lines,  so  defined,  is  excluded  from  both  of  these  classes, 
and  must,  if  it  exist  at  all,  belong  to  the  '  Separational' 
class.  Remember,  however,  that  you  may  have  so  framed 
your  Definition  as  to  exclude  your  Pair  of  Lines  from 
existence.  For  instance,,  if  you  choose  to  combine  two  con- 
tradictory conditions  of  direction,  and  to  say  that  Lines, 
which  have  identical  and  intersectional  directions,  are  to 
be  called  so-and-so,  you  are  simj)ly  describing  a  nonentity. 

Nie.  That  is  all  quite  clear. 

Min.  Your  Definition,  then,  amounts  to  this : — Lines, 
which  are  not  coincidental,  but  which  have  identical 
directions,  are  said  to  be  '  sepcodab' 

Nie.  It  does. 

Min,  Well,  here  is  another  Definition  for  Parallels,  which 
will  answer  your  purpose  just  as  well : — '  Lines,  which  are 
not  intersectional,  but  which  have  different  directions.' 

Nie.  But  I  think  I  can  prove  to  you  that  you  have 
now  done  the  very  thing  you  cautioned  me  against : 
you  have  annihilated  your  Pair  of  Lines. 

Min.  That  is  a  matter  which  we  need  not  consider  at 
present.     Proceed. 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  PAIRS    OF   LINES.  121 

NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  II.  'From  this  Definition,  and  the  Axioms  above 
given,  the  following  results  are  immediately  deduced : 

(i)  That  parallel — I  beg  your  pardon — that  'sepcodal' 
Lines  would  not  meet  however  far  they  were  produced. 
For  if  they  met '' 

Min.  You  need  not  trouble  yourself  to  prove  it.  I 
grant  that,  \f  such  Lines  existed,  they  would  not  meet. 
Your  assertion  is  simply  the  Contranominal  of  Ax.  7  (p.  115), 
and  therefore  is  necessarily  true  if  the  subject  be  real. 

But  remember  that,  though  I  have  granted  to  you 
that,  if  we  are  given  a  Line  and  a  point  not  on  it,  we 
can  draw,  through  the  point,  a  certain  Line  separational 
from  the  given  Line,  we  do  not  yet  know  that  it  is  tlie 
onhj  such  Line.  That  w^ould  take  us  into  Table  11. 
With  our  present  knowledge,  w^e  must  allow  for  the 
possibility  of  drawing  any  number  of  Lines  through  the 
given  point,  all  separational  from  the  given  Line :  and 
all  I  grant  you  is,  that  your  ideal  '  sepcodal '  Line  will, 
if  it  exist  at  all^  be  one  of  this  group. 

NiEMAND  reads. 
(2)  '  That  Lines  which  are  sepcodal  with  the  same  Line 
are  sepcodal  w^ith  each  other.     For ' 


Min.  Wait  a  moment.  I  observe  that  you  say  that  such 
Lines  are  sepcodal  with  each  other.  Might  they  not  be 
'  co»?puncto-codirectional '  ? 

Nie.  Certainly  they  might :  but  w^e  do  not  wish  to 
include  that  case  in  our  predicate. 


122  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

Mill.  Then  you  must  limit  your  subject,  and  say  ^  dif- 
ferent Lines.' 

Nie.  Very  well. 

Reads. 

'That  different  Lines,  which  are  sepcodal  with  the 
same  Line,  are  sepcodal  with  each  other.  For  they  each 
have  the  same  direction  as  that  Line,  and  therefore  the 
same  direction  as  the  other.' 

Min.  I  am  willing  to  grant  you,  without  any  proof, 
that,  if  such  Lines  existed,  they  would  have  the  same 
direction  with  regard  to  each  other.  The  phrase  '  they 
each  have'  is  not  remarkably  good  English.  However, 
you  may  proceed. 

NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  12.  Ax.  9.  ^  An  angle  may  be  conceived  as  transferred 
from  one  position  to  another,  the  direction  of  its  arms 
remaining  the  same.' 

Mill.  Let  us  first  consider  the  right  arm  by  itself.  You 
assert  that  it  may  be  transferred  to  a  new  position,  its 
direction  remaining  the  same  ? 

Nie.  We  do. 

Min.  You  might,  in  fact,  have  here  inserted  an  Axiom 
^  A  Line  may  be  conceived  as  transferred  from  one  position 
to  another,  its  direction  remaining  the  same  '  ? 

Nie.  That  would  express  our  meaning. 

Min.  And  this  is  virtually  identical  with  your  Axiom 
^  Two  different  Lines  may  have  the  same  direction '  ? 

Nie.  Certainly.  They  embody  the  same  truth.  But 
the  one  contemplates  a  single  Line  in  two  positions,  and 


Sc.  YI.  §  I.]  PAIRS    OF    LINES.  123 

the  other  contemplates  two  Lines :  the  difference  is  very 
slight. 

M'ln.  Exactly  so.  Now  let  me  ask  you,  do  you  mean, 
by  the  word  'angle,'  a  constant  or  a  variable  angle? 

N'le.  I  do  not  quite  understand  your  question. 

M'ln.  I  will  put  it  more  fully.  Do  you  mean  that  the 
arms  of  the  angle  are  rigidly  connected,  so  that  it  cannot 
change  its  magnitude,  or  that  they  are  merely  hinged 
loosely  together,  as  it  were,  so  that  it  depends  entirely 
on  the  relative  motions  of  the  two  arms  whether  the 
angle  changes  its  magnitude  or  not? 

Wie.  Why  are  we  bound  to  settle  the  question  at  all  ? 

Mill.  I  will  tell  you  why.  Suppose  we  say  that  the 
arms  are  merely  hinged  together  :  in  that  case  all  you 
assert  is  that  each  arm  may  be  transferred,  its  direction 
remaining  the  same;  that  is,  you  merely  assert  your  6th 
Axiom  twice  ov-er,  once  for  the  right  arm  and  once  for  the 
left  arm ;  and  you  do  not  assert  that  the  angle  will  retain 
its  magnitude.  But  in  the  Theorem  w^hich  follows,  you 
clearly  regard  it  as  a  constant  angle,  for  you  say  '  the 
angle  AOB  would  coincide  with  the  angle  EKH.  There- 
fore the  angle  AOB  =  EKTL''  But  the  'therefore'  would 
have  no  force  \i  AOB  could  change  its  magnitude.  Thus 
you  would  be  deducing,  from  an  Axiom  where  '  angle '  is 
used  in  a  peculiar  sense,  a  conclusion  in  which  it  bears 
its  ordinary  sense.  Yoii  have  heard  of  the  fallacy  '  A  dicto 
secundum  Quid  ad  dictum  SimjoUciter'  ? 

Nie.  [hastily)  We  are  not  going  to  commit  ourselves  to 
that.  You  may  assume  that  we  mean,  by  '  angle,'  a  rigid 
angle,  which  cannot  change  its  magnitude. 


124  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

Mm,  In  that  case  you  assert  that,  when  a  pair  of  Lines, 
terminated  at  a  point,  is  transferred  so  that  its  vertex  has 
a  new  position,  these  three  conditions  can  be  simulta- 
neously fulfilled : — 

(i)  the  right  arm  has  '  the  same  direction '  as  before ; 

(2)  the  left  arm  has  '  the  same  direction '  as  before  ; 

(3)  the  magnitude  of  the  angle  is  unchanged. 
Nie.  We  do  not  dispute  it. 

Min.  But  any  tivo  of  these  conditions  are  sufficient, 
without  the  third,  to  determine  the  ne'»v  state  of  things. 
For  instance,  taking  (i)  and  (3),  if  we  fix  the  position 
of  the  right  arm,  by  giving  it  '  the  same  direction '  as 
before,  and  also  keep  the  magnitude  of  the  angle  un- 
changed, is  not  that  enough  to  fix  the  position  of  the  left 
arm,  without  mentioning  (2)  ? 

Nie.  It  certainly  is. 

Min.  Your  Axiom  asserts,  then,  that  any  two  of  these 
conditions  lead  to  the  third  as  a  necessary  result? 

Nie.  It  does. 

Min.  Your  Axiom  then  contains  two  distinct  assertions  : 
the  data  of  the  first  being  (i)  and  (3)  [or  (2)  and  (3),  w^hich 
lead  to  a  similar  result],  the  data  of  the  second  being  (i) 
and  (2).     These  I  will  state  as  two  separate  Axioms : — 

9  (a).  If  a  Pair  of  Lines,  terminated  at  a  point,  be 
transferred  to  a  new  position,  so  that  the  direction  of  one 
of  the  Lines,  and  the  magnitude  of  the  included  angle, 
remain  the  same;  the  direction  of  the  other  Line  will 
remain  the  same. 

9  (/3).  If  a  Pair  of  Lines,  terminated  at  a  point,  be  trans- 
ferred to  a  new  position,  so  that  their  directions  remain 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  PAIRS     OF    LINES.  125 

the  same;  the  magnitude  of  the  included  angle  will 
remain  the  same. 

Have  I  represented  your  meaning  correctly  ? 

N'le.  We  have  no  objection  to  make. 

M'ln.  "VYe  will  return  to  this  subject  directly.  I  must 
now  ask  you  to  read  the  enunciation  of  Th.  4,  omitting, 
for  ^simplicity's  sake,  all  about  supplementary  angles,  and 
assuming  the  Lines  to  be  taken  '  the  same  way.' 

NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  12.  Th.  4.  'If  two  Lines  are  respectively  sepcodal 
with  tw^o  other  Lines,  the  angle  made  by  the  first  Pair 
will  be  equal  to  the  angle  made  by  the  second  Pair.' 

Mill.  The  '  sep'  is  of  course  superfluous,  for  if  the  Lines 
are  '  C(9»2puncto-codirectional,'  it  is  equally  true.  May  I 
re- word  it  thus  ? — 

'  If  two  Pairs  of  Lines,  each  terminated  at  a  point,  be 
such  that  the  directions  of  one  Pair  are  respectively  the 
same  as  those  of  the  other ;  the  included  angles  are  equal.' 

N'le.  Yes,  if  you  like. 

Min.  But  surely  the  only  difference,  between  Ax.  9  (/3) 
and  this,  is  that  in  the  Axiom  we  contemplated  a  single 
Pair  of  Lines  transferred,  while  here  we  contemplate  two 
Pairs  ? 

Nie.  That  is  the  only  difference,  we  admit. 

Min.  Then  I  must  say  that  it  is  anything  but  good 
logic  to  take  two  Propositions,  distinguished  only  by  a 
trivial  difference  in  form,  and  to  call  one  an  Axiom  and 
the  other  a  Theorem  deduced  from  it !  A  very  gross  case 
of  '  Petitio  Frincijjii,^  I  fear  ! 


126  WILSON,  [Act  II. 

N'le.  {after  a  long  imuse)  Well !  We  admit  that  it  is 
not  exactly  a  Theorem  :  it  is  only  a  new  form  of  the  Axiom. 

Min.  Quite  so  :  and  as  it  is  a  more  convenient  form  for 
my  purpose,  I  will  with  your  permission  adopt  it  as  a  sub- 
stitute for  the  Axiom.  Now  as  to  the  corollary  of  this 
Theorem :  tliat^  I  think,  is  merely  a  particular  case  of 
Ax.  9  (/3),  one  of  the  arms  being  slid  along  the  infinite 
Line  of  which  it  forms  a  part,  and  thus  of  course  having 
'  the  same  direction  '  as  before  ? 

ISlie.  It  is  so. 

Min.  And,  as  this  is  a  more  convenient  form  still, 
I  will  restate  your  assertions^,  limiting  them  to  this  par- 
ticular case : — 

Ax.  9  (a).  Lines,  which  make  equal  corresponding  angles 
with  a  certain  transversal,  have  the  same  direction. 

Ax.  9  (/3).  Lines,  which  have  the  same  direction,  make 
equal  corresponding  angles  with  any  transversal. 

Am  I  right  in  saying  that  these  two  assertions  are 
virtually  involved  in  your  Axiom  ? 

N'le.  We  cannot  deny  it. 

Min.  Now  in  9  (a)  you  ask  me  to  believe  that  Lines 
possessing  a  certain  geometrical  property,  w^hich  can  be 
defined,  constructed,  and  tested,  possess  also  a  property 
which,  in  the  case  of  different  Lines,  we  can  neither  define, 
nor  construct,  nor  test.  There  is  nothing  axiomatic  in 
this.  It  is  much  more  like  a  Definition  of  '  codirectional ' 
when  asserted  of  different  Lines,  for  which  we  have  as  yet 
no  Definition  at  all.  Will  you  not  permit  me  to  insert 
it,  as  a  Definition,  before  Ax.  6  (p.  108)?  We  might 
word  it  thus  : — 


Sc.  YI.  §  I.]  FAIRS     OF    LINES.  127 

*  If  two  different  Lines  make  equal  angles  with  a  cer- 
tain transversal,  they  are  said  to  have  the  same  direction : 
if  unequal,  different  directions.' 

This  interpolation  would  have  the  advantage  of  making 
Ax.  6  (which  I  have  hitherto  declined  to  grant)  indis- 
putably true. 

Nie.  [after  a  pause)  No.  We  cannot  adopt  it  as  a  Defini- 
tion so  early  in  the  subject. 

Min.  You  are  right.  You  probably  saw  the  pitfall 
which  I  had  ready  for  you,  that  this  same  Definition  would 
make  your  8th  Axiom  (p.  115)  exactly  equivalent  to  Euclid's 
1 2th !  From  this  catastrophe  you  have  hitherto  been  saved 
solely  by  the  absence  of  geometrical  meaning  in  your 
phrase  'the  same  direction,'  when  applied  to  different 
Lines.     Once  define  it,  and  you  are  lost ! 

Nie.  TYe  are  aware  of  that_,  and  prefer  all  the  incon* 
venience  which  results  from  the  absence  of  a  Definition. 

Min.  The  '  inconvenience,'  so  far,  has  consisted  of  the 
ruin  of  Ax.  6  and  Ax.  8.     Let  us  now  return  to  Ax.  9. 

As  to  9  (/3),  it  is  of  course  obviously  true  with  regard  to 
coincidental  Lines :  with  regard  to  different  '  Lines,  which 
have  the  same  direction,'  I  grant  you  that,  if  such  Lines 
existed,  they  would  make  equal  corresponding  angles  with 
any  transversal ;  for  they  would  then  have  a  relationship  of 
direction  identical  with  that  which  belongs  to  coincidental 
Lines.     But  all  this  rests  on  an  '  if — ?/'they  existed. 

Now  let  us  combine  9  (/3)  with  Axiom  6,  and  see  what 
it  is  you  ask  me  to  grant.     It  is  as  follows : — 

'  There  can  be  a  Pair  of  different  Lines  that  make  equal 
angles  with  any  transversal.* 


128  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

I  am  not  misrepresenting  you,  I  think,  if  I  say  that 
you  propound  this  as  axiomatic  truth — which,  I  need 
hardly  remark^  is  a  corollary  deducible  from  the  fourth 
Proposition  in  Table  II.  (see  p.  34). 

ISlle.  We  accept  the  responsibility  of  the  two  Axioms 
separately,  but  not  of  a  logical  deduction  from  the  two. 
'  Min.  There  are  certainly  some  logical  deductions  from 
Axioms  (Contranominals  for  instance)  that  are  not  so 
axiomatic  as  the  Axioms  from  which  they  come :  but 
surely  if  you  tell  me  'it  is  axiomatic  that  X  is  Z'  and 
'  it  is  axiomatic  that  Y  is  ^,'  it  is  much  the  same  as  saying 
'  it  is  axiomatic  that  X  is  ^'? 

Nie.  It  is  very  like  it,  we  admit. 

Min.  Now  take  one  more  combination.  Take  9  (a)  and 
9  (/3).  We  thus  eliminate  the  mysterious  property  alto- 
gether, and  get  a  Proposition  whose  subject  and  predicate 
are  perfectly  definite  geometrical  conceptions — a  Proposi- 
tion which  you  assert  to  be,  if  not  perfectly  axiomatic,  yet 
so  nearly  so  as  to  be  easily  deducible  from  two  Axioms — 
a  Proposition  which  again  lands  us  in  Table  II,  and  which, 
I  will  venture  to  say,  is  less  axiomatic  than  any  Pro- 
position in  that  Table  that  has  yet  been  proposed  as  an 
Axiom.     We  get  tins  : — 

'  Lines  which  make  equal  corresponding  angles  with 
a  certain  transversal  do  so  with  any  transversal,'  which 
is  Tab.  II.  4  (see  p.  34). 

Here  we  have,  condensed  into  one  appalling  sentence, 
the  whole  substance  of  Euclid  I.  27,  28,  and  29  (for  the 
fact  that  the  lines  are  '  separational  ^  may  be  regarded  as 
merely  a  go-between).     Here  we  have  the  whole  difficulty 


Sc.  \L  §  I.]  PAI/^S     OF    LINES.  129 

of  Parallels  swallowed  at  one  gulp.  Why,  Euclid's  much- 
abused  1 2th  Axiom  is  nothing  to  it !  If  we  had  (what 
I  fear  has  yet  to  be  discovered)  a  unit  of  '  axiomaticity/ 
I  should  expect  to  find  that  Euclid's  12th  Axiom  (which 
you  call  in  your  Preface,  at  p.  xiii^  '  not  axiomatic ')  was 
twenty  or  thirty  times  as  axiomatic  as  this !  I  need  not 
ask  you  for  any  further  proof  of  Euc.  I.  32.  This  won- 
drous Axiom,  or  quasi- Axiom,  is  quite  sufiicient  machinery 
for  your  purpose,  along  with  Euc.  I.  13,  w^hich  of  course 
we  grant  you.  Have  you  thought  it  necessary  to  provide 
any  other  machinery  ? 

Nie.  No. 

Mi7i.  Euclid  requires,  besides  I.  13,  the  following  ma- 
chinery:— Props.  4,  5,  7,  8,  15,  16,  Ax.  12,  Props.  27,  28, 
and  29.  And  for  all  this  you  offer,  as  a  sufiicient  sub- 
stitute, one  single  Axiom ! 

Nie.  Two,  if  you  please.    You  are  forgetting  Ax.  6. 

3Iin.  No,  I  repeat  it — one  single  Axiom.  Ax.  6  is  con- 
tained in  Ax.  9  (a) :  when  the  subject  is  known  to  be  real, 
the  Proposition  necessarily  asserts  the  reality  of  the  pre- 
dicate. 

Nie.  That  we  must  admit  to  be  true. 

Min.  I  need  hardly  say  that  I  must  decline  to  grant 
this  so-called  ^  Axiom,'  even  though  its  collapse  should 
involve  that  of  your  entire  system  of  '  Parallels.'  And 
now  that  we  have  fully  discussed  the  subject  of  direction, 
I  wish  to  ask  you  one  question  which  will,  I  think,  sum 
up  the  whole  difficulty  in  a  few  words.  It  is,  in  fact,  t/ie 
crucial  test  as  to  whether  '  direction '  is,  or  is  not,  a  logical 
method  of  proving  the  properties  of  Parallels. 

K 


130 


WILSON.  [Act  II. 


You  assert,  as  axiomatic,  that  different  Lines  exist,  whose 
relationship  of  direction  is  identical  with  that  which  exists 
between  coincidental  Lines. 

Nie.  Yes. 

Mm.  Now^  does  the  phrase  '  the  same  direction/  when 
used  of  two  Lines  not  known  to  have  a  common  point, 
convey  to  your  mind  a  clear  geometrical  conception  ? 

Nie.  Yes,  we  can  form  a  clear  idea  of  it,  though  we 
cannot  define  it. 

Mm.  And  is  that  idea  (this  is  the  crucial  question)  in- 
dejpendent  of  all  siilsegiuent  hiotvleclge  of  the  projoerties  of 
Parallels  ? 

Nie.  We  believe  so. 

Min.  Let  us  make  sure  that  there  is  no  self-deception  in 
this.  You  feel  certain  you  are  not  unconsciously  picturing 
the  Lines  to  yourself  as  being  equidistant,  for  instance  ? 

Nie.  No,  they  suggest  no  such  idea  to  us.  We  introduce 
the  idea  of  equidistance  later  on  in  the  book,  but  we  do  not 
feel  that  our  first  conception  of  '  the  same  direction '  in- 
cludes it  at  all. 

Min.  I  think  you  are  right,  though  Mr.  Cuthbertson,  in 
his  '  Euclidian  Geometry,'  says  (Pref.  p.  vi.)  '  the  concep- 
tion of  a  parallelogram  is  not  that  of  a  figure  whose  oppo- 
site sides  will  never  meet  .  .  .  .  ,  but  rather  that  of  a  figure 
whose  opposite  sides  are  equidistant.'  But  do  you  feel 
equally  certain  that  you  are  not  unconsciously  using  your 
subsequent  knowledge  that  Lines  exist  which  make  equal 
angles  with  all  transversals  ? 

Nie.  We  are  not  so  clear  about  that.  It  is,  of  course, 
extremely  difficult  to  divest  one's  mind  of  all  later  know- 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  PAIRS    OF    LINES.  131 

ledge,  and  to  place  oneself  in  the  mental  attitude  of  one 
who  is  totally  ignorant  of  the  subject. 

31in,  Very  difficult,  no  doubt,  but  absolutely  essential,  if 
you  mean  to  write  a  book  adapted  to  the  use  of  beginners. 
My  own  belief  as  to  the  course  of  thought  needed  to  grasp 
the  theory  of  '  direction '  is  this  : — first  you  grasp  the  idea 
of  ^  the  same  direction '  as  regards  Lines  which  have  a 
common  point ;  next,  you  convince  yourself,  by  some  other 
means,  that  different  Lines  exist  which  make  equal  angles 
with  all  transversals;  thirdly,  you  go  back,  armed  with 
this  new  piece  of  knowledge,  and  use  it  unconsciously, 
in  forming  an  idea  of  '  the  same  direction  '  as  regards 
different  Lines.  And  I  believe  that  the  course  of  thought 
in  the  mind  of  a  beginner  is  simply  this  : — he  grasps, 
easily  enough,  the  idea  of  '  the  same  direction  *  as  regards 
Lines  which  have  a  common  point;  but  when  you  put 
before  him  the  idea  of  different  Lines,  and  ask  him  to 
realise  the  meaning  of  the  phrase,  when  applied  to  such 
Lines,  he,  finding  that  the  former  geometrical  conception 
of  '  coincidence '  is  not  applicable  in  this  case,  and  knowing 
nothing  of  the  idea,  which  is  latent  in  i/02ir  mind_,  of  Lines 
which  make  equal  angles  with  all  transversals,  simply  fails  to 
attach  any  idea  at  all  to  the  phrase,  and  accepts  it  blindly, 
from  faith  in  his  teacher,  and  is  from  that  moment,  until  he 
reaches  the  Theorem  about  transversals,  walking  in  the  dark. 

Nie.  If  this  be  true,  of  course  the  theory  of  '  direction,' 
however  beautiful  in  itself,  is  not  adapted  for  purposes  of 
teaching. 

Mill.  That  is  my  own  firm  conviction.  But  I  fear  I 
may  have  wearied  you  by  discussing  this  matter  at  such 

K  3 


132  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

great  length.  Let  us  turn  to  another  subject.  What  is 
your  practical  test  for  knowing  whether  two  finite  Lines 
will  meet  if  produced  ? 

Nie.  You  have  already  heard  our  8th  Axiom  (p.  ii). 
'  Two  straight  lines  which  have  difierent  directions  would 
meet  if  produced.' 

Min.  But,  even  if  that  were  axiomatic  (which  I  deny),  it 
would  be  no  practical  test^  for  you  have  admitted  that  you 
have  no  means  of  knowing  whether  two  Lines,  not  known  to 
have  a  common  pointy  have  or  have  not  different  directions. 

Nie.  We  must  refer  you  to  p.  14.  Th.  5.  Cor.  2,  where  we 
prove  that  Lines,  which  make  equal  angles  with  a  certain 
transversal,  have  the  same  direction. 

Min.  Which  you  had  already  asserted,  if  you  remember, 
in  Ax.  9. 

Nie.  Well  theu;  we  refer  you  to  Ax.  9  as  containing  the 
same  truth. 

Min.  And  having  got  that  truth,  whether  lawfully  or 
not,  what  do  you  do  with  it  ? 

Nie.  Why,  surely  it  is  almost  the  same  as  saying  that, 
if  they  make  ?^^?equal  angles,  they  have  different  directions. 

Min.  And  what  then  ? 

Nie.  Then,  combining  this  with  the  Axiom  you  refused 
to  grant,  namely,  that  Lines  having  different  directions  will 
meet,  we  get  a  practical  test,  such  as  you  were  asking  for. 

Min.  [dreamily)  I  see  !  You  get  rid  of  the  '  different 
directions '  altogether,  and  the  result  is  that  '  Lines,  which 
BQake  unequal  angles  with  a  certain  transversal,  will  meet 
if  produced,'  which  is  Tab.  II.  2  (see  p.  34).  And  this 
you  assert  as  axiomatic  truth  ? 


Sc.  YI.  §  I.]       TEST    OF    MEETING    LINES.  133 

ISlie.  {^uneasily)  Yes. 

Mill.  Surely  I  have  read  something  like  it  before?  Could 
it  have  been  Euclid's  1 2th  Axiom  ?  And  have  I  not  some- 
where read  words  like  these  : — '  Euclid's  treatment  of  paral- 
lels distinctly  breaks  down  in  Logic.  It  rests  on  an  Axiom 
which  is  not  axiomatic '  ? 

JSlie,  We  have  nowhere  stated  this  Axiom  which  you  put 
into  our  mouth. 

Mill.  No  ?  Then  how,  may  I  ask,  do  you  prove  that 
particular  Lines  will  meet  ?  You  must  have  to  prove  it 
sometimes,  you  know. 

l>lie.  We  have  not  had  to  prove  it  anywhere,  that  we 
are  aware  of. 

Min.  Then  there  must  be  some  gaps  in  your  arguments. 
Let  us  see.  Please  to  turn  to  p.  46.  Prob.  7.  Here  you 
make,  at  the  ends  of  a  Line  Ci>,  angles  equal  to  two  given 
angles  (which,  as  you  tell  us  below^_,  'must  be  together  less 
than  two  right  angles  '),  and  you  then  say  '  let  their  sides 
meet  in  0.'     How  do  you  know  that  they  will  meet  ? 

Nie.  You  have  found  one  hiatus,  we  grant.  Can  you 
point  out  another  in  the  whole  book  ? 

Min.  I  can.  At  p.  70  I  find  the  words  'Join  §(?,  and 
produce  it  to  meet  FlI  produced  in  /S'.'  And  again  at 
p.  88.  '  Hence  the  centre  must  be  at  0,  the  point  of  inter- 
section of  these  perpendiculars.'  In  both  these  cases  I 
would  ask,  as  before,  how  do  you  know  that  the  Lines  in 
question  ivill  meet  ? 

ISiie.  We  had  not  observed  the  omissions  before,  and  we 
must  admit  that  they  constitute  a  serious  hiatus. 

Min.  A  most  serious  one.     A  student,   who  had  been 


134  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

taught  such  proofs  as  these,  would  be  almost  sure  to  try 
the  plan  in  cases  where  the  Lines  would  not  really  meet, 
and  his  assumption  would  lead  him  to  results  more  remark- 
able for  novelty  than  truth. 

Let  us  now  take  a  general  survey  of  your  book.  And 
First,  as  to  the  Propositions  of  Euclid  which  you  omit — 

Wie.  You  are  alluding  to  Prop.  7, 1  suppose.  Surely  its 
only  use  is  to  prove  Prop.  8,  which  we  have  done  very  well 
without  it. 

Min,  That  is  quite  a  venial  omission.  The  others  that 
I  miss  are  27,  28,  29,  30,  '>,'>,,  34,  '>,^,  ofi,  37,  38,  39,  40, 41, 
and  43  :  rather  a  formidable  list. 

Nie.  You  are  much  mistaken !  Nearly  all  of  those  are 
in  our  book,  or  could  be  deduced  in  a  moment  from  theorems 
in  it. 

Min.  Let  us  take  I.  34  as  an  instance. 

Nie.  That  we  give  you,  almost  in  the  words  of  Euclid, 
at  p.  37. 

^eads. 

Th.  22.  'The  opposite  angles  and  sides  of  a  Parallelo- 
gram will  be  equal,  and  the  diagonal,  or  the  Line  which 
joins  its  opposite  angles,  will  bisect  it.' 

Min.  Well,  but  your  Parallelogram  is  not  what  Euclid 
contemplates.  He  means  by  the  word  that  the  opposite 
sides  are  separational — a  property  whose  reality  he  has 
demonstrated  in  I.  27  ;  whereas ^oz^  mean  that  they  have  the 
same  direction — a  property  whose  reality,  when  asserted  of 
different  Lines,  has  nowhere  been  satisfactorilj^  proved. 

Nie.  We  have  proved  it  at  p.  14.  Th.  5.  Cor.  2. 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  A     FALSE     COROLLARY. 


135 


Min.  Which,  if  traced  back,  will  be  seen  to  depend 
ultimately  on  your  6th  Axiom,  where  you  assume  the 
reality  of  such  Lines.  But,  even  if  your  Theorem  had 
been  shown  to  refer  to  a  real  figure,  how  would  that 
prove  Euc.  I.  34  ? 

Nie.  You  only  need  the  link  that  separational  Lines 
have  the  same  direction. 

Mm.  Have  you  supplied  that  link  ? 

Nie.  No  :  but  the  reader  can  easily  make  it  for  himself. 
It  is  the  '  Contranominal '  (as  you  call  it)  of  our  8th  Axiom, 
^  two  straight  Lines  which  have  different  directions  would 
meet  if  prolonged  indefinitely.' 

Min.  Your  pupils  must  be  remarkably  clever  at  drawing 
deductions  and  filling  up  gaps  in  an  argument,,  if  they 
usually  supply  that  link,  as  well  as  the  proof  that  separa- 
tional Lines  exist  at  all,  for  themselves.  But,  as  1/021  do 
not  supply  these  things,  it  seems  fair  to  say  that  your  book 
omits  all  the  Propositions  which  I  have  enumerated. 

I  will  now  take  a  general  survey  of  your  book,  and  select 
a  few  points  which  seem  to  call  for  remark. 

Minos  reads. 

P.  14.  Th.  5.  Cor.  I.  '  Hence  if  two  straight  Lines  which 
are  not  parallel  are  intersected  by  a  third,  the  alternate 
angles  will  be  not  equal,  and  the  interior  angles  on  the 
same  side  of  the  intersecting  Line  will  be  not  supplemen- 
tary."' Excuse  the  apparent  incivility  of  the  remark^  but 
this  Corollary  is  false. 

Nie»  You  amaze  me  ! 


136  WILSON,  [Act  II. 

Min.  You  have  simply  to  take,  as  an  instance,  a  Pair  of 
coincidental  Lines,  whicli  most  certainly  answer  to  your 
description  of  ^  not  parallel.' 

Nie.  It  is  an  oversight. 

Min,  So  I  suppose :  it  is  a  species  of  literary  pheno- 
menon in  which  your  Manual  is  rich. 

Your  proof  of  Cor.  a.  is  a  delicious  collection  of  nega- 
tives. 

^eads. 

'  Cor.  1.  Hence  also  if  the  corresponding  angles  are  equal, 
or  the  alternate  angles  equal,  or  the  interior  angles  siipjole- 
mentary,  the  Lines  will  he  parallel. 

'  For  they  csmnot  be  not  parallel,  for  then  the  cor- 
responding and  alternate  angles  would  be  ?mequal  by 
Cor.  I.' 

Should  I  be  justified  in  calling  this  a  somewhat  knotty 
passage  ? 

Nie.  You  have  no  right  to  make  such  a  remark.  It  is 
a  mere  jest ! 

Mi7i.  Well,  we  will  be  serious  again. 

At  p.  9,  you  stated  more  than  the  data  authorised  :  we 
now  come  to  a  set-off  against  this^  since  we  shall  find 
you  asserting  less  than  you  ought  to  do.  I  will  read  the 
passage : — 

P.  26.  Th.  15.  'If  two  Triangles  are  equiangular  to  one 
another  and  have  a  side  of  the  one  equal  to  the  correspond- 
ing side  of  the  other,  the  Triangles  will  be  equal  in  all 
respects.' 

This  contains  a  superfluous  datum :  it  would  have  been 


Sc.  VL§I.]  A     CUMBROUS    PROOF.  137 

enough  to  say  '  if  two  Triangles  have  two  angles  of  the  one 
equal  to  two  angles  of  the  other  &c/ 

Nie.  Well,  it  is  at  worst  a  superfluity  :  the  enunciation 
is  really  identical  with  Euclid's. 

Mia.  By  no  means.  The  logical  effect  of  a  superfluous 
datimi  is  to  limit  the  extent  of  a  Proposition  :  and,  if  the 
Proposition  be  '  universal,'  it  reduces  it  to  '  particular ' ; 
i.e.  it  changes  'all  ^  is  B'  into  'some  A  is  B'  For 
suppose  we  take  the  Proposition  'all  A  is  ^,'  and  sub- 
stitute for  it  '  all  that  is  both  A  and  Z  is  ^,'  we  may  be 
accidentally  making  an  assertion  of  the  same  extent  as 
before,  for  it  may  happen  that  the  w^hole  class  'A'  pos- 
sesses the  property  'X';  but,  so  far  as  logical /(?;m  is 
concerned;  we  have  reduced  the  Proposition  to  '  some  things 
that  are  A  (viz.  those  w^hich  are  also  X)  are  -5.' 

I  turn  now  to  p.  27,  where  I  observe  a  new  proof  for 
Euc.  I.  24. 

Nie.  New  and,  we  hope,  neat  and  short. 

Mm.  Charmingly  neat  and  short,  as  it  stands :  but  this 
method  really  requires  the  discussion  of  five  cases,  each 
with  its  own  figure. 

Nie.  How  do  you  make  that  out  ? 

Mill.  The  five  cases  are  : — 

(i)  Vertical  angles  together  less  than  two  right  angles, 
and  adjacent  base  angles  acute  (the  case  you  give). 

(2)  Adjacent  base-angles  right. 

(3)  Adjacent  base-angles  obtuse. 

These  two  cases  are  proved  along  with  the  first. 

(4)  Vertical  angles  together  equal  to  two  right  angles. 
This  requires  a  new  proof,  as  we  must  substitute  for  the 


138  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

words  '  the  bisector  of  the  angle  FAC^  the  words  '  the 
perpendicular  to  FC  drawn  through  A^ 

(5)  Vertical  angles  together  greater  than  two  right 
angles. 

This  also  requires  a  new  proof,  as  we  must  insert,  after 
the  words  '  the  bisector  of  the  angle  FAC^'  the  words 
'produced  through  A,  and  must  then  prove  (by  your 
Th.  i)  that  the  angles  OAC,  OAF,  are  equal. 

On  the  whole,  I  take  this  to  be  the  most  cumbrous  proof 
yet  suggested  for  this  Theorem. 

"We  now  come  to  what  is  probably  the  most  extra- 
ordinary Corollary  ever  yet  propounded  in  a  geometrical 
treatise.     Turn  to  pages  30  and  31. 

Th.  %o.  '  If  two  triangles  have  two  sides  of  the  one 
equal  to  two  sides  of  the  other,  and  the  angle  opposite 
that  which  is  not  the  less  of  the  two  sides  of  the  one 
equal  to  the  corresponding  angle  of  the  other,  the  triangles 
shall  be  equal  in  all  respects. 

'  Cor.  I .  If  the  side  opposite  the  given  angle  were  less 
than  the  side  adjacent,  there  would  be  two  triangles,  as  in 
the  figure  ;  and  the  proof  given  above  is  inapplicable. 

'  This  is  called  the  ambiguous  case.' 

The  whole  Proposition  is  a  grand  specimen  of  obscure 
writing  and  bad  English,  ^  is '  and  '  are,'  ^  could,"*  and 
*■  would,'  alternating  throughout  with  the  most  charming 
impartiality :  but  what  impresses  me  most  is  the  probable 
effect  of  this  wondrous  Corollary  on  the  brain  of  a  simple 
reader,  coming  breathless  and  exhausted  from  a  death- 
struggle  with  the  preceding  theorem.  I  can  imagine  him 
saying  wildly  to  himself  ^  If  two  Triangles  fulfil  such  and 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  A     BOLD    ASSUMPTION.  139 

such  conditions,  such  and  such  things  follow :  but,  if  one 
of  the  conditions  were  to  fail,  there  ivoulcl  he  tivo  Triangles  ! 
I  must  be  dreaming !  Let  me  dip  my  head  in  cold  water, 
and  read  it  all  again.  If  two  Triangles  .  .  .  there  ivoulcl  be 
two  Triangles.     Oh,  my  poor  brains  !  ' 

Nie.  You  are  pleased  to  be  satirical :  it  is  rather  obscure 
writing,  we  confess. 

ITm.  It  is  indeed  !  You  do  well  in  calling  it  the  am- 
higiious  case. 

At  p.  '^'^^  I  see  the  heading  'Theorems  of  equality"': 
but  you  only  give  two  of  them,  the  second  being  '  the 
bisectors  of  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle  meet  in  one 
point,'  which,  as  a  specimen  of  '  Theorems  of  equality,' 
is  probably  unique  in  the  literature  of  Geometry.  I 
cannot  wonder  at  your  not  attempting  to  extend  the 
collection. 

At  p.  40  I  read,  '  It  is  assumed  here  that  if  a  circle 
has  one  point  inside  another  circle,  the  circumferences 
will  intersect  one  another.'  This  I  believe  to  be  the 
boldest  assumption  yet  made  in  Modern  Geometry. 

At  pp.  40,  42  you  assume  a  length  'greater  than  half 
a  given  Line,  without  having  shewn  how  to  bisect  Lines. 
Two  cases  of  '  Petitio  Frincijni.'*     (See  p.  58.) 

P.  69.  Here  we  have  a  Problem  (which  you  call  '  the 
quadrature  of  a  rectilineal  area"*)  occupying  three  pages 
and  a  half.  It  is  '  approached  '  by  four  '  stages,"*  which  is 
a  euphemism  for  saying  that  this  fearful  Proposition  con- 
tains four  of  Euclid's  Problems,  viz.  I.  42,  44,  45,  and 
II.  14. 

P.  73.  2.  '  Find  a  point  equally  distant  from  three  given 


140  WILSON.  [Act  II. 

straight  lines.'  Is  it  fair  to  give  this  without  any  limita- 
tion ?     What  if  the  given  lines  were  parallel  ? 

P.  84.  'If  Aj  JBy  C  .  .  .as  conditions  involve  D  as  a. 
result,  and  the  failure  of  C  involves  a  failure  of  D ;  then 
A,  £,  D  .  .  .  as  conditions  involve  C  as  a  result.'  If  not-C 
proves  not-D,  then  D  proves  C.  A  and  B  are  irrelevant 
and  obscure  the  statement.  I  observe,  in  passing,  the 
subtle  distinction  which  you  suggest  between  '  ike  failure 
of  C '  and  '  a  failure  of  D.'  D  is  a  habitual  bankrupt,  who 
has  often  passed  through  the  court,  and  is  well  used  to 
failures :  but,  when  C  fails,  his  collapse  is  final,  and 
^  leaves  not  a  wrack  behind^ ! 

P.  90.  '  Given  a  curve,  to  ascertain  whether  it  is  an  arc 
of  a  circle  or  not.'  What  does  '  given  a  curve  '  mean  ?  If 
it  means  a  line  drawn  with  ink  on  paper,  we  may  safely 
say  at  once  '  it  is  not  a  circle.' 

P.  96.  Def.  15.  'When  one  of  the  points  in  which  a 
secant  cuts  a  circle  is  made  to  move  up  to,  and  ultimately 
coincide  with,  the  other,  the  ultimate  position  of  the 
secant  is  called  t/ie  tangent  at  that  point.'  (The  idea  of 
the  jiosition  of  a  Line  being  itself  a  Line  is  queer  enough: 
I  suppose  you  would  say  '  the  nltiwMe position  of  Whitting- 
ton  was  the  Lord  IMayor  of  London.'  But  this  is  by  the 
way :  of  course  you  mean  '  the  secant  in  its  ultimate 
position.')  Now  let  us  take  three  points  on  a  circle,  the 
middle  one  fixed,  the  others  movable;  and  through  the 
middle  one  let  us  draw  two  secants,  each  passing  through 
one  of  the  other  points ;  and  then  let  us  make  the  other 
points  'move  up  to,  and  ultimately  coincide  with,'  the 
middle  one.     We  have  no  ground  for  saying  that  these 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]  SUMMING-UP.  141 

two  secants,  in  their  ultimate  positions,  will  coincide. 
Hence  the  phrase  '  the  tangent '  assumes,  w^ithout  proof, 
Th.  7.  Cor.  I,  viz.  'there  can  be  only  one  tangent  to 
a  circle  at  a  given  point.'     This  is  a  ^Petitio  Princijni.^ 

P.  97.  Th.  6.  The  secant  consists  of  two  portions^  each 
terminated  at  the  fixed  point.  All  that  you  prove  here 
is  that  the  portion  which  has  hitherto  cut  the  circle  is 
ultimately  outside :  and  you  jump,  without  a  shadow  of 
proof,  to  the  conclusion  that  the  same  thing  is  true  of  the 
other  portion!  "Why  should  not  the  second  portion  begin 
to  cut  the  circle  at  the  precise  moment  when  the  first 
ceases  to  do  so?     This  is  another  ^ Petitio  Princijni.^ 

P.  129,  line  3  from  end.  'Abstract  quantities  are  the 
means  that  we  use  to  express  the  concrete.'  Excluding 
such  physical  '  means '  as  pen  and  ink  or  the  human  voice 
(to  w^hich  you  do  not  seem  to  allude),  I  presume  that  the 
'  means '  referred  to  in  this  mysterious  sentence  are  '  pure 
numbers.'  At  any  rate  the  only  instances  given  are  '  seven, 
five,  three.'  Now  take  P.  130,  1.  5,  '  Abstract  quantities 
and  ratios  are  precisely  the  same  things.'  Hence  all  ratios 
are  numbers.  But  in  the  middle  of  the  same  page  we 
read  that  '  all  numbers  are  ratios,  but  all  ratios  are  not 
numbers.'     I  leave  this  without  further  remark. 

I  will  now  sum  up  the  conclusions  I  have  come  to  with 
respect  to  your  Manual. 

( 1 )  As  to  *  straight  Lines '  you  suggest  a  useful  ex- 
tension of  Euclid's  Axiom. 

(2)  As  to  angles  and  right   angles,  your  extension  of 


142  IVILSON,  [Act  II. 

the  limit  of  size  is,  in  my  opinion,  objectionable.  In 
other  respects  your  language^  though  hazy,  agrees  on  the 
whole  with  Euclid. 


(3)  As  to  '  Parallels,'  there  is  a  good  deal  to  be  said^  and 
that  not  very  flattering,  I  fear. 

In  Ax.  6,  you  assert  the  reality  of  different  Lines 
having  the  same  direction — a  property  you  can  neither 
define,  nor  construct,  nor  test. 

You  also  assert  (by  implication)  the  reality  of  separa- 
tional  Lines,  which  Euclid  ^roi;^5. 

You  also  assert  the  reality  of  Lines,  not  known  to  have 
a  common  pointy  but  having  different  directions — a  pro- 
perty you  can  neither  define,  nor  construct,  nor  test. 

In  Ax.  8,  you  assert  that  the  undefined  Lines  last  men- 
tioned would  meet  if  produced. 

These  Axioms,  therefore,  are  not  axiomatic. 

In  proving  result  (2),  you  are  guilty  of  the  fallacy 
'  Petitio  Princijoii.^ 

In  Ax.  9  and  Th.  4  taken  together,,  if  the  word  '  angle ' 
in  Ax.  9  means  '  variable  angle/  you  are  guilty  of  the 
fallacy  'A  clicto  secundum  Quid  ad  dictum  Sim^pliciter^'^  if 
'  constant  angle,'  of  the  fallacy  '  Petitio  Principii.^ 

In  Ax.  9  [a),  you  assert  that  Lines  possessing  a  certain 
real  geometrical  property,  viz.  making  equal  angles  with 
a  certain  transversal,  possess  also  the  before-mentioned 
undefined  property.     This  is  not  axiomatic. 

In  Ax.  9  (/3)  combined  with  Ax.  6,  you  assert  the  reality 
of  Lines  which  make  equal  angles  with  all  transversals. 
This  is  not  more  axiomatic  than  Euc.  Ax.  12. 


Sc.  VI.  §  I.]         REJECTION    OF    MANUAL.  143 

In  Ax.  9  (a)  combined  with  Ax.  9  (/3),  yon  assert  that 
Lines,  which  make  equal  angles  with  a  certain  transversal, 
do  so  with  all  transversals.  This  I  believe  to  be  the  most 
unaxiomatic  Axiom  ever  yet  proposed. 

(4)  You  furnish  no  practical  test  for  the  meeting  of 
finite  Lines,  and  consequently  you  never  prove  (however 
necessary  for  the  matter  in  hand)  that  any  particular 
Lines  will  meet.  And  when  we  come  to  examine  what 
practical  test  can  possibly  be  extracted  from  your  Axioms, 
the  only  result  is  an  imperfect  edition  of  Euclid's  12th 
Axiom! 

The  sum  total  of  the  chief  defects  which  I  have  noticed 
is  as  follows  : — 

fourteen  of  Euclid's  Theorems  in  Book  I.  omitted ; 

seven  unaxiomatic  Axioms ; 

six  instances  of  '  Petitio  Principii.^ 

The  abundant  specimens  of  logical  inaccuracy,  and  of 
loose  writing  generally,  which  I  have  here  collected  would, 
I  feel  sure,  in  a  mere  popular  treatise  be  discreditable — 
in  a  scientific  treatise,  however  modestly  put  forth,  de- 
plorable— but  in  a  treatise  avowedly  put  forth  as  a  model 
of  logical  precision,  and  intencled  to  siipersede  Euclid,  they 
are  simply  monstrous. 

My  ultimate  conclusion  on  your  Manual  is  that  it  has 
no  claim  wJiatei-er  to  be  adopted  as  the  Manual  for  pur- 
poses of  teaching  and  examination. 


ACT  II. 

Scene  VI. 

§  2.  Pierce. 


'  dum  brevis  esse  laboro, 
Obscurus  fio.' 


Nie.  I  lay  before  you  '  An  Mementary  Treatise  on  lane 
and  Solid  Geometry^  by  Benjamin  Pierce,  A.M.,  Perkins 
Professor  of  Astronomy  and  Matbematics  in  Harvard 
University,  published  in  1872. 

Min.  As  I  have  already  considered,  at  great  length,  the 
subject  of  direction  as  treated  by  Mr.  Wilson,  I  need  not 
trouble  you  as  to  any  matters  where  Mr.  Pierce's  treat- 
ment does  not  materially  differ  from  his.  Is  there  any 
material  difference  in  the  treatment  of  a  straight  line  ? 

Nie.  He  has  a  Definition  of  direction  which  will,  I  think, 
be  new  to  you : — 

Beads. 

P.  5.  §  II,  Def.  'The  Direction  of  a  Line  in  any  part  is 
the  direction  of  a  point  at  that  part  from  the  next  pre- 
ceding point  of  the  Line.' 


SO-CALLED     'parallels:  145 

Min,  That  sounds  mysterious.  Which  way  along-  a  Line 
are  ^  preceding  '  points  to  be  found  ? 

Nie.  Both  ways.  He  adds,  directly  afterwards^  '  a  Line 
has  two  different  directions,'  etc. 

Mm.  So  your  Definition  needs  a  postscript  ?  That  is 
rather  clumsy  writing.  But  there  is  yet  another  diffi- 
culty.    How  far  from  a  point  is  the  '  next '  point  ? 

Nle.  At  an  infinitely  small  distance,  of  course.  You 
will  find  the  matter  fully  discussed  in  any  work  on  the 
Infinitesimal  Calculus. 

Min.  A  most  satisfactory  answer  for  a  teacher  to  make 
to  a  pupil  just  beginning  Geometry !  I  see  nothing  else 
to  remark  on  in  your  treatment  of  the  Line,  except  that 
you  state,  as  an  Axiom,  that  'a  straight  Line  is  the  shortest 
way  from  one  point  to  another.'  I  have  already  given, 
in  my  review  of  M.  Legendre,  my  reasons  for  think- 
ing that  this  is  not  a  fair  Axiom^  and  ought  to  be  a 
Theorem  (see  p.  ^^, 

There  is  nothing  particular  to  notice  in  your  treat- 
ment of  angles  and  right  angles.  Let  us  go  on  to  Paral- 
lels.    How  do  you  prove  Euc.  I.  32  ? 

NiEMAXD  reads, 

P.  9.  §  27,  Def.  ' ParallellAwQs  are  straight  Lines  which 
have  the  same  Direction.' 

Min.  I  presume  you  do  not  mean  to  include  coinci- 
dental Lines  ? 

JSie.  Certainly  not.  We  see  the  omission.  Allow  us  to 
insert  the  word  '  different.' 

Min.  Very  well.   Then  your  Definition  combines  the  two 

L 


146  PIERCE.  [Act  II. 

properties  'diiFerent'  and  ^having"  the  same  direction.' 
Bear  in  mind  that  you  have  yet  to  prove  the  realiiij  of 
such  Lines.  And  may  I  request  you  in  future  to  call 
such  Lines  '  sepcodal '  ?  But  if  you  wish  to  assert  any 
thing  of  them  which  is  also  true  of  coincidental  Lines, 
you  had  better  drop  the  '  sep- '  and  simply  call  them 
'  Lines  which  have  the  same  direction.'  so  as  to  include 
both  classes. 
Nie.  Very  well. 

NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  9.  §  28.  Th.  '  Sepcodal  Lines  cannot  meet,  how^ever 
far  they  are  produced.' 

Min.  Or  rather  '  could  not  meet,  if  they  existed.'  Pro- 
ceed. 

NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  9.  §  29.  Th.  ^  Two  angles  are  equal,  when  their  sides 
have  the  same  direction.' 

Mm.  How  do  you  define  'same  direction'  for  different 
Lines  ? 

Nie.  We  cannot  define  it. 

Mill.  Then  I  cannot  admit  that  such  Lines  exist.  But 
even  if  I  did  admit  their  reality,  why  should  the  angles 
be  equal? 

Wie.  Because  '  the  difference  of  direction '  is  the  same 
in  each  case. 

Min.  But  how  would  that  prove  the  angles  equal? 
Do  you  define  '  angle '  as  the  '  difference  of  direction '  of 
two  lines  ? 

Nie.  Not  exactly.     We  have  stated  (p.  6,  §  19}  'The 


Sc.  YL  §  2.]  SO-CALLED     'parallels:  14' 


magnitude  of  the  angle  depends  solely  upon  the  difference 
of  direction  of  its  sides  at  the  vertex.' 

Min.  But  the  difference  of  direction  also  possesses  'mag- 
nitude.' Is  that  magnitude  a  wholly  «;«dependent  entity  ? 
Or  does  it,  in  its  turn,  depend  to  some  extent  upon  the 
angW^  Seriously,  all  these  subtleties  must  be  very  trying 
to  a  beginner.  But  we  had  better  proceed  to  the  next 
Theorem.  I  am  anxious  to  see  where,  in  this  system, 
these  creatures  of  the  imagination,  these  sepcodal  Lines, 
are  to  appear  as  actually  existent. 

ISlie.  We  next  prove  (p.  9.  §  30)  that  Lines,  which 
have  the  same  direction,  make  equal  angles  with  all 
transversals. 

ILin.  That  is  merely  a  particular  case  of  your  last 
Theorem. 

Nie.  And  then  that  two  Lines,  which  make  equal  angles 
wdth  a  transversal,  have  the  same  direction. 

Min.  Ah,  that  would  bring  them  into  existence  at  once ! 
Let  us  hear  the  proof  of  that. 

Nie.  The  proof  is  that  if,  through  the  point  where  the 
first  Line  is  cut  by  the  transversal,  a  Line  be  drawn 
having  the  same  direction  as  the  second,  it  makes  equal 
angles  with  the  transversal,  and  therefore  coincides  with 
the  first  Line. 

Min.  You  assume,  then,  that  a  Line  can  be  drawn  through 
that  point,  having  the  same  direction  as  the  second  Line  ? 

Nie.  Yes. 

Min.  That  is,  you  assume,  without  proof,  that  different 
Lines  can  have  the  same  direction.  On  the  whole,  then, 
though   Mr.   Pierce's   system    differs    slightly    from    Mr. 

L  2 


148  PIERCE.  [Act  II.  Sc.  VI.  §  2. 

Wilson's,  both  rest  on  the  same  vicious  Axiom,  that 
different  Lines  can  exist,  which  possess  a  property  called 
'the  same  direction' — a  phrase  which  is  intelligible  enough 
when  used  of  two  Lines  which  have  a  common  point, 
but  which,  when  applied  to  two  Lines  not  known  to  have 
a  common  point,  can  neither  be  defined,  nor  constructed. 
We  need  not  pursue  the  subject  further.  Have  you 
provided  any  test  for  knowing  whether  two  given  finite 
Lines  will  meet  if  produced  ? 

Nie.  We  have  not  thought  it  necessary. 

Mln.  Then  the  only  other  remark  I  have  to  make  on 
this  singularly  compendious  treatise  is  that,  of  the  35 
Theorems  which  Euclid  gives  us  in  his  First  Book,  it 
reproduces  just  sixteen  :  the  omissions  being  16,  17,  25, 
26  (2),  27  and  28,  29,  30,  0^^,  34,  'i,^,  0,6,  37,  38,  39,  40, 
41,43,  47,  and  48. 

Nie.  Most  of  those  are  in  the  book.  For  example,  §  30 
answers  to  Euc.  I.  29. 

Mill.  Only  by  proving  that  separational  Lines  have 
the  same  direction  :  which  you  have  not  done. 

Nie.  At  any  rate  we  have  Euc.  I.  47  in  our  §  256. 

Min.  Oh,  no  doubt !  Long  after  going  through  ratios, 
which  necessarily  include  incommensurables ;  and  long 
after  the  Axiom  (§  99)  '  Infinitely  small  quantities  may 
be  neglected ' !  No,  no  :  so  far  as  heginners  are  concerned, 
there  is  no  Euc.  I.  47  in  tJiis  book  ! 

My  conclusion  is  that,  however  useful  this  Manual 
may  be  to  an  advanced  student,  it  is  not  adapted  to  the 
wants  of  a  beginner. 


A-CT   II. 


Scene  VL 


§  3.    WiLLOCK. 


'  This  work  ....  no  doubt,  has  its  faults.' 

WiLLocK,  Pre/,  p.  I. 


Nie.  I  lay  before  you  '  The  Mementary  Geomeln/  of 
the  Right  Line  and  Circle'  by  W.  A.  Willock,  D.D., 
formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  published  in 

1875- 

Mill.  I  have  gone  throngli  the  subject  of  '  direction '  so 
minutely  in  reviewing  Mr.  Wilson's  book^  that  I  need 
not  discuss  with  you  any  points  in  which  your  client 
essentially  agrees  with  him.  AVe  may,  I  think,  pass  over 
the  subject  of  the  Right  Line  altogether? 

Nie.  Yes. 

Min.  And  as  to  Angles  and  Right  Angles,  I  see  na 
novelty  in  Dr.  AVillock's  book,  except  that  he  defines  an 
Angle  as  '  the  divergence  of  two  directions,'  which  is 
virtually  the  same  as  Euclid's  Definition. 

Nie.  That  I  think  is  all. 


150  WILLOCK.  [Act  II. 

Min.  Then  we  can  proceed  at  once  to  the  subject  of 
Parallels.  Will  you  kindly  give  rae  your  proof  of  Euc. 
I.  32  from  the  beginning  ? 

NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  TO.  Th.  I.  ^  Two  Directives  can  intersect  in  only  one 
point. ^ 

Min.  By  '  Directive  '  •  you  mean  an  '  infinite  Line  '  ? 

Nie.  Yes. 

Min.  Well,  I  need  hardly  trouble  you  to  prove  it  as 
a  Theorem,  being  quite  willing  to  grant  it  as  an  Axiom. 
What  is  the  next  Theorem  ? 

NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  II.  Th.  5.  ^  Tarallel  Directives  cannot  meet.'^ 
Min.  AVe  will  call  them  ^  sepcodal/  if  you  please.    I  grant 
it,  provisionally.     If  such  Lines  exist,  they  cannot  meet. 

NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  II.  Th.  7.  '  Onli/  one  Line,  sepcodal  to  a  Directive, 
can  be  drawn  through  a  points 

Min.  Does  that  assert  that  one  can  be  drawn?  Or 
does  it  simply  deny  the  possibility  of  drawing  tivo  ? 

ISiie.  The  proof  only  applies  to  the  denial :  but  the 
assertion  is  certainly  involved  in  the  enunciation.  At 
all  events,  if  not  assumed  here,  it  is  assumed  later  on. 

Min.  Then  I  will  at  this  point  credit  you  with  one  un- 
warrantable Axiom,  namely^  that  different  Lines  can  have 
the  same  direction.     The  Theorem  itself  I  grant. 


Sc.  YL  §  3-]         SO-CALLED     'parallels:  151 


NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  12.  Th.  8.  ^  The  angles  cf  intersection  of  a  Transversal 
with  tivo  sepcodal  Birectives  are  equal: 

Mln,  Do  you  prove  that  by  Mr.  Wilson's  method  ? 

Nie.  Not  quite.  He  does  it  by  transferring*  an  angle  : 
2ce  do  it  by  divergence  of  directions. 

Ilin.  I  prefer  your  method.  All  it  needs  to  make  it 
complete  is  the  proof  of  the  reality  of  such  Lines :  but 
that  'is  unattainable,  and  its  absence  is  fatal  to  the  whole 
system.  Nay,  more :  the  fact,  that  the  reality  of  such 
Lines  leads  by  a  logical  necessity  to  the  reality  of  Lines 
which  make  equal  angles  with  any  transversal,  reacts  upon 
that  unfortunate  Axiom,  and  destroys  the  little  hope  it 
ever  had  of  being  granted  without  proof.  In  point  of 
fact,  in  asking"  to  have  the  Axiom  granted,  you  were 
virtually  asking  to  have  this  other  reality  granted  as 
axiomatic — but  all  this  I  have  already  explained  (p.  125). 

NiEMA^'D  reads. 

P.  13.  Th.  10.  ^  If  a  Transversal  cut  two  Birectives  and 
make  the  angles  of  intersection  loith  them  equal,  the  Birectives 
are  sepcodai: 

Min.  The  subject  of  your  Proposition  is  indisputably 
real.  If  then  you  can  prove  this  Theorem,  you  will  thereby 
prove  the  reality  of  sepcodai  Lines.  But  I  fear  you  have 
assumed  it  already  in  Th.  7.  There  is  still,  however,  a 
gleam  of  hope  :  perhaps  you  do  not  need  Th.  7  in  proving 
this  ? 


152  WILLOCK.  [Act  II. 

Nie.  We  do  not :  but  I  fear  tliat  will  not  mend  matters, 
as  we  assume,  in  the  course  of  this  Theorem,  that  a  Line 
can  be  drawn  through  a  given  point_,  so  as  to  have  the 
same  direction  as  a  given  Line. 

Mill.  Then  we  need  not  examine  it  further :  it  must 
perish  with  the  faulty  Axiom  on  which  it  rests.  What 
is  your  next  Theorem  ? 

It^ie.  It  answers  to  Euc.  I,  i6,  17,  and  is  proved  by  the 
Theorem  you  have  just  rejected. 

Min.  Then  I  must  reject  its  jproof^  but  I  will  grant  you 
the  Theorem  itself,  if  you  like,  as  we  know  it  can  be  proved 
from  undisputed  Axioms.     What  comes  next? 

NiEMAND  reads. 

P.  14.  Th.  13.  '' If  a  Transversal  meet  Uoo  Directives,  and 
maJce  angles  with  tJiem,  the  External  greater  than  the  Internal, 
or  the  sum  of  the  two  Internal  angles  less  than  two  rigid 
angles,  the  two  directives  must  meet^ 

Min.  A  proof  for  Euclid's  Axiom  ?     That  is  interesting. 

NiEMAND  reads. 

'  For,  suppose  they  do  not  meet.  Then,  they  should  be 
sepcodal ' 

Min.  {interrupting)  ^Should  be  sepcodal'?  Does  that 
mean  that  they  are  sepcodal  ? 

Nie.  Yes,  I  think  so. 

Min.  That  is,  you  assume  that  separational  Lines  have 
the  same  direction  ? 

Nie.  We  do. 

Min.  A  fearful  assumption !  {A  long  silence)  Well  ? 


Sc.  YI.  §  3-]  GENERAL     SURVEY,  153 

Nie.  I  am  waiting*  to  know  whether  you  grant  it. 

Mln.  Unquestionably  not!  I  must  mark  it  against 
you  as  an  Axiom  of  the  most  monstrous  character  !  Mr. 
Wilson  himself  does  not  assume  this,  though  he  does 
assume  its  Contranominal,  that  Lines  having  different 
directions  will  meet  (see  p.  115).  And  what  I  said  then 
I  say  now — unaxiomatic  !  But  supposing  it  granted,  how 
would  you  prove  the  Theorem  ? 

NiEMAXD  reach. 

'  Then^  they  should  be  sepcodal ;  and  the  external 
angle  should  be  equal  (Th.  8)  to  the  internal ;  which  is 
contrary  to  the  supposition.' 

Mm.  Quite  so.  But  Th.  8,  which  you  quote,  itself 
depends  on  the  reality  of  sepcodal  Lines.  Your  Theorem 
rests  on  two  legs,  and  hoth,  I  fear,  are  rotten ! 

Nie.  The  next  Theorem  is  equivalent  to  Euc.  I.  32.  Do 
you  wish  to  hear  it? 

Mln.  It  is  unnecessary  :  it  follows  easily  from  Th.  8. 

And  I  need  not  ask  you  what  practical  test  you  provide 
for  the  meeting  of  two  Lines,  seeing  that  you  have  Euclid's 
12th  Axiom  itself. 

Nie.  Proved  as  a  Theorem. 

M\7i.  Attempted  to  be  proved  as  a  Theorem.  I  will  now 
take  a  hasty  general  survey  of  your  client's  book. 

The  first  point  calling  for  remark  is  the  arrangement. 
You  begin  b}^  dragging  the  unfortunate  beginner  straight 
into  the  most  difficult  part  of  the  subject.  Your  first 
chapter  positively  bristles  with  difficulties  about  'direction.' 
Then  comes  a  long  chapter  on  circles,  including  some  very 


154  WILLOCK.  [Act  II. 

complicated  figures,  and  a  theory  of  tangents  which  de- 
pends upon  moving  lines  and  vanishing  chords — all  most 
disheartening  to  a  beginner.  What  do  you  suppose  he 
is  likely  to  make  of  such  a  sentence  as  ^  the  direction  of 
the  motion  of  the  generating  point  of  any  curve  is  that 
of  the  tangent  to  the  curve  at  that  point '  ?  (p.  29.)  Or 
this  again^  ^it  is  also  evident  that,  the  circle  being  a 
simple  curve,  there  can  be  only  one  tangent  to  it  at  any 
point '  ?  (p.  29.)     What  u  '  a  simple  curve  '  ? 

Nie.  I  do  not  know, 

Miu.  Then  comes  a  ch  pter  of  Problems,  and  then  — 
when  your  pupil  has  succeeded  in  mastering  thirty-four 
pages  of  your  book,  and  has  become  tolerably  familiar 
with  tangents  and  segments,  with  diametral  lines  and 
reentrant  angles,  with  '  oval  forms '  and  '  forms  semi- 
convex,  semi-concave,' — you  at  last  confront  him  with 
that  abstruse  and  much  dreaded  Theorem,  Euc.  I.  4 ! 
True,  he  has  the  '  Asses'  Bridge  '  to  help  him  in  proving 
it,  that  in  its  turn  being  proved,  apparently,  by  properties 
of  the  circle ;  but,  even  with  all  these  assistances,  it  is  an 
arduous  task  ! 

Nie.  You  are  hard  on  my  client. 

Min.  Well,  jesting  apart,  let  me  say  in  all  seriousness 
that  I  think  it  would  require  very  great  ingenuity  to 
make  a  worse  arrangement  of  the  subject  of  Geometry, 
for  purposes  of  teaching,  than  is  to  be  found  in  this  little 
book. 

I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  criticise  the  book  through- 
out :  but  I  will  mention  one  or  two  passages  which  have 
caught  my  eye  in  glancing  through  it. 


Sc.  VI.  §  3-]  'DOUBLE     conversion:  155 

Here,  for  instance,  is  something"  about  '  Directives,' 
which  seem  to  be  a  curious  kind  of  Loci — quite  different 
from  Right  Lines,  I  should  say. 

Nie.  Oh  no  !     They  are  exactly  the  same  thing  ! 

Mill,  Well,  I  find,  at  p.  4,  '  Directives  are  either  diver- 
gent or  parallel '  :  and  again,  at  p.  1 1,  '  Parallel  Directives 
cannot  meet.'  Clearly,  then,  Directives  can  never  by  any 
possibility  coincide  :  but  ordinary  Eight  Lines  occasionally 
do  so,  do  they  not  ? 

K'le.  It  is  a  curious  lajisus  joennae. 

3Iin.  At  p.  7,  I  observe  an  article  headed  '  The  principle 
of  double  conversion,'  which  I  will  quote  entire. 

Beads. 

'  If  four  magnitudes,  a,  d,  A,  B,  are  so  related,  that  when 
a  is  greater  than  b,  A  is  greater  than  B  ;  and  when  a  is 
equal  to  h,  A  is  equal  to  B :  then,  conversely^  when  A  is 
greater  than  B,  a  is  greater  than  h ;  and,  when  A  is  equal 
to  B,  a  is  equal  to  b. 

'  The  truth  of  this  principle,  which  extends  to  every 
kind  of  magnitude,  is  thus  made  evident : — If,  when  A 
is  greater  than  B,  a  is  not  greater  than  b,  it  must  be  either 
less  than  or  equal  to  b.  But  it  cannot  be  less  ;  for,  if  it 
were,  A  should,  by  the  antecedent  part  of  the  proposition, 
be  less  than  B,  w^hich  is  contrary  to  the  supposition  made. 
Nor  can  it  be  equal  to  b  ;  for,  in  that  case,  A  should  be 
equal  to  B^  also  contrary  to  supposition.  Since,  therefore, 
a  is  neither  less  than  nor  equal  to  ^,  it  remains  that  it  must 
be  greater  than  b: 

Now  let  a  and  A  be  variables  and  represent  the  ordinates 


156 


WILLOCK. 


[Act  II. 


to  two  curves,  mnr  and  MNB^  for  the  same  abscissa  ;  and 
let  h  and  B  be  constants  and  represent  their  intercepts  on 
the  Z-axis ;  i.e.  let  On  —  b,  and  ON  =  B. 


Does  not  this  diagram  fairly  represent  the  data  of  the 
proposition  ?  You  see,  when  we  take  a  negative  abscissa, 
so  as  to  make  a  greater  than  ^,  we  are  on  the  left-hand 
branch  of  the  curve,  and  A  is  also  greater  than  B ;  and 
again,  when  a  is  equal  to  h,  we  are  crossing  the  Z-axis, 
where  A  is  also  equal  to  B. 

Nie.  It  seems  fair  enough. 

Mln.  But  the  conclusion  does  not  follow  ?  With  a  posi- 
tive abscissa,  A  is  greater  than  B,  but  a  less  than  b. 

Nie.  We  cannot  deny  it. 

3Iin.  What  then  do  you  suppose  would  be  the  effect 
on  a  simple-minded  student  who  should  wrestle  with  this 
terrible  theorem,  firm  in  the  conviction  that,  being  in  a 
printed  book,  it  must  someJwiv  be  true  ? 

Nie.  [gravely)  Insomnia,  certainly ;  followed  by  acute 
Cephalalgia ;  and,  in  all  probability,  Epistaxis. 

Min.  Ah,  those  terrible  names!     AVho  would  suppose 


Sc.  VI.  §  3.]  INCOMMEXSURABLES.  157 

that  a  man  could  have  all  those  three  maladies,  and  sur- 
vive ?     And  yet  the  thing  is  possible  ! 

Let  me  now  read  you  a  statement  (at  p.  T12)  about 
incommensurables  : — 

'  When  one  of  the  magnitudes  can  be  represented  only 
by  an  interminable  decimal,  while  the  other  is  a  finite 
whole  number,  or  finite  decimal,  no  finite  common  sub- 
multiple  can  exist ;  for,  though  a  unit  be  selected  in  the 
last  place  of  the  whole  number  or  finite  decimal,  j^et  the 
decimal  represented  by  all  the  figures  which  follow  the 
corresponding  place  in  the  interminable  decimal,  being 
less  than  that  unit  in  that  place  and  unknown  in  quantity, 
cannot  be  a  common  measure  of  the  two  magnitudes,  and 
is  only  a  remainder.' 

Now  can  you  lay  your  hand  upon  your  heart  and  declare, 
on  the  word  of  an  honest  man,  that  you  understand  this 
sentence — beginning  at  the  words  '  yet  the  decimal '  ? 

N'le.  {j'ehemently)  I  cannot ! 

Min.  Of  the  two  reasons  which  are  mentioned,  to  ex- 
plain why  it  '  cannot  be  a  common  measure  of  the  two 
magnitudes,'  does  the  first — that  it  is  '  less  than  that  unit 
in  that  place  ' — carry  conviction  to  your  mind  ?  And 
does  the  second — that  it  is  'unknown  in  quantity'  ripen 
that  conviction  into  certainty  ? 

A^V.  [loildly)  Not  in  the  least ! 

Min.  Well,  I  will  not  'slay  the  slain'  any  longer. 
You  may  consider  Dr.  Willock's  book  as  rejected.  And 
I  think  we  may  say  that  the  whole  theory  of  'direction' 
has  collapsed  under  our  examination. 

A?"^.  I  greatly  fear  so. 


ACT    III 

Scene  I. 
§  I.   The  other  Modern  Rivals. 

'  But  mice,  and  rats,  and  such  small  deer, 
Have  been  Tom's  food  for  seven  long  year.' 

Min.  I  consider  the  question,  as  to  whether  Euclid's 
system  and  numeration  should  be  abandoned  or  retained^ 
to  be  now  set  at  rest :  the  subject  of  Parallels  being  dis- 
posed of,  no  minor  points  of  difference  can  possibly  justify 
the  abandonment  of  our  old  friend  in  favour  of  any  Modern 
E-ival.  Still  it  will  be  worth  while  to  examine  the  other 
writers,  whose  works  you  have  brought  with  you^  as  they 
may  furnish  some  valuable  suggestions  for  the  improve- 
ment of  Euclid's  Manual. 

Nie.  The  other  writers  are  Chauvenet,  Loomis,  Morell, 
Reynolds ,  and  Wright. 

3Iin.  There  are  a  few  matters,  as  to  which  we  may  con- 
sider them  all  at  once.  How  do  they  define  a  straight 
Line? 

Nie.  All  but  Mr.  Reynolds  define  it  as  the  shortest  dis- 
tance between  two  points,  or  more  accurately,  to  use  the 


OTHER    MODERN    RIVALS.  159 

words  of  Mr.  Chauvenet,  '  a  Line  of  which  every  portion  is 
the  shortest  Line  between  the  points  limiting  that  portion. 

Min.  We  discussed  that  Definition  in  M.  Legendre's 
book.     Plow  does  Mr.  Reynolds  define  it  ? 

N'le.  Not  at  all. 

Min.  Very  cautious.     What  of  angles  ? 

N'le.  Some  of  them  allow  larger  limits  than  Euclid  does. 
Mr.  Wn'srht  talks  about  '  ano-les  of  continuation '  and 
'angles  of  rotation.' 

Mill.  Good  for  Trigonometry :  not  so  suitable  to  early 
Geometry.     How  do  they  define  Parallels  ? 

Nie.  As  in  Euclid,  all  of  them. 

Min.  And  which  Proposition  of  Tab.  II.  do  they  assume? 

Nie.  Playfair's,  or  else  its  equivalent,  'only  one  Line  can 
be  drawn,  parallel  to  a  given  Line,  through  a  given  point 
outside  it.' 

Mill.  Now  let  us  take  them  one  bv  one. 


ACT    III 

Scene  I. 
§  2.     Chauvenet. 


Where  Washington  hath  left 
His  awful  memory 
A  light  for  after  times  ! ' 


Nie.  I  lay  before  you  ^A  Treatise  on  Meynentary  Geometry^ 
by  W.  Chauveket,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Mathematics  and 
Astronomy  in  Washington  University,  published  in  1876. 

Mill.  I  read  in  the  Preface  (p.  4)  '  I  have  endeavoured 
to  set  forth  the  elements  with  all  the  rigour  and  complete- 
ness demanded  by  the  present  state  of  the  general  science, 
without  seriously  dejoarting  from  the  established  order  of  the 
Projiositiom'  So  there  would  be  little  difficulty,  I  fancy, 
in  introducing  into  Euclid's  own  Manual  all  the  improve- 
ments which  Mr.  Chauvenet  can  sug-gest. 

P.  14.  Pr.  I,  and  p.  18.  Pr.  v,  taken  together,  tell  us 
that  only  one  perpendicular  can  be  drawn  to  a  Line  from  a 
point.  And  various  additions,  about  obliques,  are  made  in 
subsequent  Propositions.  All  these  may  well  be  embodied 
in  a  new  Proposition,  which  we  might  interpolate  as  Euc.  I. 
12.  B. 


CHAUVENET.  161 


P.  26.  Pr.  liv;  asserts  the  equidistance  of  Parallels.  This 
might  be  interpolated  as  Eue.  I.  34.  B. 

Another  new  Theorem,  that  angles  whose  sides  are 
parallel,  each  to  each^  are  equal  (which  I  observe  is  a  great 
favourite  with  the  Modern  Rivals),  seems  to  me  a  rather 
clumsy  and  uninteresting  extension  of  Euc.  I.  29. 

I  see  several  Propositions  which  might  well  be  inserted 
as  exercises  on  Euclid  (e.g.  Pr.  xxxix,  'Every  point  in 
the  bisector  of  an  angle  is  equally  distant  from  the  sides  '), 
but  which  are  hardly  of  sufficient  importance  to  be  in- 
cluded as  Propositions:  and  others  (e.g.  Pr.  XL,  'The  bi- 
sectors of  the  three  angles  of  a  Triangle  meet  in  the  same 
point)  which  seem  to  belong  more  properly  to  Euc.  Ill  or 
IV.  I  have  no  other  remarks  to  make  on  this  book,  which 
seems  well  and  clearly  written. 


ACT    III. 

Scene  I. 

§  3.      LOOMIS. 

•  Like— but  oh  !   how  different !  * 

Nie.  I  lay  before  you  "-Mements  of  Geometry^  by  Elias 
LooMis,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  and 
Astronomy  in  Yale  College^  a  revised  edition,  1876. 

Min.  I  read  in  the  Preface  (p.  10)  'The  present  volume 
follows  substantially  the  order  of  Blanchet's  Legendre, 
while  the  form  of  the  demonstrations  is  modeled  after 
the  more  logical  method  of  Euclid/  He  has  not,  however, 
adopted  the  method  of  infinite  series,  which  constitutes 
the  crucial  distinction  between  that  writer  and  Euclid. 

The  Propositions  are  pretty  nearly  in  Euclid's  order : 
with  a  few  changes  in  order  and  numeration,  the  book 
would  be  a  modernised  Euclid,  the  only  important  differ- 
ences being  the  adoption  of  Play  fair's  Axiom  and  the 
omission  of  the  diagonals  in  Euc.  II.  I  have  no  hostile 
criticisms  to  offer.  Our  American  cousins  set  us  an  ex- 
cellent example  in  the  art  of  brief,  and  yet  lucid,  mathe- 
matical writing. 


ACT    III 

Scene  I. 

§  4.       MORELL. 

'  Quis  custodiet  ipsos  custodes  ? 
Quis  inspiciet  ipsos  inspectores  ? ' 

Nie.    I    lay    before    you    'Euclid    Simplijied,    compiled 

from   the   most   important   French   loorhs,    ajojoroved   hy   the 

University  0/ Paris  and  the  Minister  of  Public  Instruction,' 

by  Mr.  J.  R.  Morell,  formerly  H.  M.  Inspector  of  Schools, 

published  in  1875. 

3Iin.  What  have  you  about  Lines,  to  begin  with  ? 

Nie.  Here  is  a  Definition.     '  The  place  where  two  sur- 
faces meet  is  called  a  Line.' 

3Iin.  Really !     Let  us  take  two   touching  spheres,  for 
instance  ? 

Nie.  Ahem  !    "We  abandon  the  Definition. 

Min.  Perhaps  we  shall  be  more  fortunate  with  the  Defi- 
nition of  a  straight  Line. 

Nie.  It  is   'an  indefinite  Line,   which  is  the   shortest 
between  any  two  of  its  points.' 

M  2 


164  MO R ELL.  [AcT  III. 

Mill.  An  '  indefinite '  Line  !  What  in  the  world  do  you 
mean?  Is  a  curved  Line  more  definite  than  a  straight 
Line? 

Nie.  I  don't  know. 

Min.  Nor  I.  The  rest  of  the  sentence  is  slio'htly  ellip- 
tical. Of  course  you  mean  'the  shortest  which  can  be 
drawn'? 

Nie.  (eagerly)  Yes,  yes  ! 

Min.  Well,  we  have  discussed  that  matter  already.  Go  on. 

Nie.  Next  we  have  an  Axiom,  '  that  from  one  point  to 
another  only  one  straight  Line  can  be  drawn,  and  that 
if  two  portions  of  a  straight  Line  coincide,  these  Lines 
coincide  throughout  their  whole  extent.' 

Min.  You  bewilder  me.  How  can  one  portion  of  a 
straight  Line  coincide  with  another? 

Nie.  [after  a  pause)  It  can't,  of  course,  in  situ  :  but  why 
not  take  up  one  portion  and  lay  it  on  another  ? 

3Iin.  By  all  means,  if  you  like.  Let  us  take  a  certain 
straight  Line,  cut  out  an  inch  of  it,  and  lay  it  along 
another  inch  of  the  Line.     What  follows  ? 

Nie.  Then  'these  Lines  coincide  throughout  their  whole 
extent.' 

3Iin.  Do  they  indeed  ?  And  pray  who  are  '  these  Lines '  ? 
The  two  inches? 

Nie.  [gloomily)  I  suppose  so. 

Min.  Then  the  Axiom  is  simple  tautology. 

Nie.  Well  then,  we  mean  ihe  whole  straight  Line  and — 
and — 

Min.  And  what  else ?  You  can't  talk  of  'one  straight 
Line '  as  '  these  Lines,^  you  know. 


Sc.  I.  §  4.]  PARALLELS.  1G5 

Nie.  We  abandon  the  Axiom. 

Min,  Better  luck  next  time !     Try  another  Definition. 

Nie.  'A  broken  Line  is  a  Line  composed  of  straight 
Lines.' 

Mill,  But  a  straight  Line  also  is  '  a  Line  composed  of 
straight  Lines,'  isn't  it? 

Nie.  Well,  we  abandon  the  Definition. 

Min.  This  is  quite  a  new  process  in  our  navigation. 
Instead  of  heaving  the  lead,  we  seem  to  be  throwing  over- 
board the  whole  of  our  cargo !  Let  us  hear  something 
about  Angles. 

Nie.  ^The  figure  formed  by  two  Lines  that  intersect 
is  called  an  Angle.' 

Min.  What  do  you  mean  by  'figure'?  Do  you  define 
it  anywhere  ? 

Nie.  Yes.  '  The  name  of  figure  is  given  to  volumes, 
surfaces,  and  lines.' 

Min.  Under  which  category  do  you  put  '  Angle  '? 

Nie.  I  don't  know. 

Min.  Anything  new  about  the  Definition,  or  equality, 
of  right  angles  ? 

Nie.  No,  except  that  we  prove  that  all  right  angles  are 
equal. 

Min.  That  we  have  discussed  already  (see  p.  57).  Let 
us   go  on  to  Pairs  of  Lines,  and  j^our  proof  of  Euc.   L 

NiEMAND  reach. 

'Th.  19.  Two  Lines  perpendicular  to  the  same  Line  are 
parallel.' 


166  MORELL.  [Act  III. 

Min.  Do  you  mean  '  separational' ? 

Nie.  Yes. 

Min.  Have  you  defined  '  parallel '  anywhere  ? 

Nie.  [after  a  search)  I  can't  find  it. 

Min.  A  careless  omission.  Moreover,  your  assertion 
isn't  always  true.  Suppose  your  two  Lines  were  drawn 
from  the  same  point  ? 

Nie.  We  beg*  to  correct  the  sentence.  'Two  different 
Lines.' 

Min.  Very  well.  Then  you  assert  Table  I.  6.  (See 
p.  29.)     I  grant  it. 

NiEMAND  reads. 

'  Th.  20.  Through  a  point  situated  outside  a  straight 
Line  a  Parallel,  and  only  one,  can  be  drawn  to  that 
Line.' 

Min.  ^A  Parallel,'  I  grant  at  once:  it  is  Table  I.  9. 
But  ^  oiili/  one^l  That  takes  us  into  Table  II.  What 
axiom  do  you  assume  ? 

Nie.  '  It  may  be  admitted  that  only  one  Parallel  can  be 
drawn  to  it.' 

Min.  That  is  Table  II.  15  (b) — a  contranominal  of 
Playfair's  Axiom.  We  need  not  pursue  the  subject :  all 
is  easy  after  that.  Now  hand  me  the  book,  if  you  please  : 
I  wish  to  make  a  general  survey  of  style,  &c. 

At  p.  4  I  read : — '  Two  Theorems  are  reciprocal  when  the 
hypothesis  and  the  conclusion  of  one  are  the  conclusion 
and  the  hypothesis  of  the  other.'  (They  are  usually  called 
'  converse ' — the  technicalj  not  the  logical^  converse,  as  was 
mentioned   some   time    ago  (p.  47) ;    but  let  that   pass.) 


Sc.  I.  §  4.]  GENERAL    SURVEY.  167 

'  Thus  the  Theorem — if  two  angles  are  right  angles^  they  are 
equal — has  for  its  reciprocal — if  tioo  angles  are  equals  they 
are  right  angles^ 

(This,  by  the  way,  is  a  capital  instance  of  the  distinction 
between  '  technical '  and  ' logical.'  Here  the  techn'wal  con- 
verse is  wild  nonsense,  while  the  logical  converse  is  of 
course  as  true  as  the  Theorem  itself:  it  is  ^ some  cases  of 
two  angles  being  equal  are  cases  of  their  being  right.') 

'  All  Propositions  are  direct,  reciprocal,  or  contrary — all 
so  closely  connected  that  either  of  the  two  latter'  ([ 
presume  he  means  '  the  latter  two ')  '  is  a  consequence  of 
the  other  two.' 

A  '  consequence ' !  Can  he  mean  a  logical  consequence  ? 
Would  he  let  us  make  a  syllogism  of  the  three,  using 
the  '  direct '  and  '  reciprocal '  (for  instance)  as  premisses, 
and  the  'contrary'  as  the  conclusion? 

However,  let  us  first  see  what  he  means  by  a  '  con- 
trary' Proposition. 

'It  is  a  direct  Proposition  to  prove  that  all  points  in 
a  circle  enjoy  a  certain  property,  e.g.  the  same  distance 
from  the  centre.' 

(This  notion  of  sentient  points,  by  the  way,  is  very 
charming.  I  like  to  think  of  all  the  points  in  a  circle 
really  feeling  a  placid  satisfaction  in  the  thought  that 
they  are  equidistant  from  the  centre !  They  are  infinite 
in  number,  and  so  can  well  afford  to  despise  the  arrogance 
of  a  point  within,  and  to  ignore  the  envious  murmurs  of 
a  point  without !) 

'The  contrary  Proposition  shows  that  all  points  taken 
outside  or  inside  the  figure  do  not  enjoy  this  property.' 


168  MORELL.  [AcT  III. 

So  tlien  this  is  his  trio  : — 

1.  Direct.  '  All  Z  are  Y! 

2.  Reciprocal.  'All  Fare  X' 

3.  Contrary.  '  All  not-Xare  not-T.' 

Here  of  course  No.  2  and  No.  3,  being  Contranominals, 
are  logically  deducible  from  each  other,  No.  i  liaving  no 
logical  connection  with  either  of  them. 

And  yet  he  calls  the  three  ^so  closely  connected  that 
either  of  the  two  latter  is  a  consequence  of  the  other  two ' ! 
Shade  of  Aldrich  !  Have  we  come  to  this  ?  You  say 
nothing,  mein  Herr? 

Nie.  I  say  that,  if  you  grant  what  you  call  the  'pre- 
misses,' you  cannot  deny  the  conclusion. 

Min.  True.  It  reminds  me  of  an  answer  given  some 
years  ago  in  the  Schools  at  Oxford,  when  the  Examiner 
asked  for  an  example  of  a  syllogism.  After  much  patient 
thought,  the  candidate  handed  in 

'  All  men  are  dogs ; 
All  dogs  are  men  : 
There/ore,  All  men  are  dogs.' 

This  certainly  has  the  form  of  a  syllogism.  Also  it 
avoids,  with  marked  success,  the  dangerous  fallacy  of  '  four 
terms.^  And  it  has  the  great  merit  of  Mr.  Morell's  syllo- 
gism, that,  if  you  grant  the  premisses,  you  cannot  deny 
the  conclusion.  Nevertheless  I  feel  bound  to  add  that 
it  was  not  commended  by  the  Examiner. 

Nie.  I  can  well  believe  it. 

Min.  I  proceed.  ^  The  direct  and  the  reciprocal  proofs 
are  generally  the  simpler,  and  do  not  require  a  fresh  con- 
struction.'    Why  '  fresh  '  ?     The  '  direct '  comes  frst,  ap- 


Sc.  I.  §  4.]  A    FALSE    ASSERTION.  169 

parently;  so  that,  if  it  requires  a  construction  at  all,  it 
must  be  a  '  fresh  '  one. 

Nie.  Be  not  hypercritical. 

3rm.  Wellj  it  is  rather  '  small  deer,'  I  confess :  let  us 
change  the  subject. 

Here  is  a  pretty  proof  in  Th.  4. 

'  Then  7n-\-o  =  m-\-  x. 
But  m  =  m. 
Therefore  0  —  x! 

Isn't  that  '  but  m  =  m '  a  delightfully  cautious  paren- 
thesis ?  Your  client  seems  to  be  nearly  as  much  at  home 
in  Algebra  as  in  Logic^  which  is  saying  a  great  deal ! 

At  p.  9,  I  read  '  The  base  of  an  isosceles  Triangle  is  the 
unequal  side.' 

'  The  unequal  side ' !  Is  an  equilateral  Triangle  isosceles, 
or  is  it  not  ?     Answer,  mein  Herr ! 

J^ie.  Proceed. 

Min.  At  p.  1 7,  I  read  ^  From  one  and  the  same  point 
three  equal  straight  Lines  cannot  be  drawn  to  another 
straight  Line  ;  for  if  that  were  the  case,  there  would  he  oti 
the  same  side  of  a  perjpendlcular  tioo  equal  ohliqiies,  which 
is  impossible.' 

Kindly  prove  the  italicised  assertion  on  this  diagram, 
in  which  I  assume  FB,  FC,  FE,  to  be  equal  Lines,  and 


170  MORELL.  [Act  III. 

have  made  the  middle  one  of  the  three  a  perpendicular  to 
the  '  other  straight  Line.' 

Nie.  {furiously)  I  will  not ! 

Min.  Look  at  p.  0^6.  ^A  circumference  is  general!}^ 
described  in  language  by  one  of  its  radii.'  Let  us  hope 
that  the  language  is  complimentary — at  least  if  the  cir- 
cumference is  within  hearing!  Can't  you  imagine  the 
radius  gracefully  rising  to  his  feet,  rubbing  his  lips  with 
his  table-napkin  ?  '  Gentlemen !  The  toast  I  have  the 
honour  to  propose  is  &c.  &c.  Gentlemen,  I  give  you  the 
Circumference ! '  And  then  the  chorus  of  excited  Lines, 
'  For  he's  a  jolly  good  felloe  ! ' 

Nie.  (rajjiturombj)  Ha,  ha!  (checking  himself)  You  are 
insulting  my  client. 

Min.  Only  filling  in  his  suggestive  outlines.  Try  p.  48. 
'Th.  13.  If  two  circumferences  are  interior,'  &c.  Can 
your  imagination,  or  mine,  grasp  the  idea  of  two  cir- 
cumferences, each  of  them  inside  the  other  ?  No !  We 
are  mere  prosaic  mortals :    it  is  beyond  us ! 

In  p.  49  I  see  some  strange  remarks  about  ratios.  First 
look  at  Def.  44.  '  When  a  magnitude  is  contained  an 
exact  number  of  times  in  two  magnitudes  of  its  kind,  it  is 
said  to  be  their  common  measure.'  (The  wording  is  awkward, 
and  suggests  the  idea  of  their  having  only  one  '  common 
measure'';  but  let  that  pass.)  '  The  ratio  of  two  magnitudes 
of  the  same  kind  is  the  number  which  would  express  the 
measure  of  the  first,  if  the  second  were  taken  as  unity.' 

'  The  measure  of  the  first ' !  Do  you  understand  that  ? 
Is  it  a  'measure'  such  as  you  have  just  defined?  or  some 
other  kind  ? 


Sc.  I.  §  4.]  COMMON    MEASURES.  171 

Nie.  Some  other  kind,  I  think.  But  there  is  a  slight 
obscurity  somewhere. 

Min.  Perhaps  this  next  enunciation  will  clear  it  up.  '  If 
two  magnitudes  of  the  same  kind,  A  and  B,  are  mutually 
commensurable '  (by  the  way,  '  mutually '  is  tautology), 
'  their  ratio  is  a  whole  or  fractional  number,  which  is 
obtained  by  dividing  the  two  numbers  one  by  the  other, 
and  which  expresses  how  many  times  these  magnitudes 
contain  their  common  measure  M!  Do  you  understand 
thaf^. 

Nie.  Well,  no ! 

Min.  Let  us  take  an  instance — ^3  and  los.  A  shilling 
is  a  common  measure  of  these  two  sums :  will  you  accept  it 
as  '  their  common  measure '  ? 

Nie.  We  will  do  it,  provisionally. 

Min.  Now  the  number,  '  obtained  by  dividing  the  two 
numbers'  (I  presume  you  mean  Hhe  two  magnitudes') 
^one  by  the  other,'  is  '  6,'  is  it  not? 

Nie.  It  would  seem  so. 

Min.  Well,  does  this  number  '  express  how  many  times 
these  magnitudes  contain  their  common  measure,'  viz.  a 
shilling  ? 

Nie.  Hardly. 

Min.  Did  you  ever  meet  with  any  one  number  that  could 
'  express  '  two  distinct  facts  ? 

Nie.  We  would  rather  change  the  subject. 

Min.  Very  well,  though  there  is  plenty  more  about  it, 
and  the  obscurity  deepens  as  you  go  on.  We  will  '  vary 
the  verse '  with  a  little  bit  of  classical  criticism.  Look 
at  p.   81.   ^Homologous,   from  the  Greek  ofio'Los,  like  or 


172  MORELL.  [Act  III. 

similar,  \6yos,  word  or  reason.'  Do  you  think  this  school- 
inspector  ever  heard  of  the  great  Church  controversy, 
where  all  turned  on  the  difference  between  ojuo?  and  ojuoios? 

Nie.  (tmeasily)  I  think  not.  But  this  is  not  a  mathe- 
matical slip,  you  know. 

Min.  You  are  right.  Revenons  a  nos  moiitons.  Turn  to 
p.  145,  art.  6^.  *To  measure  areas,  it  is  usual  to  take  a 
square  as  unity.'  To  me,  who  have  always  been  accus- 
tomed to  regard  '  a  square '  as  a  concrete  magnitude  and 
'unity'  as  a  pure  number,  the  assertion  comes  rather  as 
a  shock.  But  I  acquit  the  author  of  any  intentional  rough- 
ness. Nothing  could  surpass  the  delicacy  of  the  next  few 
words  : — '  It  has  been  already  stated  that  surfaces  are 
measured  indirectly'  !  Lines,  of  course,  may  be  measured 
anyhow  :  they  have  no  sensibilities  to  wound  :  but  there  is 
an  open-handedness — a  breadth  of  feeling — about  a  surface, 
which  tells  of  noble  birth — '  every  (square)  inch  a  King  !  ' 
— and  so  we  measure  it  with  averted  eyes,  and  whisper  its 
area  with  bated  breath  ! 

'N'le.  Beturn  to  other  muttons. 

Mm.  Well,  take  p.  156.  Here  is  a  'scholium'  on  a 
theorem  about  the  area  of  a  sector  of  a  circle.  The 
'  scholium  '  begins  thus  : — '  If  a  is  the  number  of  degrees 
in  the  arc  of  a  sector,  we  shall  have  to  find  the  length 

of  this  arc .'     I  pause  to  ask  '  If  /3  were  the  number, 

should  we  have  to  find  it  then  ?  ' 

Nie.  {^solemnly)  We  should  ! 

Mln,  '  For  the  two  Lines  which  are  multiplied  in  all 
rules  for  the  measuring  of  areas  must  be  referred  to  the 
same  linear  unity.'     That^  I  take  it,  is  fairly  obscure  :  but 


Sc.  I.  §  4.]  A  LOGICAL  FIASCO.  173 

it  is  luminous  when  compared  with  the  note  which  follows 
it.  '  If  the  linear  unit  and  angular  unit  are  left  arbitrary, 
any  angle  has  for  measure  the  ratio  of  the  numbers  of 
linear  units  contained  in  the  arcs  which  the  angle  in  ques- 
tion and  the  irregular  unit  intercept  in  any  circumference 
described  from  their  summit  as  common  centres.'  Is  not 
that  a  useful  note  ?  '  The  irregular  unit ' !  Linear,  or 
angular,  I  wonder  ?  And  then  '  common  centres  ' !  How 
many  centres  does  a  circumference  usually  require  ?  I  will 
only  trouble  you  with  one  more  extract,  as  a  hoiwe  louche 
to  wind  up  with. 

'  Th.  9.  (P.  126.)  Everi/  convex  closed  Line  ABCD  enve- 
loj)ed  hy  any  other  closed  Line  PQRST  is  less  than  it. 


'AH  the  infinite  Lines  ABCD,  PQRST,  &c.' by  the 

way,  these  are  curious  instances  of  '  infinite  Lines '  ? 

Nie.  {hastily)  We  mean  'infinite'  in  numher^  not  in 
kmgth. 

Min.  Well,   you   express   yourself  oddly,   at   any   rate 

' which  enclose  the  plane  surface  ABCD,  cannot  be 

equal.  For  drawing  the  straight  Line  MBj  which  does 
not  cut  ABCD,  MB  will  be  less  than  MPqB ;  and  adding 


174  MORELL.  [Act  III.  Sc.  I.  §  4. 

to  both  members  tbe  part  MTSRQI),  the  result  will  be 
MBQRSTM  less  than  MPQRSm:   Is  that  result  proved? 

Nie.  No. 

Min,  Is  it  true  ? 

iVe^.  Not  necessarily  so. 

Min.  Perhaps  it  is  a  lapsus  jpennce.     Try  to  amend  it. 


Nie,  If  we  add  to  MB  the  part  MTSRQD,  we  do  get 
MBQRSTM,  it  is  true:  but,  if  we  add  it  to  MPQI),  we 
get  QB  twice  over;  that  is,  we  get  MPQRST3I  together 
with  twice  QB. 

Miti.  How  does  that  addition  suit  the  rest  of  the  proof? 

Nie.  It  ruins  it :  all  depends  on  our  proving  the  peri- 
meter 3IBQRSTM  less  than  the  perimeter  MPQRSTM, 
which  this  method  has  failed  to  do — as  of  course  all 
methods  must,  the  thing  not  being  capable  of  proof. 

Min.  Then  the  whole  proof  breaks  down  entirely  ? 

Nie.  We  cannot  deny  it. 

Min.  Let  us  turn  to  the  next  author. 


ACT   III. 

Scene  I. 
§  5.   Reynolds. 

'  Though  this  be  madness,  jet  there 's  method  in 't.' 

Nie.  I  lay  before  you  '  Modern  Methods  i?i  Elementary 
Geometry^  by  E.  M.  Reynolds,  M.A.,  Mathematical  Master 
in  Clifton  College,  Modern  Side;  published  in  1868. 

Mm.  The  first  remark  I  have  to  make  on  it  is,  that  the 
Definitions  and  Axioms  are  scattered  through  the  book, 
instead  of  being  placed  together  at  the  beginning,  and  that 
there  is  no  index  to  them,,  so  that  the  reader  only  comes  on 
them  by  chance :  it  is  quite  impossible  to  refer  to  them. 

l^ie.  I  cannot  defend  the  innovation. 

Min.  In  Th.  i  (p.  3),  I  read  '  the  angles  CBA,  CJDB 
are  together  equal  to  two  right  angles.  For  they  fill  ex- 
actly the  same  sjoace.^  Do  you  mean  finite  or  infinite  space  ? 
If  '  finite,'  we  increase  the  angle  by  lengthening  its  sides  : 
if  '  infinite,'  the  idea  is  unsuited  for  elementary  teaching. 
You  had  better  abandon  the  idea  of  an  angle  'filling 
space,'  which  is  no  improvement  on  Euclid's  method. 


176  REYNOLDS.  [AcT  III.  Sc.  I.  §  5. 

P.  61.  Th.  IT  (of  Book  III)  it  is  stated  that  Paral- 
lelograms, on  equal  bases  and  between  the  same  Parallels, 
'  may  always  be  placed  so  that  their  equal  bases  coincide^' 
and  it  is  clearly  assumed  that  they  will  still  be  '  between 
the  same  Parallels.'  And  ag-ain,  in  p.  6^^^  the  altitude  of  a 
Parallelogram  is  defined  as  *  the  perpendicular  distance  of 
the  opposite  side  from  the  base,'  clearly  assuming  that 
there  is  only  one  such  distance.  In  both  these  passages 
the  Theorem  is  assumed  '  Parallels  are  equidistant  from  each 
other/  of  which  no  proof  has  been  given,  though  of  course 
it  might  have  been  easily  deduced  from  Th.  xvi  (p.  19). 

The  Theorems  in  Euc.  II  are  here  proved  algebraically, 
which  I  hold  to  be  emphatically  a  change  for  the  worse, 
chiefly  because  it  brings  in  the  difficult  subject  of  incom- 
mensurable magnitudes,  which  should  certainly  be  avoided 
in  a  book  meant  for  beginners. 

I  have  little  else  to  remark  on  in  this  book.  Several  of 
the  new  Theorems  in  it  seem  to  me  to  be  premature,  e.  g. 
Th.  XIX,  &c.  on  '  Loci ' :  but  the  sins  of  omission  are  more 
serious.  He  actually  leaves  out  Euc.  I.  7,  17,  21  (2nd 
part),  24,  25,  26  (2nd  part),  48,  and  II.  I,  2,  3,  8,  9,  10,  12, 
13.  Moreover  he  separates  Problems  and  Theorems,  which 
I  hold  to  be  a  mistake.  I  will  not  trouble  you  with  any 
further  remarks. 


ACT    III. 

Scene  I. 
§  6.   Weight. 

'  Defects  of  execution  unquestionably  exist.' 

Wright,  Pr^f.  p.  lo 

^le.  I  lay  before  you  '  The  Elements  of  Plane  Geometrij^ 
l)y  E.  P.  Wright,  Teacher  of  Mathematics  in  University 
College  School,  London;    the  second  edition,  1871. 

Min.  Some  of  the  changes  in  Euclid's  method,  made  in 
this  book,  are  defended  in  the  Preface. 

First,  he  claims  credit  for  having  more  Axioms  than 
Euclid,  whom  he  blames  for  having  demonstrated  'much 
that  is  obvious.'  I  need  hardly  pause  to  remind  you  that 
'  obviousness '  is  not  an  invariable  property :  to  a  perfect 
intellect  the  whole  of  Euclid,  to  the  end  of  Book  XII, 
would  be  ^obvious'  as  soon  as  the  Definitions  had  been 
mastered :  but  Geometricians  must  write  for  imjjerfect  in- 
tellects, and  it  cannot  be  settled  on  general  principles  where 
Axioms  should  end  and  Theorems  begin.  Let  us  look  at 
a  few  of  these  new  Axioms.     In  p.  viii  of  the  Prefiice,  I 

N 


178  WRIGHT.  [Act  III. 

read  ^with  the  conception  of  straiglitness  in  a  Line  we 
naturally  associate  that  of  the  utmost  possible  shortness 
of  path  between  any  two  of  its  points;  allow  this  to  be 
assumed,  &c.'  This  I  consider  a  most  objectionable  Axiom, 
obliging"  us,  as  it  does_,  to  contemplate  the  lengths  of  curved 
lines.  This  matter  I  have  already  discussed  with  M. 
Legendre  (p.  56). 

Secondly^  for  the  host  of  new  Axioms  with  which  we 
are  threatened  in  the  Preface,  I  have  searched  the  book  in 
vain :  possibly  I  have  overlooked  some,  as  he  never  uses 
the  heading  '  Axiom,'  but  really  I  can  only  find  one  new 
one,  at  p.  5.  'Every  angle  has  one,  and  only  one  bisector,' 
which  is  hardly  worth  stating.  Perhaps  the  writer  means 
that  his  proofs  are  not  so  full  as  those  in  Euclid,  but  take 
more  for  granted.  I  do  not  think  this  any  improvement 
in  a  book  meant  for  beginners. 

Another  change,  claimed  in  the  Preface  as  an  improve- 
ment, is  the  more  constant  use  of  superposition.  I  have 
considered  that  point  already  (p.  47)  and  have  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  Euclid's  method  of  constructing  a  new 
figure  has  all  the  advantages,  without  the  obscurity,  of  the 
method  of  superposition. 

I  see  little  to  remark  on  in  the  general  style  of  the  book. 
At  p.  2 1  I  read  ^  the  straight  Line  Al  satisfies  the  four  fol- 
lowing conditions  :  it  passes  through  the  vertex  A^  through 
the  middle  point  I  of  the  base,  is  a  perpendicular  on  that 
base,  and  is  the  bisector  of  the  vertical  angle.  Now,  two 
of  these  four  conditions  suffice  to  determine  the  straight 
Line  Al^  .  .  .  Hence  a  straight  Line  fulfilling  any  two  of 
these  four  conditions  necessarily  fulfils  the  other  two.'     All 


Sc.  I.  §  6.]  GENERAL    SURVEY.  179 

this  is  strangely  inaccurate  :  the  fourth  condition  is  suffi- 
cient by  itself  to  determine  the  line  AI. 

At  p.  40  I  notice  the  startling  announcement  that  '  the 
simplest  of  all  Polygons  is  the  Triangle ' !  This  is  surely  a 
new  use  for  '  many  '  ?  I  wonder  if  the  writer  is  prepared 
to  accept  the  statement  that  '  many  people  have  swum  across 
the  Bosphorus '  on  the  strength  of  Byron's 

*As  once  (a  feat  on  which  ourselves  we  prided) 
Leander,  Mr.  Ekenhead,  and  I  did.' 

As  a  specimen  of  the  wordy  and  unscientific  style  of  the 
writer,  take  the  following : — 

^  From  any  i-ioint  0,  one^  and  only  one ^  iwrpendicular  can  he 
draicn  to  a  given  straight  Line  AB. 


'  Let  Cf  be  the  point  on  which  0  would  fall  if,  the  paper 
being  folded  along  AB^  the  upper  portion  of  the  figure  were 
turned  down  upon  the  lower  portion.  If  from  the  points 
0,  Of  straight  Lines  be  drawn  to  any  point  w^hatever  /  on 
the  line  AB^  the  adjacent  angles  OIB^  (JIB  will  be  equal ; 
for  folding  the  paper  again  along  AB  and  turning  the 
upper  portion  down  upon  the  lower,  0  falls  on  (/,  I  remains 
fixed,  and  the  angle  OIB  exactly  coincides  with  (JIB. 
Now  in  order  that  the  Line  01  may  be  perpendicular  to 
AB^  or,  in  other  words,  that  OIB  may  be  a  right  angle^ 

N  2 


180  WRIGHT.  [Act  III.  Sc.  I.  §  6. 

the  sum  of  the  two  adjacent  angles  OIB^  C/IB  must  be 
equal  to  two  right  angles,  and  consequently  their  sides 
JO,  I(y  in  the  same  straight  Line.  But  since  we  can  always 
draw  one,  and  only  one,  straight  Line  between  two  points 

0  and  0\  it  follows  that  from  a  point  0  we  can  always 
draw  one,  and  only  one,  perpendicular  to  the  line  AB.^ 

Do  you  think  you  could  make  a  more  awkward  or  more 
obscure  proof  of  this  almost  axiomatic  Theorem  ? 

Nie.  {cautiously)  I  would  not  undertake  it. 

Min.  All  that  about  folding  and  re-folding  the  paper  is 
more  like  a  child's  book  of  puzzles  than  a  scientific  treatise. 

1  should  be  very  sorry  to  be  the  school-boy  who  is  expected 
to  learn  this  precious  demonstration  1  In  such  a  case,  I 
could  not  better  express  my  feelings  than  by  quoting  three 
words  of  this  very  Theorem  : — '7  remains  fixed^  ! 

In  conclusion,  I  may  say  as  to  all  five  of  these  authors,, 
that  they  do  not  seem  to  me  to  contain  any  desirable 
novelty  w^hich  could  not  easily  be  introduced  into  an 
amended  edition  of  Euclid. 

Nie.  It  is  a  position  I  cannot  dispute. 


ACT   III. 

Scene  II. 

§  I.  Syllabus  of  the  Association  for  the 
Improvement  of  Geometrical  Teaching.     1878. 

'  Nos  nuniems  sumus.' 

Nie.  The  last  book  to  be  examined  is  Mr.  Wilson's  nev/ 
Manual,  founded  on  the  Syllabus  of  the  Geometrical  Asso- 
ciation. 

M'ui.  We  had  better  begin  by  examining  the  Syllabus 
itself.  I  own  that  I  could  have  wished  to  do  this  in  the 
presence  of  some  member  of  the  Committee,  who  might 
have  supplied  a  few  details  for  what  is  at  present  little 
more  than  a  skeleton,  but  that  I  fear  is  out  of  the 
question. 

Nie.  Nay,  you  shall  not  have  far  to  seek.  /  am  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Committee. 

Mln.  {astonished)  You  !  A  German  professor  !  No  such 
member  is  included  in  the  final  list  of  the  Committee^  which 
a  friend  showed  me  the  other  day. 


182  SYLLABUS.  [Act  III. 

Nie.  The  final  list,  was  it  ?  Well,  ask  your  friend  whe- 
ther, since  the  drawing-  up  of  that  list,  any  addition  has 
been  made  :  he  will  say  '  Nobody  has  been  added.' 

Min.  Quite  so. 

Nie.  You  do  not  understand.  Nohocly — Nlemand — see 
you  not  ? 

Min.  What  ?     You  mean — 

Nie.  (solemnly)  I  do,  my  friend.  /  have  been  added 
to  it! 

Min.  (hoiving)  The  Committee  are  highly  honoured,  I 
am  sure. 

Nie.  So  they  ought  to  be,  considering  that  I  am  a  more 
distinguished  mathematician  than  Newton  himself,  and 
that  my  Manual  is  better  known  than  Euclid's  !  Excuse 
my  self-glorification,  but  any  moralist  will  tell  you  that 
I — I  alone  among  men — ought  to  praise  myself. 

Min.  (thou ghtf idly)  True,  true.  But  all  this  is  word- 
juggling — a  most  misleading  analogy.  However,  as  you 
now  appear  in  a  new  character,  you  must  at  least  have 
a  new  name ! 

Nie.  (proudly)  Call  me  Nostradamus  ! 

\_Even  as  he  utters  the  mystic  name^  the  air  groics  dense 
around  him,  and  gradually  crystallizes  into  living  forms. 
Enter  a  phantasmic  p'ocession,  groujjed  about  a  banner,  on 
which  is  emblazoned  in  letters  of  gold  the  title  '  Association 
FOR  THE  Improvement  of  Things  in  General.'  Foremost 
in  the  line  marches  Nero,  carrying  his  unfinished  ^  Scheme  for 
lighting  and  warming  Borne  ^;  while  among  the  crowd  which 
follow  him  ?nay  be  noticed — Guy  Fawkes,  President  of  the 
'  Association  for  raising  the  position  of  Members  of  Farlia- 


Sc,  11.  §  I.]  TREATMENT    OF    LINE.  183 

menV — the  Marchioness  de  Brinvilliers,  Inventress  of 
the  ^Aj)iMcation  of  Alteratives  to  the  Digedive  Faculty/' — 
and  the  Rev.  F.  Gustrell  {the  being  tvho  cut  cloivn  Shak- 
Sjoeare's  mulberry-tree),  leader  of  the  ^  Association  for  the 
Hefinement  of  Literary  Tasted  Afterwards  enter ^  on  the  other 
side,  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  little  dog  ^Diamond/  carrying  in 
his  mouth  a  half-burnt  roll  of  manuscript.  He  pointedly 
avoids  the  procession  and  the  banner,  and  marches  yast  alone, 
serene  in  the  consciousness  that  he,  single-pawed,  conceived 
and  carried  out  his  great  ^  Scheme  for  throwing  fresh  light  on 
Mathematical  Research,^  without  the  aid  of  any  Association 
whatever.'] 

Min.  Nostra,  the  plural  of  nostrum,  'a  quack  remedy'; 
and  damns,  '  we  give.'     It  is  a  sug-gestive  name. 

Nos.  And,  trust  me,  it  is  a  suggestive  book  that  I  now 
lay  before  you.     '  Syllabus — '. 

Min.  {interrupting)  You  mean  '  a  Syllabus  \  or  '  the 
Syllabus'? 

Nos.  No,  no  !  In  this  railroad-age,  we  have  no  time 
for  superfluous  words  !  '  Syllabus  of  Tlane  Geometry,  pre- 
pared by  the  Association  for  the  Impirovement  of  Geometrical 
Teaching^    Fourth  Edition,  1877. 

Min.  How  do  you  define  a  Right  Line? 

Nostradamus  reads. 

P.  7.  Def.  5.  '  A  straight  line  is  such  that  any  part  will, 
however  placed,  lie  wholly  on  any  other  part,  if  its  ex- 
tremities are  made  to  fall  on  that  other  part.' 

Mm.  That  looks  more  like  a  piroperty  of  a  Right  Line 
than  its  essence.  Euclid  makes  an  Axiom  of  that  property. 
Of  course  you  omit  his  Axiom  ? 


184  SYLLABUS.  [Act  III. 

Nos.  No.  We  have  the  Axiom  (p.  lo,  Ax.  i)  '  Two 
straight  lines  that  have  two  points  in  common  lie  wholly 
in  the  same  straight  line.' 

Min,  Well !  That  is  certainly  the  strangest  Axiom  I 
ever  heard  of!  The  idea  of  asserting,  as  an  Axiom,  that 
Right  Lines  answer  to  their  Definition ! 

Nos.  {bashfully)  Well,  you  see  there  were  several  of  us 
at  work  drawing  up  this  Syllabus :  and  we  \e  got  it  a 
little  mixed :  we  don't  quite  know  which  are  Definitions 
and  which  are  Axioms. 

Mm.  So  it  appears :  not  that  it  matters  much :  the 
practical  test  is  the  only  thing  of  importance.  Do  you 
adopt  Euc.  I.  14  ? 

Nos.  Yes. 

Mm.  Then  w^e  may  go  on  to  the  next  subject.  Be  good 
enough  to  define  '  Angle.' 

Nostradamus  reads, 

P.  8.  Def.  II.  '  When  two  straight  lines  are  drawn  from 
the  same  point,  they  are  said  to  contain,  or  to  make  with 
each  other,  2i  plane  angled 

Min.  Humph  !  You  are  very  particular  about  drawing 
themy)'o;w  a  point.  Suppose  they  were  drawn  to  the  same 
point,  what  would  they  make  then? 

Nos.  An  angle,  undoubtedly. 

Min.  Then  why  omit  that  case  ?  However,  it  matters 
little.  You  say  '  a  plane  angle/  I  observe.  You  limit  an 
angle,  then,  to  a  magnitude  less  than  the  sum  of  two 
right  angles. 

Nos.  No,  I  can't  say  we  do.     A  little  further  down  w^e 


Sc.  II.  §  I.]  TREATMENT    OF    ANGLE.  185 

assert  that  '  two  angles  are  formed  by  two  straight  lines 
drawn  from  a  point.' 

Min.  Why,  these  are  like  FalstaflPs  '  rogues  in  buckram 
suits ' !     Are  there  more  coming  ? 

Nos.  No,  we  do  not  go  beyond  the  sum  of  four  right 
angles.  These  two  we  call  conjugate  angles.  '  The  greater 
of  the  two  is  called  the  major  conjtigate^  and  the  smaller  the 
minor  conjugate,  angle.' 

Min.  These  Definitions  are  wondrous  !  This  is  the  first 
time  I  ever  heard  '  major  '  and  '  minor '  defined.  One  feels 
inclined  to  say,  like  that  Judge  in  the  story,  when  a 
certain  barrister,  talking  against  time,,  insisted  on  quoting 
authorities  for  the  most  elementary  principles  of  law, 
^  Really^  brother,  there  are  some  things  the  Court  may  be 
assumed  to  know  ! ''     Any  more  definitions  ? 

Nos.  We  define  '  a  straight  angle.' 

Min.  That  I  have  discussed  already  (see  p.  102). 

Nos.  But  tliis^  I  think,  is  new  : — 

^eads. 

P.  9.  Def  12.  'When  three  straight  Lines  are  drawn 
from  a  point,  if  one  of  them  be  regarded  as  lying  between 
the  other  two,  the  angles  which  this  one  (the  mean)  makes 
with  the  other  two  (the  extremes)  are  said  to  be  adjacent 
angles.' 

Min.  That  is  new  indeed.     Let  us  try  a  figure  : — 

A 

B 


186  SYLLABUS.  [Act  III. 

Now  let  us  regard  OA  '  as  lying  between  the  other  two.' 
Which  are  Hlie  angles  which  it  makes  with  the  other  two'? 
For  this  line  OA  (which  you  rig]itly  call  '  the  mean  ' — 
lying  is  always  mean)  makes,  be  pleased  to  observe,  four 
angles  altogether — two  with  OB,  and  two  with  OC. 

Nos.  I  cannot  answer  your  question.     You  confuse  me. 

Mm.  I  need  not  have  troubled  you.  I  see  that  I  can 
obtain  an  answer  from  the  Syllabus  itself.  It  says  (at 
the  end  of  Def.  ii)  'when  the  angle  contained  hy  two  lines 
is  spoken  of  without  qualification,  the  minor  conjugate  angle 
is  to  be  understood.'  Here  we  have  a  case  in  point,  as 
these  angles  are  spoken  of  '  without  qualification.'  So  that 
the  angles  alluded  to  are  both  of  them  ^  minor  conjugate  ' 
angles,  and  lie  on  the  same  side  of  OA.  And  these  we  are 
told  to  call  ^  adjacent  ^  angles  ! 

How  do  you  define  a  Right  Angle  ? 

Nos.  As  in  Euclid. 

Min.  Let  me  hear  it,  if  you  please.  You  know  Euclid 
has  no  major  or  minor  conjugate  angles. 

Nostradamus  reads. 

P.  9.  Def.  14.  'When  one  straight  line  stands  upon 
another  straight  line  and  makes  the  adjacent  angles  equal, 
each  of  the  angles  is  called  a  right  angled 

Min.  Allow  me  to  present  you  with  a  figure,  as  I  see  the 
Syllabus  does  not  supply  one. 

A 
B 

c 

Here  AB  ^  stands  upon '  BC  and  makes  the  adjacent  angles 
equal.     How  do  you  like  these  '  right  angles '  ? 


Sc.  II.  §  I.]  PARALLELS.  187 

Nos,  Not  at  all. 

Min.  These  same  ^  conjugate  angles '  will  get  you  into 
many  difficulties. 

Have  you  Euclid's  Axiom  '  all  right  angles  are  equal '  ? 

Nos.  Yes ;    only  we  propose  to  prove  it  as  a  Theorem. 

Min.  I  have  no  objection  to  that :  nor  do  I  think  that 
your  treatment  of  angles,  as  a  whole,  is  actually  illogical. 
What  I  chiefly  object  to  is  the  general  '  slipshoddity  '  (if  I 
may  coin  a  word)  of  the  language  of  your  Syllabus. 

Does  your  proof  of  Euc.  I.  32  differ  from  his? 

Nas.  No,  except  that  we  propose  Playfair's  Axiom^ '  two 
straight  Lines  that  intersect  one  another  cannot  both  be 
parallel  to  the  same  straight  Line,'  as  a  substitute  for 
Euc.  Ax.  12. 

Min.  Is  this  your  only  test  for  the  meeting  of  two  Lines, 
or  do  you  provide  any  other  ? 

N08.  This  is  the  only  one. 

Min,  But  there  are  cases  where  this  is  of  no  use.  For 
instance,  if  you  wish  to  make  a  Triangle,  having,  as  data, 
a  side  and  the  two  adjacent  angles.  Have  you  such  a 
Problem  ? 

Nos.  Yes,  it  is  Pr.  10,  at  p.  19. 

Min.  And  how  do  you  prove  that  the  Lines  will  meet  ? 

Nos.  [smiling)  We  donH  prove  it :  that  is  the  reader's 
business  :  we  only  provide  enunciations. 

Min.  You  are  like  the  goicrmand  who  would  eat  so  many 
oysters  at  supper  that  at  last  his  friend  could  not  help 
saying  '  They  are  sure  to  disagree  with  you  in  the  nig^ht." 
'That  is  .their  affair,'  the  ather  gaily  replied.  'I  shall  be 
asleep  ! ' 


SYLLABUS. 


[Act  III. 


YoLii-  Syllabus  has  the  same  hiatus  as  the  other  writers 
who  have  rejected  Euclid's  13th  Axiom.     If  you  will  not 
have  it  as  an  Axiom,  you  ought  to  prove 
it  as  a  Theorem.     Your  treatise  is  incom- 
plete without  it. 

The  Theorems  contained  in  the  first  26 

Propositions  of  Euclid  are  thus  rearranged 

in  the  Syllabus.     The  only  advantage  that 

I  can  see  in  the  new  arrangement  is  that 

it   places   first  the  three  which  relate   to 

Lines,  thus  getting  all  those  which  relate 

to  Triangles  into  a  consecutive  series.     All 

the  other  changes  seem  to  be  for  the  worse, 

and   specially  the   separation  of  Theorems 

from  their  converses,  e.g.  Props.  5,  6,  and 

24,  25. 

The  third  part  of  Prop.  29  is  put  after  Prop.  32  :  and 

Props.   '7^'>^,  34  are  transposed.     I  can   see  no  reason    for 

either  change. 

Prop.  47  is  put  next  before  Prop.  12  in  Book  II.  This 
would  be  a  good  arrangement  (if  it  were  ever  proved  to 
be  worth  while  to  abandon  Euclid's  order),  as  the  Theorems 
are  so  similar;  and  the  placing  Prop.  48  next  after  II.  13 
is  a  necessary  result. 

In  Book  II,  Props.  9,  10  are  placed  after  Props.  \2,  13. 
I  see  no  reason  for  it. 

It  does  not  appear  to  me  that  the  new  arrangements, 
for  the  sake  of  which  it  is  proposed  to  abandon  the  numer- 
ation of  Euclid,  have  anything  worth  mentioning  to  offer 
as  an  advantage. 


Sc.  II.  §  I.]  RULE  OF  CONVERSION.  189 

I  will  now  g-o  through  a  few  pages  of  '^this  many-headed 
monster,'  and  make  some  general  remarks  on  its  style. 

P.  4.  'A  Theorem  is  the  formal  statement  of  a  Proposi- 
tion that  may  be  demonstrated  from  known  Propositions. 
These  known  Propositions  may  themselves  be  Theorems  or 
Axioms.' 

This  is  a  truly  delightful  jumble.  Clearly,  '  a  Propo- 
sition that  may  be  demonstrated  from  known  Propositions  ' 
is  itself  a  Theorem.  Hence  a  Theorem  is  '  the  formal 
statement '  of  a  Theorem.  The  question  now  arises — of 
itself,  or  of  some  other  Theorem?  That  a  Theorem 
should  be  ^  the  formal  statement '  of  itself.^  has  a  com- 
fortable domestic  sound,  something  like  '  every  man  his 
own  washerwoman/  but  at  the  same  time  it  involves  a 
fearful  metaphysical  subtlety.  That  one  Theorem  should 
be  '  the  formal  statement '  of  another  Theorem,  is,  I  think, 
degrading  to  the  former,  unless  the  second  will  consent  to 
act  on  the  '  claw  me,  claw  thee '  principle,  and  to  be  '  the 
formal  statement '  of  the  first. 

Nos.  You  bewilder  me. 

Min.  Perhaps,  however,  it  is  intended  that  the  teacher 
who  uses  this  Manual  should,  on  reaching  the  words  'a 
Proposition  that  may  be  demonstrated,'  recognise  the  fact 
that  this  is  itself  '  a  Theorem,'  and  at  once  go  back  to  the 
beginning  of  the  sentence.  He  will  thus  obtain  a  Defi- 
nition closely  resembling  a  Continued  Fraction,  and  may 
go  on  repeating,  as  long  as  his  breath  holds  out,  or  until 
his  pupil  declares  himself  satisfied,  '  a  Theorem  is  the 
formal  statement  of  the  formal  statement  of  the  formal 
statement  of  the ' 


190  SYLLABUS.  [Act  III. 

Nos.  (w\lclly)  Say  no  more  !     My  brain  reels  ! 

Min.  I  spare  yon.  Let  us  go  on  to  p.  5,  where  I  find 
the  following" : — 

^  Rule  of  Conversion.  If  of  the  hypotheses  of  a  group 
of  demonstrated  Theorems  it  can  be  said  that  one  must 
be  true,  and  of  the  conclusions  that  no  two  can  be  true 
at  the  same  time,  then  the  converse  of  every  Theorem  of 
the  group  will  necessarily  be  true.' 

Let  us  take  an  instance : — 

If  5  >  4,  then  S>?,- 
If  5  <  2,  then  5  <  3. 

Those  will  do  for  '  demonstrated  Theorems,'  I  suppose  ? 

Nos.  I  suppose  so. 

Min.  And  the  '  hypothesis '  of  the  first  '  must  be  true,' 
simply  because  it  is  true. 

Nos.  It  would  seem  so. 

Mill.  And  it  is  quite  clear  that  '  of  the  conclusions  no 
two  can  be  true  at  the  same  time/  for  they  contradict  each 
other. 

Nos.  Clearly. 

Min.  Then  it  ought  to  follow  that  '  the  converse  of 
every  Theorem  of  the  group  will  necessarily  be  true.'  Take 
the  converse  of  the  second,  i.e. 

If  5  <  3,  then  5<  2. 

Is  this  'necessarily  true'  ?  Is  every  thing  which  is  less 
than  3  necessarily  less  than  2  ? 

Nos.  Certainly  not.  I  think  you  have  misinterpreted 
the  phrase  '  it  can  be  said  that  one  must  be  true,'  when 
used  of  the  hypotheses.  It  does  not  mean  '  it  can  be  said, 
from    a    knowledge    of   the    subject-matter    of    some   one 


Sc.  II.  §1.]  MISCELLANEOUS.  191 

liypothesis,  that  it  /*,  and  therefore  mnst  be,  true,'  but 
'  it  can  be  said,  from  a  knowledge  of  the  mutual  logical 
relation  of  all  the  hypotheses,  as  a  question  oi  form  alone, 
and  without  any  knowledge  of  their  subject-matter,  that 
one  must  be  true,  though  we  do  not  know  which  it  is.' 

M'ln.  Your  power  of  uttering  long  sentences  is  one  that 
does  equal  honour  to  your  head  and  your — lungs.  And 
most  sincerely  do  I  pity  the  unfortunate  learner  who  has 
to  make  out  all  that  for  himself !     Let  us  proceed. 

P.  9.  Def.  13.  'The  lisector  of  an  angle  is  the  straight 
Line  that  divides  it  into  two  equal  angles.' 

This  assumes  that  '  an  angle  has  one  and  only  one 
bisector,'  which  appears  as  Ax.  4,  at  the  foot  of  p.  10. 

P.  10.  Def.  21.  '  The  opposite  angles  made  by  two  straight 
Lines  that  intersect  &c.' 

This  seems  to  imply  that  'two  Lines  that  intersect' 
always  do  make  '  opposite  angles.' 

Nos.  Surely  they  do  ? 

Min.  By  no  means.  Look  at  p.  12^  Def.  32,  where,  in 
speaking  of  a  Triangle,  you  say  '  the  intersection  of  the 
other  two  sides  is  called  the  vertex.' 

Nos.  A  slip,  I  confess. 

Min.  One  of  many. 

P.  12,  Def.  31.  'AH  other  Triangles  are  called  acute- 
angled  Triangles.'  What  ?  If  a  Triangle  had  two  right 
angles,  for  instance? 

Nos.  But  there  is  no  such  Triangle. 

3Iin.  That  is  a  point  you  do  not  prove  till  we  come  to 
Th.  18,  Cor.  I,  two  pages  further  on.  The  same  remark 
applies  to  jowx  Def.  33,  in  the  same  page.     '  The  side  .  .  . 


192  SYLLABUS.  [AcT  III. 

which  is  opposite  to  the  right  angle/  where  you  clearly 
assume  that  it  cannot  have  more  than  one. 

P.  12,  Def.  32.  ^  When  two  of  the  sides  have  been  men- 
tioned, the  remaining  side  is  often  called  the  base.^  Well, 
but  how  if  two  of  the  sides  have  not  been  mentioned  ? 

Nos.  In  that  case  we  do  not  use  the  word. 

Min.  Do  you  not?  Turn  to  p.  22,  Th.  2,  Cor.  i,  'Tri- 
angles on  the  same  or  equal  bases  and  of  equal  altitude  are 
equal.' 

Nos.  We  abandon  the  point. 

Min.  You  had  better  abandon  the  Definition. 

P.  12,  Def.  34.  Is  not  'identically  equal "'  tautology? 
Things  that  are  'identical'  must  surely  be  'equal''  also. 
Again,  ''  every  part  of  one  being  equal,'  &c.  What  do  you 
mean  by  '  every  part '  of  a  rectilineal  figure  ? 

Nos.  Its  sides  and  angles,  of  course. 

Mm.  Then  what  do  you  mean  .by  Ax  {I)  in  p.  3.  '  The 
whole  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  its  parts'?  This  time,  I 
think  I  need  not  '  pause  for  a  reply  ' ! 

P.  15,  Def.  38.  '  When  a  straight  Line  intersects  two 
other  straight  Lines  it  makes  with  them  eight  angles  etc' 


E 
A 


C 


Let  us  count  the  angles  at  G.     They  are,  the  '  major 


Sc.  II.  §  I.]  MISCELLANEOUS.  193 

and  '  minor '  angles  which  bear  the  name  EGA  ;  do.  for 
EGB\  do.  for  AGE-,  and  do.  for  BGIL  That  is,  eight 
angles  at  G  alone.     There  are  sixteen  altogether. 

P.  17,  Th.  30.  '  If  a  quadrilateral  has  two  opposite  sides 
equal  and  parallel,  it  is  a  Parallelogram.' 

This  re-asserts  part  of  its  own  data. 

P.  17,  Th.  31.  '  Straight  Lines  that  are  equal  and  parallel 
have  equal  projections  on  any  other  straight  Line ;  con- 
versely, parallel  straight  Lines  that  have  equal  projections 
on  another  straight  Line  are  equal.' 

The  first  clause  omits  the  case  of  Lines  that  are  equal 
and  in  one  and  the  same  straight  Line.    The  second  clause 


is  not  true :  if  the  parallel  Lines  are  at  right  angles  to 
the  other  Line,  their  projections  are  equal,  both  being 
zero,  whether  the  Lines  are  equal  or  not. 

P.  18,  Th.  32.  '  If  there  are  three  parallel  straight  Lines, 
and  the  intercepts  made  by  them  on  any  straight  Line  that 
cuts  them  are  equal,  then  etc' 

The  subject  of  this  Proposition  is  inconceivable :  there 
are  three  intercepts^  and  by  no  possibility  can  these  three 
be  equal. 

P.  25,  Prob.  5.  '  To  construct  a  rectilineal  Figure  equal 
to  a  given  rectilineal  Figure  and  having  the  number  of  its 
sides  one  less  than  that  of  the  g-iven  Fig-ure.' 

May  I  ask  you  to  furnish  me  with  the  solution  of  this 

o 


194  SYLLABUS.        [Act  III.  Sc.  II.  §  i. 

Problem,   taking,    as   your    '  given   rectilineal  Figure/   a 
Triangle  ? 

Nos.  {indignantly)  I  decline  to  attempt  it ! 

Min.  I  will  now  sum  up  the  conclusions  I  liave  come  to 
with  respect  to  your  Syllabus. 

In  the  subjects  of  Lines,  Angles,  and  Parallels,  the 
changes  you  propose  are  as  follows  : — 

You  give  a  very  unsatisfactory  Definition  of  a  '  Right 
Line,^  and  then  most  illogically  re-state  it  as  an  Axiom. 

You  extend  the  Definition  of  Angle — a  most  disastrous 
innovation. 

Your  Definition  of '  Right  Angle  '  is  a  failure. 

You  substitute  Playfair's  axiom  for  Euclid's  12th. 

All  these  things  are  very  poor  compensation  indeed 
for  the  vital  changes  you  propose  —  the  separation  of 
Problems  and  Theorems,  and  the  abandonment  of  Euclid's 
order  and  numeration.  Restore  the  Problems  (which  are 
also  Theorems)  to  their  proper  places,  keep  to  Euclid's 
numbering  (interpolating  your  new  Propositions  where 
you  please),  and  your  Syllabus  may  yet  prove  to  be  a 
valuable  addition  to  the  literature  of  Elementary  Geometry. 


ACT   III. 

Scene  II. 


6  2.  Wilson's  '  Syllabus  '-Manual. 


'  No  followers  allowed.' 

Times'  advertisement-sheet,  passim. 

Nie.  I  lay  before  you  ^Elemental-?/  Geometry ^folloiolng  the 
Sjjllahis  ^prepared  hj  the  Geometrical  Association^  by  J.  M. 
Wilson,  M.A.,  1878.' 

Min.  In  what  respects  is  this  book  a  '  Rival '  of  Euclid  ? 

Nie.  Well,  it  separates  Problems  from  Theorems 

Min.  Already  discussed  (see  p.  18). 

Nie.  It  adopts  Playfair^s  Axiom 

Mill.  Discussed  (see  p.  40). 

Nie.  It  abandons  diagonals  in  Book  II 

Min.  Discussed  (see  p.  50). 

Nie.  And  it  adopts  a  new  sequence  and  numeration. 

Min,  That^  of  course,  prevents  us  from  taking"  it  as 
merely  a  new  edition  of  Euclid.  It  will  need  very  strong 
evidence   indeed    to   justify   its    claim    to    set    aside   the 

o  2 


196  WILSON'S    '  SYLLABUS' -MANUAL.        [Act  III. 

sequence  and  numeration  of  our  old  friend.  We  must 
now  examine  the  book  seriatim.  When  we  come  to 
matters  that  have  been  already  condemned,  either  in 
Mr.  Wilson's  book,  or  in  the  '  Syllabus,'  I  shall  simply 
note  the  fact.  We  need  have  no  new  discussion,  except 
as  to  new  matter. 

Nie.  Quite  so. 

Min.  In  the  'Introduction,'  at  p.  2,  I  read  ^ A  Theorem 
is  the  formal  statement  of  a  Projjosition'  &c.  Discussed 
at  p.  189. 

At  p.  3  we  have  the  '  Rule  of  Conversion,'  which  I  have 
already  endeavoured  to  understand  (see  p.  190). 

At  p.  6  is  a  really  remarkable  assertion.  '  Every  Theorem 
may  he  shewn  to  he  a  means  of  indirectly  measuring  some 
7nagnitucle.^     Kindly  illustrate  this  on  Euc.  I.  14. 

Nie.  [hastily)  Oh,  if  you  pick  out  one  single  accidental 
excep 

Min.  Well,  then,  take  16,  if  you  like:  or  17,  or  18 • 

Nie.  Enough,  enough ! 

3Iin.  [raising  his  voice) — or  19,  or  20,  or  21,  or  24,  or  25, 
or  27,  or  28,  or  30 ! 

Nie.  We  abandon  '  every ^ 

Min.  Good.  At  p.  8  we  have  the  Definitions  of  '  major 
conjugate^  2i\\di  ^  minor  conjugate'  (discussed  at  p.  185). 

At  p.  9  is  our  old  friend  the  *  straight  angle '  (see  p.  101). 

In  the  same  page  we  have  that  w^onderful  triad  of  Lines, 
one  of  which  is  ^regarded  as  lying  hetween  the  other  two''  (see 
p.  185). 

And  also  the  extraordinary  result  that  follows  when  one 
straight  Line  'stands  uj)on  another^  (see  p.  186). 


Sc.  II.  §  2.]  ITS    OXE     GREAT    MERIT.  197 

At  p.  27,  Theorem  14,  is  a  new  proof  of  Euc.  I.  24, 
apparently  an  amended  version  of  Mr.  Wilson's  five-case 
proof,  which  I  discussed  at  p.  137.  He  has  now  reduced 
it  to  three  cases,  but  I  still  think  the  '  bisector  of  the  angle ' 
a  superfluity. 

At  p.  '^'j  we  have  those  curious  specimens  of '  Theorems 
of  Equality^  which  I  discussed  at  p.  139. 

At  p.  53  is  the  Theorem  which  asserts,  in  its  conclusion, 
part  of  its  own  data  (see  p.  192). 

At  p.  54  we  are  told  that  ^parallel  Lines,  lohich  have 
equal  projections  on  another  Line^  are  eqnaV  (see  p.  193). 

At  p.  ^^  we  have  the  inconceivable  triad  of  ^  equal 
intercepts^  made  by  a  Line  cutting*  three  Parallels  (see 
p.  193). 

At  p.  161  I  am  surprised  to  see  him  fall  into  a  trap 
in  which  I  have  often  seen  unwary  students  caught,  while 
trying  to  say  Euc.  III.  30  ('To  bisect  a  given  arc ') 
After  proving  two  chords  equal,  they  at  once  conclude 
that  certain  arcs,  cut  off  by  them,  are  equal ;  forgetting 
to  prove  that  the  arcs  in  question  are  both  minor  arcs. 

But  I  must  go  no  further :  I  have  already  wandered 
beyond  the  limits  of  Euc.  I,  II.  The  one  great  merit  of 
this  book 

Nie.  You  have  mentioned  all  ih^  faults,  then  ? 

Min.  By  no  means.  You  are  too  impatient.  The  one 
great  merit,  as  I  was  saying,  of  Mr.  Wilson's  new  book 
(and  a  most  blessed  change  it  is !)  is  that  it  ignores  the 
whole  theory  of  '  direction.'  That  he  has  finally  abandoned 
that  night-mare  of  Elementary  Geometry,  I  dare  not 
hope :    so  all  I  have  said  about  it  had  better  stand,  lest 


198  WILSON'S     'SYLLABUS' -MANUAL.       [AcT  III. 

in  some  future  fit  of  inspiration  he  should  bring  out  a 
yet  more  agonising*  version  of  it. 

But  it  has  the  usual  hiatus  of  a  system  which  replaces 
Euclid's  Axiom  by  Playfair's :  it  provides  no  means  of 
proving  that  the  Lines  contemplated  by  Euclid  will  meet 
if  produced.     (This  I  have  discussed  at  p.  187.) 

Its  proposed  changes  in  the  sequence  of  Euclid  I  have 
discussed  at  p.  188. 

It  has  a  few  other  faults,  which  I  have  already  discussed 
in  Mr.  Wilson's  own  book,  'and  a  few  peculiar  to  the 
Syllabus;    but  I  spare  you  such  minute  criticisms. 

But  what  I  have  now  to  ask  you  is  simply  this.  What 
possible  pretext  have  you  left  for  suggesting  that  Euclid's 
Manual,  and  specially  his  sequence  and  numeration,  should 
be  abandoned  in  favour  of  this  far  from  satisfactory  infant? 

Nie.  There  are  some  new  Theorems 

Min.  Those  constitute  no  reason :  you  might  easily  inter- 
polate them. 

Nie.  I  fear  there  are  no  other  grounds  to  urge.  But 
I  should  like  to  consult  the  dopj)elg anger  of  the  Asso- 
ciation before  I  throw  up  my  brief. 

Min.  By  all  means. 

\For  a  mimcte  or  two  there  is  heard  a  rustling  and  a 
whispering^  as  of  ghosts.     Then  Niemand  s^^eahs  again^ 

Nie.  They  think  that,  considering  that  this  book  is 
but  just  published,  and  that  it  is  definitely  put  forward 
as  the  Manual  to  supersede  Euclid,  it  ought  to  be  ex- 
amined more  in  detail,  with  reference  to  what  is  new  in 


Sc.  II.  §  2.]         ■  DISCUSSED    IN    DETAIL.  199 

it  —that  is,  new  proofs  of  Euclid's  Propositions,  and  new- 
Propositions. 

Min.  {^with  a  iveary  sigh)  Very  well.  It  will  perhaps 
be  more  satisfactory  to  do  this,  if  only  to  ascertain  exactly 
how  much  this  new  Manual  contains  that  is  really  new 
and  really  worthy  of  adoption.  But  I  shall  limit  my 
examination  to  the  subject-matter  of  Euc.  I,  II. 

Nie.  That  is  all  we  ask. 

Min.  We  begin,  then^  at  p.  12. 

Theorem  i.  ^  All  right  angles  are  equals  This  is  proved 
by  their  being  halves  of  a  ^  straight  angle/  a  phrase  which 
I  have  already  criticised.  There  is  a  rather  important 
omission  in  the  proof,  no  distinction  being  drawn  between 
the  '  straight  angle '  on  one  side  of  a  Line,  and  the  other 
(of  course  named  by  the  same  letters)  which  lies  on  the 
other  sidp  and  completes  the  four  right  angles.  This 
Theorem,  if  proved  without  '  straight  angles,'  might  be 
worth  adding  to  a  new  edition  of  Euclid. 

Th.  2  (p.  13)  is  Euc.  I.  13,  proved  as  in  Euclid. 

Th.  3  (p.  14)  is  Euc.  I.  14,  where,  unfortunately,  a  new 
proof  is  attempted,  which  involves  a  fallacy.  It  is  deduced 
from  an  '  Observation '  in  p.  9,  that  ^  a  straight  Line  makes 
with  its  continuation  at  any  point  an  angle  of  two  right 
angles/  which  deduction  can  be  effected  only  by  the  pro- 
cess of  converting  a  universal  affirmative  '  simjiliciter '  in- 
stead of  'per  aecidens.' 

Th.  4  (p.  14)  is  Euc.  I.  15,  proved  as  in  Euclid. 

At  p.  17  I  find  a  'Question.'  'State  the  fact  that  ''all 
geese  have  tivo  legs  "  in  the  form  of  a  Theorem^  This  I  would 
not  mind  attempting;   but,  when  I  read  the  additional 


200  WILSON'S    '  SYLLABUS'-MANUAL.  [AcT  III. 

request,  to  '  write  down  its  converse  theorem^  it  is  so  power- 
fully borne  in  upon  me  that  the  writer  of  the  Question 
is  probably  himself  a  biped,  that  I  feel  I  must^  however 
reluctantly,  decline  the  task. 

Th.  5  (p.  1 8)  is  Euc.  I.  4,  proved  as  in  Euclid. 

Th.  6  (p.  %o)  is  Euc.  I.  5,  proved  by  supposing  the 
vertical  angle  to  be  bisected,  thus  introducing  a  'hypo- 
thetical construction'  (see  p.  20). 

Th.  7  (p.  21)  is  Euc.  I.  26  (ist  part),  proved  by  super- 
position. Euclid's  proof,  by  making  a  new  Triangle,  is 
quite  as  good,  I  think.  The  areas  are  here  proved  to  be 
equal,  a  point  omitted  by  Euclid :  I  think  it  a  desirable 
addition  to  the  Theorem. 

Th.  8  (p.  22)  is  Euc.  I.  5,  proved  by  reversing  the 
Triangle  and  then  placing  it  on  itself  {oy  on  the  trace  it 
has  left  behind),  a  most  objectionable  method  (see  p.  48). 

Theorems  9  to  13  (pp.  22  to  26)  are  Euc.  I.  i6_,  18,  19, 
20,  21,  with  Euclid's  proofs. 

Th.  14  (p.  27)  is  Euc.  I.  24,  proved  by  supposing  an 
angle  to  be  bisected  :  another  '  hypothetical  construction.' 

Th.  15  (p.  28)  is  Euc.  I.  8,  for  which  two  proofs  are 
offered : — one  by  Euc.  I.  24  (which  seems  to  be  reversing 
the  natural  order) — the  other  by  an  application  of  Euc. 
I.  5,  a  method  involving  three  cases,  of  which  only  one 
is  given.  All  this  is  to  save  the  introduction  of  Euc. 
I.  7,  a  Theorem  which  I  think  should  by  no  means  be 
omitted.  (See  p.  220.)  Here,  as  in  Th.  7,  the  equality 
of  the  areas  is,  I  think,  a  desirable  addition  to  Euclid's 
Theorem. 

Th.  16  (p.  29)  is  Euc.  I.  25,  with  old  proof. 


Sc.  II.  §  2.]  DISCUSSED    IN    DETAIL.  201 

Th.  17  (p.  30)  is  Euc.  I.  26  (2nd  part)  proved  by  super- 
position instead  of  Euclid's  method  (which  I  prefer)  of 
constructing  a  new  Triangle. 

Th.  18  (p.  32)  is  Euc.  I.  17,  with  old  proof. 

Th.  19  (p.  '^'^)  is  new.  '  Of  all  the  straight  Lines  that 
can  he  draion  from  a  given  j)oint  to  meet  a  given  straight 
Line,  the  perpendicular  is  the  shortest ;  and  of  the  others^ 
those  making  equal  angles  with  the  iierjpendicular  are  equal ; 
and  that  which  makes  a  greater  angle  loith  the  perpendicular 
is  greater  than  that  which  makes  a  less^  This  I  think 
deserves  to  be  interpolated. 

Th.  20  (p.  34)  is  new.  '  If  two  Triangles  have  tivo  sides 
of  the  one  equal  to  two  sides  of  the  other,  each  to  each,  and 
the  angles  opposite  to  ttco  equal  sides  equal,  the  angles  oppo- 
site to  the  other  tioo  equal  sides  are  either  equal  or  supple- 
mentary,  and  in  the  former  case  the  Triangles  are  equal  in 
all  respects^  I  do  not  think  it  worth  while  to  trouble 
a  beginner  with  this  rather  obscure  Theorem,  which  is  of 
no  practical  use  till  he  enters  on  Trigonometry. 

Th.  21  (p.  43)  is  Euc.  I.  27  :  old  proof. 

Th.  22  (p.  44)  is  Euc.  I.  29  (ist  part),  proved  by  Euc.  I. 
27  and  Playfair's  Axiom  (see  p.  40). 

Th.  23  (p.  45)  is  new.  ^  If  a  straight  Line  intersects  two 
other  straight  Lines  and  snakes  either  a  pair  of  alternate 
angles  equals  or  a  pair  of  corresponding  angles  equal,  or  a 
pair  of  interior  angles  on  the  same  side  supplementary ; 
then,  in  each  case,  the  two  pairs  of  alternate  angles  are 
equal,  and  the  four  pairs  of  corresponding  angles  are  equal, 
and  the  two  pairs  of  interior  angles  on  the  same  side  are 
supplementary.'     This  most  formidable  enunciation  melts 


202  WILSON'S     ' SYLLABUS' -MANUAL.       [Act  III. 

down  into  the  mildest  proportions  when  superfluities  are 
omitted,  and  only  so  much  of  it  proved  as  is  really  neces- 
sary to  include  the  whole.  Euclid  proves  all  that  is 
valuable  in  it  in  the  course  of  I.  29,  and  I  do  not  see 
any  sufficient  reason  for  stating*  and  proving  it  as  a  sepa- 
rate Theorem. 

Th.  23,  Cor.  (p.  46)  is  the  rest  of  Euc.  I.  29  :   old  proof. 

Th.  24  (p.  46)  is  Euc.  I.  30,  proved  as  a  Contranominal 
of  Play  fair's  Axiom. 

Th.  25,  26,  and  Cor.  (pp.  47,  48)  are  Euc.  I.  32  and 
Corollaries :  old  proof. 

Th.  27,  1st  part  (p.  50),  is  a  needless  repetition  of  part 
of  the  Corollary  to  Th.  23. 

Th.  27,  2nd  part  (p.  50),  is  part  of  Euc.  I.  34:  old  proof. 

Th.  28  (p.  51)  is  the  rest  of  Euc.  I.  34,  proved  as  in 
Euclid. 

Th.  29  (p.  52)  is  new.  '  //  two  Parallelograms  have  two 
acljaceyit  sides  of  the  one  respectively  equal  to  two  adjacent 
sides  of  the  other ^  and  liJceivise  an  angle  of  the  one  equal 
to  an  angle  of  the  other ;  the  Parallelograms  are  identically 
equal!  This  might  be  a  useful  exercise  to  set ;  but  really 
it  does  not  seem  of  sufficient  importance  to  be  selected 
for  a  Manual. 

Th.  30  (p.  ^'>^)  is  Euc.  I.  o^'>, :   old  proof 

Th.  31  (p.  54)  is  new.  [  Straight  Lines  tvhich  are  equal 
and  parallel  have  equal  projections  on  any  other  straight 
Line ;  conversely,  parallel  straight  Lines  which  have  equal 
'projections  on  another  straight  Line  are  equal ;  and  equal 
straight  Lines ^  which  have  equal  projections  on  another  straight 
Line  J  are  equally  inclined  to  that  Line!     The  first  and  third 


Sc.  II.  §  2.]  DISCUSSED    IN    DETAIL,        ^  203 

clauses  might  be  interpolated,  tliougli  I  think  their  value 
doubtful.     The  second  is  false.     (See  p.  193.) 

Th.  32  (p.  ^^)  is  new.  ^  If  there  are  three  jparallel 
straight  Lines,  and  the  intercepts  made  hy  them  on  any  straight 
Line  that  cuts  them  are  equal,  then  the  intercepts  on  any  other 
straight  Line  that  cuts  them  are  equal'  This  is  awkwardly 
worded  (in  fact,  as  it  stands,  its  subject,  as  I  pointed  out 
in  p.  193,  is  inconceivable),  and  does  not  seem  at  all  worth- 
stating  as  a  Theorem. 

At  p.  57  I  see  an  ^Exercise'  (No.  5).  ^  Shew  that  the 
angles  of  an  equiangular  Triangle  are  equal  to  two-thirds 
of  a  right  angle.'  In  this  attempt  I  feel  sure  I  should 
fail.  In  early  life  I  was  taught  to  believe  them  equal 
to  two  right  angles — an  antiquated  prejudice^  no  doubt ; 
but  it  is  difficult  to  eradicate  these  childish  instincts. 

Problem  i  (p.  61)  is  Euc.  I.  9  :  old  proof.  It  provides  no 
means  of  finding  a  radius  '  greater  than  half  AB,'  which 
would  seem  to  require  the  previous  bisection  oi  AB.  Thus 
the  proof  involves  the  fallacy  ^Petitio  PrincijniJ 

Pr.  2  (p.  62)  is  Euc.  L  II,  proved  nearly  as  in  Euclid. 

Pr.  3  (p.  62)  is  Euc.  I.  12,  proved  nearly  as  in  Euclid. 
It  omits  to  say  how  a  '  sufficient  radius '  can  be  secured, 
a  point  not  neglected  by  Euclid. 

Pr.  4  (p.  6^)  is  Euc.  I.  10,  proved  nearly  as  in  Euclid. 
This  also,  like  Pr.  i,  involves  the  fallacy  ^Petitio  Principii.' 

Pr.  5  (p.  64)  is  Euc.  I.  32,  proved  nearly  as  in  Euclid, 
but  claims  to  use  compasses  to  transfer  distances,  a  Postu- 
late which  Euclid  has  (properly,  I  think)  treated  as  a  Pro- 
blem.   (See  p.  212.) 

Pr.  6,  7  (pp.  6^,  66)  are  Eue.  I.  23,  31  :  old  proofs. 


204  WILSON'S     '  SYLLABUS' -MANUAL.        [AcT  III. 

Problems  8  to  1 1  (pp.  66  to  69)  are  new.  Their  object 
is  to  construct  Triangles  with  various  data :  viz.  A^  B,  and 
<?;  Aj  B,  and  a;  a,  h,  and  C\  a,  h,  and  A.  They  are 
g-ood  exercises,  I  think,  but  hardly  worth  interpolating-  as 
Theorems.  The  first  of  them  is  remarkable  as  one  of  the 
instances  where  Mr.  Wilson  assumes  Euc.  Ax.  12,  without 
giving,  or  even  suggesting,  any  proof.  If  he  intends  to 
assume  it  as  an  Axiom,  he  makes  Playfair's  Axiom  super- 
fluous.    No  Manual  ought  to  assume  both  of  them. 

Theorem  i  (p.  82)  is  Euc.  I.  '^^,  proved  as  in  Euclid,  but 
incompletely,  as  it  only  treats  of  one  out  of  three  possible 
cases. 

Th.  2  (p.  83)  is  new.  '  The  area  of  a  Triangle  is  half  the 
area  of  a  rectangle  whose  hase  and  altitude  are  equal  to  those 
of  the  Triangle^  This  is  merely  a  particular  ease  of  Euc.  I. 
41,  and  may  fairly  be  reserved  till  we  enter  on  Trigono- 
metry, where  it  first  begins  to  have  any  practical  value. 

Th.  2,  Cor.  I  (p.  84)  is  Euc.  I.  o^"],  38  :  old  proofs. 

Th.  2,  Cor.  2  (p.  84)  is  new.  *  Equal  Triangles  on  the 
same  or  equal  bases  have  equal  altitudes!  No  proof  is 
oiSered.     It  is  an  easy  deduction,  of  questionable  value. 

Th.  2,  Cor.  3  (p.  84)  is  Euc.  I.  39,  40.     No  proof  given. 

Th.  3  (p.  84)  is  new.  '  The  area  of  a  trapezium  [by 
which  Mr.  Wilson  means  '  a  quadrilateral  that  has  only  one 
pair  of  opposite  sides  paraller'\  is  equal  to  the  area  of  a 
rectangle  whose  hase  is  half  the  sum  of  the  two  parallel  sides, 
and  whose  altitude  is  the  perpendicular  distance  between  them.' 
I  have  no  hesitation  in  pronouncing  this  to  be  a  mere 
'  fancy '  Proposition,  of  no  practical  value  whatever. 

Th.  4  (p.  86)  is  Euc.  I.  43  :  old  proof. 


Sc.  II.  §  2.]  DISCUSSED    IN    DETAIL.  205 

Th.  5  (p.  87)  is  Euc.  II.  I  :  old  proof. 

Th.  6,  7,  8  (p.  88,  &c.)  are  Euc.  II.  4,  7,  5.  The 
sequence  of  Euc.  II.  5,  and  its  Corollary^  is  here  inverted. 
Also  the  diagonals  are  omitted,  and  nearly  every  detail 
is  left  unproved,  thus  attaining  a  charming-  brevity — of 
appearance  ! 

Th.  9  (p.  91)  is  Euc.  I.  47  :  old  proof. 

Th.  10,  II  (pp.  94,  95)  are  Euc.  12,  13  :    old  proof. 

Th.  12  (p.  95)  is  new.  '  The  sum  of  the  squares  on  two 
sides  of  a  Triangle  is  double  the  sum  of  the  squares  on  half 
the  base  and  on  the  line  joining  the  vertex  to  the  middle  point 
of  the  hase.^  This,  Mr.  Wilson  tells  us,  is  'Apollonius' 
Theorem ' :  but,  even  with  that  mighty  name  to  recom- 
mend it,  I  cannot  help  thinking  it  rather  more  curious 
than  useful. 

Th.  13  (p.  96)  is  Euc.  II.  9,  10.  Proved  algebraically, 
and  thus  degraded  from  the  position  of  a  (fairly  useful) 
geometrical  Theorem  to  a  mere  addition-sum,  of  no  more 
value  than  millions  of  others  like  it. 

In  the  next  proposition  we  suddenly  transfer  our  alle- 
giance, for  no  obvious  reason,  from  Arabic  to  Latin 
numerals. 

Problem  i  (p.  99)  is  Euc.  I.  42  :  old  proof. 

Pr.  II.  (p.  100)  is  Euc.  I.  44 :  proved  nearly  as  in 
Euclid,  but  labours  under  the  same  defect  as  Pr.  8  (p.  66) 
in  that  it  assumes,  without  proof,  Euc.  Ax.  12. 

Pr.  Ill  (p.  100)  is  Euc.  I.  45  :  old  proof. 

Pr.  IV  (p.  loi)  is  Euc.  II.  14  :  old  proof. 

Pr.  V  (p.  103)  is  new.  '  To  construct  a  rectilineal  Figure 
equal  to  a  given  rectilineal  Figure  and  having  the  number 


206       ,  WILSON'S    'SYLLABUS' -MANUAL.  [Act  III. 

of  Us  sides  one  less  than  that  of  the  given  figure  ;  and  thence 
to  construct  a  Triangle  equal  to  a  given  rectilineal  Figured 
This  I  have  already  noticed  (see  p.  193).  It  really  is  not 
worth  interpolating  as  a  new  Proposition.  And  its  con- 
cluding clause  is,  if  I  may  venture  on  so  harsh  an  expres- 
sion, childish  :  it  reminds  me  of  nothing  so  much  as  the 
Irish  patent  process  for  making  cheap  shoes — by  taking 
boots  and  cutting  off  the  tops  ! 

Pr.  VI  (p.  103)  is  ""To  divide  a  straight  Line,  either  inter- 
nally or  externally,  into  two  segments  such  that  the  rectangle 
contained  hy  the  given  Line  and  one  of  the  segments  may  he 
eq2ial  to  the  square  on  the  other  segment.^  The  case  of 
internal  section  is  Euc.  II.  11,  with  the  old  proof.  The 
other  case  is  new,  and  worth  interpolating. 

I  have  now  discussed,  with  as  much  care  and  patience 
as  the  lateness  of  the  hour  will  permit^  so  much  of  this 
new  Manual  as  corresponds  to  Euc.  I,  II,  and  I  hope 
your  friends  are  satisfied. 

\A  gentle  cooing,  as  of  satisfied  ghosts,  is  heard  in  the  air.^ 

I  will  now  give  you  in  a  few  words  the  net  result  of 
it  all,  and  will  show  you  how  miserably  small  is  the  basis 
on  which  Mr.  Wilson  and  his  coadjutors  of  the  'Asso- 
ciation' rest  their  claim  to  supersede  the  Manual  of 
Euclid. 

[An  angry  ?7ioaning,  as  of  ghosts  suffering  from  neuralgia, 
surges  round  the  room,  till  it  dies  away  in  the  chimney. ~\ 


Sc.  II.  §  2.]  SUMMARY    OF    RESULTS.  207 

By  breaking"  up  certain  of  the  Propositions  of  Eac.  I,  IT, 
and  including  some  of  the  Corollaries,  we  get  73  Proposi- 
tions in  all — 57  Theorems  and  16  Problems.  Of  these  73, 
this  Manual  om.its  14  (10  Theorems  and  4  Problems); 
it  proves  43  (32  Theorems  and  11  Problems)  by  methods 
almost  identical  with  Euclid^s ;  for  10  of  them  (9  Theorems 
and  a  Problem)  it  offers  new  proofs,  against  which  I  have 
recorded  taj  protest,  one  being  illogical,  1  (needlessly) 
employing  '  superposition,'  1  deserting  Geometry  for 
Algebra,  and  the  remaining  4  omitting  the  diagonals  in 
Euc.  II  ;  and  finally  it  offers  6  new  proofs^  which  I 
think  may  fairly  be  introduced  as  alternatives  for  those 
of  Euclid. 

In  all  thisj  and  in  all  the  matters  previously  discussed, 
I  fail  to  see  one  atom  of  reason  for  abandoning  Euclid. 
Have  you  any  yet-unconsidered  objections  to  urge  against 
my  proposal  '  that  the  sequence  and  numeration  of  Euclid 
be  kept  unaltered^? 

\Peacl  silence  is  the  only  repli/l\ 

Carried,  nemine  contragemente  I  And  now^  Prisoner  at 
the  Bar  (I  beg  your  pardon,  I  should  say  '  Professor  on 
the  Sofa  ')j  have  you,  and  your  attendant  phantoms,  any 
other  reasons  to  urge  for  regarding  this  Manual  as  in 
any  sense  a  substitute  for  Euclid's — as  in  any  sense  any- 
thing else  than  a  revised  edition  of  Euclid  ? 

Nie.  We  have  nothing  more  to  say. 

Mm.  Then  I  can  but  repeat  with  regard  to  this  new- 
bom    '  follower '   of  the    Syllabus,    what    I    said    of  the 


208      WILSON'S  '  SYLLABUS'-MANUAL.    [AcT  III.  Sc.  II.  §  2. 

Syllabus  itself.  Restore  the  Problems  (which  are  also 
Theorems)  to  their  proper  places ;  keep  to  Euclid's  num- 
bering (interpolating  your  new  Propositions  where  you 
please) ;  and  your  new  book  may  yet  prove  a  valuable 
addition  to  the  literature  of  Elementary  Geometry. 

[^  tremidous  movement  is  seen  amid  the  ghostly  throng. 
They  waver  fitfully  to  and  fro,  and  finally  drift  off  in  the 
direction  of  one  corner  of  the  ceiling.  When  the  procession 
has  got  well  under  way,  Niemand  himself  becomes  hazy, 
and  floats  off  to  join  them.  The  whole  jprocession  gradually 
melts  away  into  vacancy.  Diamond  going  last,  nibbling  at 
the  heels  of  Nero,  for  which  a  pair  of  gorgeous  Roman 
sandals  seem  to  afford  but  scanty  protection^ 


ACT  IV. 

•Old  friends  are  best.' 

[Sce?ie  as  before.  Time,  the  early  dawn.  Minos  slum- 
her'ing  uneasily^  having  fallen  forvmrds  2i]oon   the  table,  his 

forehead  resting  on  the  inJcstand.  To  him  enter  Euclid  on 
tip-toe,  followed  by  the  phantasms  of  Archimedes,  Pytha- 
GOUAS^  Aristotle,  Plato,  ^r.,  who  have  come  to  see  fair 

jday.] 

§  I .  Treatment  of  Pairs  of  Lines. 

Euc.  Are  all  gone  ? 

Min.  ^Be  cheerful,  sir: 

Our  revels  now  are  ended :  these  our  actors. 
As  I  foretold  you,  were  all  spirits,  and 
Are  melted  into  air,  into  thin  air ! ' 
Euc.  Good.     Let  us  to  business.     And  first,  have  you 
found  any  method  of  treating  Parallels  to  supersede  mine  ? 
3Iin.  No  !     A  thousand  times,  no  !     The  infinitesimal 
method,  so  gracefully  employed  by  M.  Legendre,  is  un- 
suited  to  beginners :  the  method  by  transversals,  and  the 
method  by  revolving  Lines,  have  not  yet  been  offered  in 
a  logical  form  :  the  '  equidistant '  method  is  too  cumbrous  : 

P 


210  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  IV. 

and  as  for  the  method  of  'direction/  it  is  simply  a  rope 
of  sand — it  breaks  to  pieces  wherever  you  touch  it! 

liuc.  We  may  take  it  as  a  settled  thing,  then^  that  you 
have  found  no  sufficient  cause  for  abandoning  either  my 
sequence  of  Propositions  or  their  numbering,  and  that  all 
that  now  remains  to  be  considered  is  whether  any  im- 
portant modifications  of  my  Manual  are  desirable  ? 

Min.  Most  certainly. 

Em.  Have  you  met  with  any  striking  novelty  on  the 
subject  of  a  practical  test  for  the  meeting  of  Lines  ? 

Min.  There  is  one  rival  to  your  12th  Axiom  which  is 
formidable  on  account  of  the  number  of  its  advocates — • 
the  one  usually  called  ^Playfair's  Axiom.' 

Hue.  We  have  discussed  that  matter  already  (p  40). 

M'ln.  But  what  have  you  to  say  to  those  who  reject 
Playfair's  Axiom  as  well  as  yours? 

Hue.  I  simply  ask  them  what  practical  test,  as  to  the 
meeting  of  two  given  finite  Lines,  they  propose  to  employ. 
Not  only  will  they  find  it  necessary  to  prove,  in  certain 
Theorems,  that  two  given  finite  Lines  will  meet  if  pro- 
duced, but  they  will  even  find  themselves  sometimes 
obliged  to  prove  it  of  two  Lines,  of  which  the  only  geo- 
metrical fact  known  is  that  they  possess  the  very  property 
which  forms  the  subject  of  my  Axiom.  I  ask  them,  in 
short,  this  question : — '  Given  two  Lines  making,  with 
a  certain  transversal,  two  interior  angles  together  less 
than  two  right  angles,  how  do  you  propose  to  prove, 
without  my  Axiom,  that  they  will  meet  if  produced  ? ' 

Min.  The  advocates  of  the  '  direction  '  theory  would  of 
course   reply,  'We  can  prove,  from  the   given  property. 


§  I.]  PAIRS     OF    LINES.  211 

that  they  have  different  directions :  and  then  we  brinjif 
in  the  Axiom  that  Lines  having*  different  directions  will 
meet  if  produced.' 

Euc.  All  that  you  have  satisfactorily  disposed  of  in  your 
review  of  Mr.  Wilson's  Manual. 

Min.  The  only  other  substitute,  that  I  know  of,  belongs 
to  the  '  equidistant '  theory,  which  replaces  your  Axiom  by 
three  or  four  new  Axioms  and  six  new  Theorems.  That 
substitute,  also,  I  have  seen  reason  to  reject. 

My  general  conclusion  is  that  your  method  of  treat- 
ment of  all  these  subjects  is  the  best  that  has  yet  been 
suggested. 

Euc.  Any  noticeable  innovations  in  the  treatment  of 
Right  Lines  and  Angles? 

Min.  Those  subjects  I  should  be  glad  to  talk  over  with 
you. 

Euc.  With  all  my  heart.  And  now  how  do  you  pro- 
pose to  conduct  this  our  final  interview  ? 

3Ii)i.  I  should  wish,  in  the  first  place,  to  lay  before  you 
the  general  charges  which  have  been  brought  against  you  : 
then  to  discuss  your  treatment  of  Lines  and  Angles,  as 
contrasted  with  that  of  your  '  Rivals ' ;  and  lastly  the 
omissions,  alterations,  and  additions  proposed  by  them. 

Euc.  Good.    Let  us  begin. 

Min.  I  will  take  the  general  charges  under  three  head- 
ings : — Construction,  Demonstration,  and  Style.  And  first 
as  to  Construction  : — 


p  'i 


212  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  IV. 


\  2.  Euclid! s   Constructio7is. 

I  am  told  that  you  indulge  too  mucli  in  '  arbitrary 
restrictions.'  Mr.  Reynolds  says  (Pref.  p.  vi.)  '  The  arbi- 
trary restrictions  of  Euclid  involve  him  in  various  incon- 
sistencies, and  exclude  his  constructions  from  use.  When, 
for  instance,  in  order  to  mark  off  a  length  upon  a  straight 
Line,  he  requires  us  to  describe  five  Circles,  an  equilateral 
Triangle,  one  straight  line  of  limited,  and  two  of  unlimited 
length,  he  condemns  his  system  to  a  divorce  from  practice 
at  once  and  from  sound  reason.' 

Euc.  Mr.  Reynolds  has  misunderstood  me :  I  do  not 
require  all  that  construction  in  Prop.  3.  To  explain  my 
meaning  I  must  go  back  to  Prop.  2,  and  I  must  ask  your 
patience  while  I  make  a  few  general  remarks  on  construc- 
tion. The  machinery  I  allow  consists  of  a  pencil,  a  ruler, 
and  a  pair  of  compasses  to  be  used  for  drawing  a  Circle 
about  a  given  centre  and  passing  through  a  given  point  (that 
is  what  I  mean  by  ^  at  any  distance  '),  but  not  to  be  used 
for  transferring  distances  from  one  part  of  a  diagram  to 
another  until  it  has  been  shoivn  that  such  transference  can  he 
effected  hy  the  machinery  already  allowed. 

Min.  But  why  not  allow  such  transference  without 
proving  that  possibility  ? 

Euc.  Because  it  would  be  introducing  as  a  Postulate  what 
is  really  a  Prohlem.  And  I  go  on  the  general  principle  of 
never  putting  a  Problem  among  my  Postulates,  nor  a 
Theorem  among  my  Axioms. 


§  2.]  CONSTRUCTIONS.  213 

Min.  I  heartily  agree  in  3^our  general  principle,  though 
I  need  scarcely  remind  you  that  it  has  been  frequently 
charged  against  you,  as  afaulf,  that  you  state  as  an  Axiom 
what  is  really  a  Theorem. 

Euc.  That  charge  has  been  met  (see  p.  40).  To  return 
to  my  subject.  I  merely  prove,  once  for  all,  in  Prop.  2, 
that  a  Line  can  be  drawn,  from  a  given  point,  and  equal  to 
a  given  Line,  by  the  original  machinery  alone,  and  without 
transferring  distances.  After  that,  my  reader  is  welcome 
to  transfer  a  distance  by  any  method  that  comes  handy, 
such  as  a  bit  of  string  &c. :  and  of  course  he  may  now 
transfer  his  compasses  to  a  new  centre.  And  this  is  all 
I  expect  him  to  do  in  Prop.  3. 

Min.  Then  you  donH  expect  these  five  Circles  &c.  to  be 
drawn  whenever  we  have  to  cut  off,  from  one  Line,  a  part 
equal  to  another  ? 

Euc.  Pas  si  hete,  mon  ami. 

Min.  Some  of  your  Modern  Rivals  are,  however,  a  little 
discontented  with  the  very  scanty  machinery  you  allow. 

Emc.  'A  bad  workman  always  quarrels  with  his  tools.' 

Min.  Their  charge  against  you  is  'the  exclusion  of 
hypothetical  constructions.'  Mr.  Wilson  says  (Pref.  p.  i.) 
'  The  exclusion  of  hypothetical  constructions  may  be  men- 
tioned as  a  self-imposed  restriction  which  has  made  the 
confused  order  of  his  first  book  necessary,  without  any 
compensating  advantage.' 

Euc.  In  reply,  I  cannot  do  better  than  refer  you  to 
Mr.  Todhunter's  Essay  on  Elementary  Geometry  (p.  186). 
'  Confused  order  is  rather  a  contradictory  expression,'  &c. 
(see  p.  241). 


214  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [AcT  IV. 

Min.  Your  reply  is  satisfactory.  Mr.  Wilson  himself  is 
an  instance  of  the  danger  of  such  a  method.  Three  times 
at  least  (pp.  46,  70,  88)  he  produces  Lines  to  meet  without 
attempting  to  prove  that  they  will  meet. 

\  3.  Euclid's  Demonstrations. 

Min.  The  next  heading  is  'Demonstration.'  You  are 
chilrged  with  an  ^  invariably  syllogistic  form  of  reasoning.' 
(Wilson,  Pref.  p.  i.) 

Euc.  Do  you  know,  I  am  vain  enough  to  think  that 
a  merit  rather  than  a  defect?  Let  me  quote  what  Mr. 
Cuthbertson  says  on  this  point  (Pref.  p.  vii.).  '  Euclid's 
mode  of  demonstration,  in  which  the  conclusion  of  each 
step  is  preceded  by  reasoning  expressed  with  all  the  exact- 
ness of  the  minor  premiss  of  a  syllogism,  of  which  some 
previous  proposition  is  the  major  premiss,  has  been  adopted 
as  offering  a  good  logical  training,  and  also  as  being 
peculiarly  adapted  for  teaching  large  classes,  rendering 
it  possible  for  the  teacher  to  call  first  upon  one,  then 
upon  another,  and  so  on,  to  take  up  any  link  in  the 
chain  of  argument.'  Perhaps  even  Mr.  Wilson's  own 
book  would  not  be  the  worse  if  the  reasoning  were  a 
trijle  more  '  syllogistic  ' ! 

Min.  A  fair  retort.  You  are  also  charged  with  '  too 
great  length  of  demonstration.'  Mr.  Wilson  says  (Pref. 
p.  i.)  '  The  real  objections  to  Euclid  as  a  text-book  are  .  .  . 
the  length  of  his  demonstrations.'  And  Mr.  Cooley  says 
(Pref.  p.  I.)  'The  important  and  fertile  theorems,  which 
crown  the  heights  in  this  field  of  knowledge,  are   here 


§  3-]  DEMONSTRATIONS.  215 

all  retained,  and  those  only  are  omitted  which  seem  to 
be  but  the  steps  of  a  needlessly  protracted  ascent.  The 
short  road  thus  opened  will  be  found  perfectly  solid  in 
construction,  and  at  the  same  time  far  less  tedious  and 
fatiguing"  than  the  circuitous  one  hitherto  in  vogue.' 

Euc.  I  think  Mr.  Wilson's  Th.  17  (p.  27),  with  its  five 
figures  (all  necessary,  though  he  only  draws  one),  and  still 
more  his  marvellous  Problem,  '  approached  by  four  stages,^ 
which  fills  pages  69  to  72,  are  pretty  good  instances  of 
lengthy  demonstration.  And  Mr.  Cooley's  '  short  and 
solid  road '  contains,  if  I  remember  right,  a  rather  break- 
neck crevasse  ! 

Min.  The  next  charge  against  you  is  '  too  great  hrevity 
of  demonstration.'  Mr.  Leslie  (a  writer  whom  I  have  not 
thought  it  necessary  to  review  as  a  '  Modern  Rival,'  as  his 
book  is  nearly  seventy  years  old)  says  (Pref.  p.  vi.)  'In  adapt- 
ing it '  (the  Elements  of  Euclid)  '  to  the  actual  state  of  the 
science,  I  have  .  .  .  sought  to  enlarge  the  basis  .  .  .  The 
numerous  additions  which  are  incorporated  in  the  text, 
so  far  from  retarding  will  rather  facilitate  progress,  by 
renderino-  more  continuous  the  chain  of  demonstration. 
To  multiply  the  steps  of  ascent,  is  in  general  the  most 
expeditious  mode  of  gaining  a  summit.' 

Euc.  I  think  you  had  better  refer  him  to  Mr.  Wilson 
and  Mr.  Cooley  :  they  will  answer  him^  and  he  in  his  turn 
will  confute  them  ! 

Min.  The  last  charge  relating  to  demonstration  is,  in 
Mr.  Wilson's  words  (Pref.  p.  viii.)  '  the  constant  reference 
to  general  Axioms  and  general  Propositions,  which  are  no 
clearer  in  the  general   statement   than   they  are   in   the 


216  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  IV. 

particular  instance,'  which  practice,  he  says,  makes  the 
study  of  Geometry  '  unnecessarily  stiff,  obscure,  tedious 
and  barren.' 

Euc.  One  advantage  of  making  a  general  statement,  and 
afterwards  referring  to  it  instead  of  repeating  it,  is  that 
you  have  to  go  through  the  mental  process  of  affirming  or 
proving  the  truth  once  for  all :  apparently  Mr.  Wilson 
would  have  you  begin  de  novo  and  think  out  the  truth 
every  time  you  need  it !  But  the  great  reason  for  always 
referring  back  to  your  universal,  instead  of  affirming  the 
particular  (Mr.  Wilson  is  merely  starting  the  old  logical 
hare  '  Is  the  syllogism  a  Tetitio  Tnucipii  ? '),  is  that  the 
truth  of  the  particular  does  not  rest  on  any  data  peculiar 
to  itself,  but  on  general  principles  applicable  to  all  similar 
cases ;  and  that,  unless  those  general  principles  prove  the 
conclusion  for  all  cases^  they  cannot  he  warranted  to  'prove 
it  for  any  one  selected  case.  If,  for  instance,  I  see  a 
hundred  men,  and  am  told  that  some  assertion  is  true 
of  ninety-nine  of  them,  but  am  not  told  that  it  is  true 
of  all,  I  am  not  justified  in  affirming  it  of  any  selected 
man  ;  for  he  might  chance  to  be  the  excepted  one.  Now 
the  assertion,  that  the  truth  of  the  particular  case  under 
notice  depends  on  general  principles,  and  not  on  peculiar 
circumstances,  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  assertion 
of  the  universal  afiirmative  which  Mr.  Wilson  deprecates. 


^  4.  Euclid! s  Style. 

Min.  Quite   satisfactory.     I   will    now   take   the  third 
heading,  namely  '  Style.' 


§  5-]  LINES    AND    ANGLES.  217 

You  are  charged  with  Artificiality,  Unsngg-estiveness, 
and  Want  of  Simplicity.  Mr.  Wilson  says  (Pref.  p.  i.) 
'  The  real  objections  to  Euclid  as  a  text-])Ook  are  his 
artificiality  .  .  .  and  his  unsuggestiveness,'  and  again,  '  he 
has  sacrificed^  to  a  great  extent,  simplicity  and  naturalness 
in  his  demonstrations,  without  any  corresponding  gain  in 
grasp  or  cogency.' 

Euc.  Well,  really  I  cannot  deal  with  general  charges 
like  these.  I  prefer  to  abide  by  the  verdict  of  my  readers 
during  these  two  thousand  years.  As  to  '  unsuggestive- 
ness/  that  is  a  charge  which  cannot,  I  admit,  be  retorted 
on  Mr.  Wilson  :  his  book  is  verij  suggestive — of  remarks 
which^  perhaps,  would  not  be  whollj/  '  music  to  his  ear ' ! 


^  5.   Euclid's  treatment  of  Lines  and  Angles, 

Min.  Let  us  now  take  the  subjects  of  Right  Lines 
and  Angles ;  and  first,  the  '  Right  Line.' 

I  see,  by  reference  to  the  original_,  that  you  define  it 
as  a  Line  ^  which  lies  evenly  as  to  points  on  it.'  That 
of  course  is  only  an  attempt  to  give  the  mind  a  grasp  of 
the  idea.     It  leads  to  no  geometrical  results,  I  think  ? 

Euc.  No  :  nor  does  ani/  definition  of  it^  that  I  have  yet 
seen. 

Min.  I  have  no  rival  Definitions  to  propose.  Mr.  Wil- 
son's '  which  has  the  same  direction  at  all  parts  of  its 
length '  has  perished  in  the  collapse  of  the  '  direction ' 
theory  :  and  M.  Legendre's  '  the  shortest  course  from  one 
point  to  another'  is  not  adapted  for  the  use  of  a  beginner. 


218  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [AcT  IV. 

And  I  do  not  know  that  any  change  has  been  suggested 
in  your  test  of  a  right  Line  in  Prop.  14. 

The  next  subject  is  ^  Angles.' 

Your  definition  would  perhaps  be  improved,  if  for  '  in- 
clination to  "*  we  were  to  read  '  declination  from,'  for,  the 
greater  the  angle  the  greater  the  f/^clination,  and  the  less 
(as  it  seems  to  me)  the  inclination. 

Euc.  I  agree  with  you. 

Min.  The  next  point  is  that  you  limit  the  size  of  an 
angle  to  something  less  than  the  sum  of  two  right  angles. 

Euc.  What  advantage  is  claimed  for  the  extension  of  the 
Definition  ? 

Min.  It  is  a  prospective  rather  than  an  immediate  one. 
It  must  be  granted  you  that  the  larger  angles  are  not 
needed  in  the  first  four  Books — 

Hue.  In  the  first  six  Books. 

Min.  Nay,  surely  you  need  them  in  the  Sixth  Book  ? 

Hue.  Where  ? 

Min.  In  Prop.  '^'>i^  where  you  treat  of  '  any  equimultiples 
whatever '  of  an  angle,  of  an  arc,  and  of  a  sector.  You 
cannot  possibly  assume  the  multiple  angle  to  be  always 
less  than  two  rio-ht  ang'les. 

Hue.  You  think,  then,  that  a  multiple  of  an  angle  must 
itself  be  an  angle  ? 

Min.  Surely. 

Hue,  Then  a  multiple  of  a  man  must  itself  be  a  man. 
If  I  contemplate  a  man  as  multiplied  by  the  number  ten 
thousand,  I  must  realise  the  idea  of  a  man  ten  thousand 
times  the  size  of  the  first  ? 

Min.  No,  you  need  not  do  that. 


§  5.]  LINES    AND    ANGLES.  219 

Euc.  Thanks  :  it  is  rather  a  strain  on  the  imaginative 
faculty. 

Min.  You  mean,  then,  that  the  multiple  of  an  angle 
may  be  conceived  of  as  so  many  separate  angles,  not  in 
contact,  nor  added  together  into  one  ? 

Euc.  Certainly. 

Min.  But  you  have  to  contemplate  the  case  where  two 
such  angular  magnitudes  are  equal,  and  to  infer  from  that, 
by  III.  26,  that  the  subtending  arcs  are  equal.  How  can 
you  infer  this  when  your  angular  magnitude  is  not  one 
angle  but  many  ? 

Euc,  Why,  the  sum  total  of  the  first  set  of  angles  is 
equal  to  the  sum  total  of  the  second  set.  Hence  the 
second  set  can  clearly  be  broken  up  and  put  together 
again  in  such  amounts  as  to  make  a  set  equal,  each  to 
each_,  to  the  first  set :  and  then  the  sum  total  of  the  arcs, 
and  likewise  of  the  sectors,  will  evidently  be  equal  also. 

But  if  you  contemplate  the  multiples  of  the  angles  as 
single  angular  magnitudes,  I  do  not  see  how  you  prove 
the  equality  of  the  subtending  arcs :  for  my  proof  applies 
only  to  cases  where  the  angle  is  less  than  the  sum  of  two 
right  angles. 

Min.  That  is  very  true,  and  you  have  quite  convinced 
me  that  we  ought  to  observe  that  limit,  and  not  con- 
template 'angles  of  rotation'  till  we  enter  on  the  subject 
of  Trigonometry. 

As  to  right  angles,  it  has  been  suggested  that  your  Axiom 
^  all  right  angles  are  equal  to  one  another '  is  capable  of 
proof  as  a  Theorem. 

Euc.  I  do  not   object  to  the   interpolation   of  such  a 


220  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  IV. 

Theorem^   thougli  there   is    very  little    to  distinguish    so 
simple  a  Theorem  from  an  Axiom. 

Min.  Let  us  now  consider  the  omissions,  alterations,  and 
additions,  which  have  been  proposed  by  your  Modern 
Rivals. 

\  6.  Omissions,  alterations,  and  additions, 
suggested  hy  Modern  Rivals. 

Euc.  Which  of  my  Theorems  have  my  Modern  Rivals 
proposed  to  omit  ? 

Min.  Without  dwelling  on  such  extreme  cases  as  that  of 
Mr.  Pierce,  who  omits  no  less  than  19  of  the  '^^  Theorems 
in  your  First  Book,  I  may  say  that  the  only  two^  as  to 
which  I  have  found  anything  like  unanimity,  are  I.  7  and 
II.  8. 

Eiic.  As  to  I.  7,  I  have  several  reasons  to  urge  in  favour 
of  retaining  it. 

First,  it  is  useful  in  proving  I.  8^  which,  without  it,  is 
necessarily  much  lengthened,  as  it  then  has  to  include  three 
cases :  so  that  its  omission  effects  little  or  no  saving  of 
space. 

Secondly,  the  modern  method  of  proving  I.  8  inde- 
pendently leaves  I.  7  still  unproved. 

311)1.  That  reason  has  no  weight  unless  you  can  prove 
I.  7  to  be  valuable  for  itself. 

Euc.  True,  but  I  think  I  can  prove  it  ;  for,  thirdly,  it 
shows  that,  of  all  plane  Figures  that  can  be  made  by 
hingeing  rods  together,  the  ^/^r^^-sided  ones  (and  these 
only)  are  rigid  (which  is  another  way  of  stating  the  fact 


§  6.]  OMISSIONS    SUGGESTED.  221 

that  there  cannot  be  two  such  figures  on  the  same  base). 
This  is  analogous  to  the  fact,  in  relation  to  solids  con- 
tained by  plane  surfaces  hinged  together,  that  a7ii/  such 
solid  is  rigid,  there  being  no  maximum  number  of  sides. 

And  fourthly,  there  is  a  close  analogy  between  I.  7,  8 
and  III.  23,  24.  These  analogies  give  to  Geometry  much 
of  its  beauty,  and  I  think  that  they  ought  not  to  be  lost 
sight  of. 

Mill.  You  have  made  out  a  good  case.  Allow  me  to 
contribute  a  '  fifthly.'  It  is  one  of  the  very  few  Proposi- 
tions that  have  a  direct  bearing  on  practical  science.  I 
have  often  found  pupils  much  interested  in  learning  that 
the  principle  of  the  rigidity  of  Triangles  is  of  constant  use 
in  architecture,  and  even  in  so  homely  a  matter  as  the 
making  of  a  gate. 

The  other  Theorem  which  I  mentioned,  II.  8,  is  now 
so  constantly  ignored  in  examinations  that  it  is  very 
often  omitted,  as  a  matter  of  course,  by  students.  It  is 
believed  to  be  extremely  difficult  and  entirely  useless. 

Buc.  Its  difficulty  has,  I  think,  been  exaggerated.  Have 
you  tried  to  teach  it  ? 

Min.  I  have  occasionally  found  pupils  amiable  enough  to 
listen  to  what  they  felt  sure  would  be  of  no  service  in 
examinations.  My  experience  has  been  wholly  among 
undergraduates,  any  one  of  whom,  if  of  average  ability, 
would,  I  think,  master  it  in  from  five  to  ten  minutes. 

Euc.  No  very  exorbitant  demand  on  your  pupil's  time. 
As  to  its  being  '  entirely  useless,'  I  grant  you  it  is  of  no 
immediate  service,  but  you  will  find  it  eminently  useful 
when  you  come  to  treat  the  Parabola  geometrically. 


222  MINOS    AND    EUCLID.  [Act  IV, 

Min.  That  is  true. 

Hug,  Let  us  now  consider  the  new  methods  of  proof  sug- 
gested by  my  Rivals. 

Min.  Prop.  5  has  been  much  attacked — I  may  say  tram- 
pled on — by  your  Modern  Rivals. 

Euc.  Good.  So  that  is  why  you  call  it  '  The  Asses' 
Bridge '  ?  Well,  how  many  new  methods  do  they  suggest 
for  crossing  it  ? 

Min.  One  is  '  hypothetical  construction,'  M.  Legendre 
bisecting  the  base,  and  Mr.  Pierce  the  vertical  angle,  but 
without  any  proof  that  the  thing  can  be  done. 

Iluc.  So  long  as  we  agree  that  beginners  in  Geometry 
shall  be  limited  to  the  use  of  Lines  and  Circles,  so  long 
will  it  be  unsafe  to  assume  a  point  as  found,  or  a  Line  as 
drawn,  merely  because  we  are  sure  it  exists.  For  example, 
it  is  axiomatic,  of  course,  that  every  angle  has  a  bisector : 
but  it  is  equally  obvious  that  it  has  two  trisectors  :  and  if 
I  may  assume  the  one  as  drawn,  why  not  the  others  also  ? 
However  we  have  discussed  this  matter  already  (p.  20). 

Min.  A  second  method  is  '  superposition/  adopted  by 
Mr.  Wilson  and  Mr.  Cuthbertson — a  method  which  here 
involves  the  reversing  of  the  triangle,  before  applying  it  to 
its  former  position. 

JEuc.  That  also  we  have  discussed  (p.  47).  What  is  the 
method  adopted  in  the  new  Manual  founded  on  the 
Syllabus  of  the  Association  ? 

Min.  The  same  as  Mr.  Pierce's.  Mr.  Reynolds  has  a 
curious  method  :  he  treats  the  sides  as  obliques  '  equally 
remote  from  the  perpendicular.' 

Euc.  Curious,  indeed. 


§  6.]  ALTERATIONS    SUGGESTED.  223 

Mln.  But  perhaps  the  most  curious  of  all  is  Mr.  Willock's 
method :  he  treats  the  sides  as  radii  of  a  circle,  and  the  base 
as  a  chord. 

Euc.  He  had  better  have  made  them  asj^mptotes  of  a 
hyperbola  at  once  !  C'est  magnifque^  niais  ce  n' est  pas  la — 
Geometrie. 

Min.  Two  of  your  Rivals  prove  Prop.  8  from  Prop.  24. 

Euc.  '  Putting  the  cart  before  the  horse,'  in  my  humble 
opinion. 

Mi7i.  For  a  brief  proof  of  Prop.  13,  let  me  commend  to 
your  notice  Mr.  Reynolds' — consisting  of  the  seven  words 
'  For  they  fill  exactly  the  same  space.' 

Euc.  Why  so  lengthy?  The  word  'exactly'  is  super- 
fluous. 

Min.  Instead  of  your  chain  of  Theorems,  18,  19,  20, 
several  writers  suggest  20,  19,  18,  making  20  axiomatic. 

Etic.  That  has  been  discussed  already  (p.  56). 

Mm.  Mr.  Cuthbertson's  proof  of  Prop.  24  is,  if  I  may 
venture  to  say  so,  more  complete  than  yours.  He  con- 
structs his  diagram  without  considering  the  lengths  of  the 
sides,  and  then  proves  the  3  possible  cases  separately. 

Etic.  I  think  it  an  improvement. 

3Iin.  There  are  no  other  noticeable  innovations,  that  have 
not  been  already  discussed,  except  that  Mr.  Cuthbertson 
proves  a  good  deal  of  Book  II  by  a  quasi-algebraical 
method,  without  exhibiting  to  the  eye  the  actual  Squares 
and  Rectangle :  while  Mr.  Reynolds  does  it  by  pure 
algebra. 

Euc.  I  think  the  actual  Squares,  &c.  most  useful  for  be- 
ginners, making  the  Theorems  more  easy  to  understand  and 


224:  MINOS    AND     EUCLID.  [AcT  IV, 

to  remember.  Algebraical  proofs  of  course  introduce  the 
difficulty  of  'incommensurables.' 

Min.  We  will  now  take  the  new  Propositions,  &c.  which 
have  been  suggested. 

Here  is  an  Axiom  :- — '  Two  lines  cannot  have  a  common 
segment! 

E2CC.  Good.  I  have  tacitly  assumed  it,  but  it  may  as 
well  be  stated. 

Mln.  Several  new  Theorems  have  been  suggested,  but  only 
two  of  them  seem  to  me  worth  mentioning.     They  are  : — 

'  All  right  angles  are  eqiiaV 

Enc.  I  have  already  approved  of  that  (p.  219). 

Min.  The  other  is  one  that  is  popular  with  most  of  your 
Rivals : — 

'  Of  all  the  Lines  ivhich  can  he  drawn  to  a  Line  from  a 
'point  without  it^  the  jperpendicnlar  is  least;  and,  of  the  rest, 
that  which  is  nearer  to  the  joeiyendiciilar  is  less  than  one  more 
remote;  and  the  lesser  is  nearer  than  the  greater ;  and  from  the 
same  point  only  tico  equal  Lines  can  he  drawn  to  the  other 
Line,  one  on  each  side  of  the  perpendicular! 

Euc.  I  like  it  on  the  whole,  though  so  long  an  enunci- 
ation will  be  alarming  to  beginners.  But  it  is  strictly 
analogous  to  III.  7.  Introduce  it  by  all  means  in  the 
revised  edition  of  my  Manual.  It  will  be  well,  however, 
to  lay  it  down  as  a  general  rule,  that  no  Proposition  shall 
be  so  interpolated,  unless  it  be  of  such  importance  and 
value  as  to  be  thought  worthy  of  being  quoted  as  proved, 
in  the  same  way  in  which  candidates  in  examinations  are 
now  allowed  to  quote  Propositions  of  mine. 

Min.  (with  a  fearful  yawn)  Well !  I  have  no  more  to  say. 


§  7-]  EUCLID'S    LAST     WORDS.  225 


\  7.   The  summing-up. 

Euc.  '  The  cock  doth  craw,  the  day  doth  daw,'  and  all 
respectable  ghosts  ought  to  be  going  home.  Let  me  carry 
with  me  the  hope  that  I  have  convinced  you  of  the  import- 
ance, if  not  the  necessity,  of  retaining  my  order  and  num- 
bering, and  my  method  of  treating  straight  Lines,  angles, 
right  angles,  and  (most  especially)  Parallels.  Leave  me 
these  untouched,  and  I  shall  look  on  with  great  content- 
ment while  other  changes  are  made — while  my  proofs  are 
abridged  and  improved — while  alternative  proofs  are  ap- 
pended to  mine — and  while  new  Problems  and  Theorems 
are  interpolated. 

In  all  these  matters  my  Manual  is  capable  of  almost 
unlimited  improvement. 

\To  the  sound  of  sloiv  music,  Euclid  and  the  other  ghosts 
'  heavily  vanish^  according  to  Shakespeare^ s  approved  stage- 
direction.  Minos  loahes  loith  a  starts  and  betakes  himself 
to  bed^  '  a  sadder  and  a  loiser  ?nan.^~\ 


APPENDICES, 


APPENDIX  I. 

Extract  from  Mr.  Todhunters  essay  on  'Ele- 
mentary Geometry,'  included  in  '  The 
Conflict  of  Studies,  &c! 

It  has  been  said  by  a  distinguished  philosopher  that  England 
is  "  usually  the  last  to  enter  into  the  general  movement  of  the 
European  mind."  The  author  of  the  remark  probably  meant  to 
assert  that  a  man  or  a  system  may  have  become  famous  on  the 
continent,  while  we  are  almost  ignorant  of  the  name  of  the  man 
and  the  claims  of  his  system.  Perhaps,  however,  a  wider  range 
might  be  given  to  the  assertion.  An  exploded  theory  or  a 
disadvantageous  practice,  like  a  rebel  or  a  patriot  in  distress, 
seeks  refuge  on  our  shores  to  spend  its  last  days  in  comfort  if 
not  in  splendour.  Just  when  those  who  originally  set  up  an 
idol  begin  to  suspect  that  they  have  been  too  extravagant  in 
their  devotions  we  receive  the  discredited  image  and  commence 
our  adorations.  It  is  a  less  usual  but  more  dangerous  illus- 
tration of  the  principle,  if  just  as  foreigners  are  learning  to 
admire  one  of  our  peculiarities  we  should  grow  weary  of  it. 

In  teaching  elementary  geometry  in  England  we  have  for 
a  long  time  been  accustomed  to  use  the  well-known  Elements  of 
Euclid.  At  the  present  moment,  when  we  learn  from  the  best 
testimony,  namely,  the  admission  of  anti-Euclideans,  that  both 
in   France   and   Italy  dissatisfaction   is   felt  with   the   system 


TODHUNTER.  227 


hitherto  used,  accompanied  with  more  or  less  desire  to  adopt 
ours,  we  are  urged  by  many  persons  to  exchange  our  system 
for  one  which  is  falling  out  of  favour  on  tlie  continent. 

Many  assertions  have  been  made  in  discussion  which  rest 
entirely  on  the  authority  of  the  individual  advocate,  and  thus  it 
is  necessary  to  be  somewhat  critical  in  our  estimate  of  the  value 
of  the  testimony.  Two  witnesses  who  are  put  prominently 
forward  are  MM.  Demogeot  and  Montucci,  who  drew  up  a 
report  on  English  education  for  the  French  Government.  Now 
I  have  no  doubt  that  these  gentlemen  were  suited  in  some 
i-espects  to  report  on  English  education,  as  they  were  selected 
for  that  purpose ;  but  I  have  searched  in  vain  for  any  evidence 
of  their  special  mathematical  qualifications.  No  list  of  mathe- 
matical publications  that  I  have  consulted  has  ever  presented 
either  of  these  names,  and  I  am  totally  at  a  loss  to  conceive  on 
what  grounds  an  extravagant  respect  has  been  claimed  for  their 
opinions.  The  following  sentence  has  been  quoted  with  appro- 
bation from  these  writers  :  "Le  trait  distinctif  de  I'enseignement 
des  mathematiques  en  Augleterre  c'est  qu'on  y  fait  appel  plutot 
a  la  memoire  qu'a  I'intelligence  de  Televe."  In  the  first  place 
we  ought  to  know  on  what  evidence  this  wide  generalisation  is 
constructed.  Did  the  writers  visit  some  of  the  humbler  schools 
in  England  in  which  the  elements  of  arithmetic  and  mensuration 
were  rudely  taught,  and  draw  from  this  narrow  experience  an 
inference  as  to  the  range  of  mathematical  instruction  throughout 
England  %  Or  did  they  find  on  inspecting  some  of  our  larger 
public  schools  that  the  mathematical  condition  was  unsatisfactory? 
In  the  latter  case  this  might  have  arisen  from  exclusive  devotion 
to  classics,  or  from  preference  for  some  of  the  fashionable  novelties 
of  the  day,  or  from  want  of  attention  and  patience  in  the  teachers. 
On  the  most  unfavourable  supposition  the  condemnation  pro- 
nounced on  the  general  matliematical  training  in  England  cannot 
be  justified.  But  take  some  kind  of  experimental  test.  Let 
an  inquirer  carefully  collect  the  mathematical  examination  papers 

Q  2 


228  APPENDIX  I. 


issued  throughout  England  in  a  single  year,  including  those 
proposed  at  the  Universities  and  the  Colleges,  and  those  set  at 
the  Military  Examinations,  the  Civil  Service  Examinations, 
and  the  so-called  Local  Examinations.  I  say  then,  without 
fear  of  contradiction,  that  the  original  problems  and  examples 
contained  in  these  papers  will  for  interest,  variety,  and  ingenuity 
surpass  any  similar  set  that  could  be  found  in  any  country  of 
the  world.  Then  any  person  practically  conversant  with  teaching 
and  examining  can  judge  whether  the  teaching  is  likely  to  be 
the  worst  where  the  examining  is  the  most  excellent. 

The  sentence  quoted  from  MM.  Demogeot  and  Montucci, 
in  order  to  have  any  valu^,  ought  to  have  proceeded  from 
writers  more  nearly  on  a  level  with  the  distinguished  mathe- 
matical teachers  in  England.  So  far  as  any  foundation  can 
be  assigned  for  this  statement,  it  will  probably  apply  not  to 
mathematics  especially  but  to  all  our  studies,  and  amount  to 
this,  that  our  incessant  examinations  lead  to  an  over  culti- 
vation of  the  memory.  Then  as  to  the  practical  bearing  of 
the  remark  on  our  present  subject  it  is  obvious  that  the  charge, 
if  true,  is  quite  independent  of  the  text-book  used  for  instruction, 
and  might  remain  equally  valid  if  Euclid  were  exchanged  for 
any  modern  author. 

The  French  gentlemen  further  on  contrast  what  they  call 
Euclid's  verbiage  with  the  elegant  conciseness  of  the  French 
methods.  It  is  surely  more  than  an  answer  to  these  writers 
to  oppose  the  high  opinion  of  the  merits  of  Euclid  expressed 
by  mathematicians  of  European  fame  like  Duhamel  and  Hoiiel. 
See  the  First  Rejport  of  the  Association  for  the  Improvement  of 
Geometrical  Teaching^  p.  lo. 

When  we  compare  the  lustre  of  the  mathematical  reputation 
of  these  latter  names  with  the  obscurity  of  the  two  former,  it 
seems  that  there  is  a  great  want  of  accuracy  in  the  statement 
made  in  a  recent  circular :  '  The  opinion  of  French  mathe- 
maticians on  this  question,  is  plainly  expressed  in  the  Report  of 
MM.  Demogeot  and  Montucci.  .  .  .' 


TODHUNTER.  229 


I  should  have  to  quote  very  kirgely  indeed  if  I  wished  to 
draw  attention  to  every  hazardous  statement  wliich  has  been 
advanced  ;  I  must  therefore  severely  restrain  myself.  Consider 
the  following :  *  Unquestionably  the  best  teachers  depart  largely 
from  his  words,  and  even  from  his  methods.  That  is,  they  use 
the  work  of  Euclid,  but  they  would  teach  better  without  it. 
And  this  is  especially  true  of  the  application  to  problems. 
Everybody  recollects,  even  if  he  have  not  the  daily  experience, 
how  unavailable  for  problems  a  boy's  knowledge  of  Euclid 
generally  is.'  The  value  of  such  a  statement  depends  entirely 
on  the  range  of  the  experience  from  which  it  has  been  derived* 
Suppose  for  instance  that  the  writer  had  been  for  many 
years  an  examiner  in  a  large  University  in  which  against  each 
candidate's  name  the  school  was  recorded  from  which  he  came  ; 
suppose  that  the  writer  had  also  been  much  engaged  in  the 
numerous  examinations  connected  with  the  military  institutions  ; 
suppose  that  he  had  also  been  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  in 
residence  at  one  of  the  largest  colleges  at  Cambridge,  and 
actively  employed  in  the  tuition  ;  suppose  also  that  it  had  been 
his  duty  to  classify  the  new  students  for  lecture  purposes  by 
examining  them  in  Euclid  and  other  parts  of  elementary 
mathematics ;  and  finally  suppose  that  he  was  in  constant  com- 
munication with  the  teachers  in  many  of  the  large  schools : 
then  his  opinion  would  have  enjoyed  an  authority  which  in  the 
absence  of  these  circumstances  cannot  be  claimed  for  it. 

If  I  may  venture  to  refer  to  my  own  experience,  wliich  I 
fear  commenced  when  the  writer  whom  I  have  just  quoted 
was  in  his  cradle,  I  may  say  that  I  have  taught  geometry 
both  Euclidean  and  non-Euclidean,  that  my  own  early  studies 
and  prepossessions  were  towards  the  latter,  but  that  my  tes- 
timony would  now  be  entirely  in  favour  of  the  former. 

I  admit  that  to  teach  Euclid  requires  patience  both  from  the 
tutor  and  the  pupil ;  but  I  can  affirm  that  I  have  known  many 
teachers  who  have  succeeded  admirably,  and  have  sent  a  large 


230  APPENDIX  I. 


number  of  pupils  to  the  University  well  skilled  in  solving 
deductions  and  examples ;  nor  have  I  ever  known  a  really 
able  and  zealous  teacher  to  fail.  I  am  happy  to  supplement 
my  own  testimony  by  an  extract  from  the  very  interesting 
lecture  on  Geometrical  Teaching  by  Dr.  Lees,  of  St.  Andrews. 
*  Whatever  may  be  the  cause  of  failure  in  England,  it  is  clear 
as  any  demonstration  can  be  that  the  failure  cannot  be  ascribed  to 
Euclid.  Because  in  Scotland  we  do  employ  Euclid  as  the  text- 
book for  our  students,  and  in  Scotland  we  have  the  teaching  of 
Geometry  attended  with  the  most  complete  success ;  and  this 
not  only  in  the  colleges,  but  in  all  the  higher  and  more  important 
schools  and  academies  of  the  country,  and  in  many  of  the  parish 
schools  even,  where  the  attention  "of  the  teacher  is  necessarily  so 
much  divided.'  See  also  the  remarkable  Narrative- Essay  on  a 
Liberal  Education,  by  the  Rev.  S.  Hawtrey,  A.M.,  Assistant- 
Master,  Eton. 

During  the  existence  of  tlie  East  India  Company's  military 
college  at  Addiscombe,  it  is  well  known  that  the  cadets  were 
instructed  in  mathematics  by  the  aid  of  a  course  drawn  up  by 
the  late  Professor  Cape.  The  geometry  in  this  course  was  of 
the  kind  which  our  modern  reformers  recommend,  being  founded 
on  Legendre,  and  adopting  the  principle  of  hypothetical  con- 
structions which  is  now  so  emphatically  praised.  In  certain 
large  schools  where  youths  were  trained  for  the  military  colleges 
it  was  usual  to  instruct  a  class  of  candidates  for  "Woolwich,  in 
Euclid,  and  a  class  of  candidates  for  Addiscombe  in  Cape's 
adaptation  of  Legendre.  Fairness  in  the  procedure  was  secured 
by  giving  the  same  number  of  hours  by  the  same  masters  to 
each  class  ;  and  the  honour  and  rewards  which  attended  success 
supplied  an  effectual  stimulus  both  to  teachers  and  pupils.  Now 
consider  the  result.  I  was  assured  by  a  teacher  who  was  for 
many  years  distinguished  for  the  number  and  the  success  of  his 
pupils,  that  the  training  acquired  by  the  Euclid  class  was  far 
superior  to  that  acquired  by  the  Legendre  class.     The  Euclid 


TDDHUNTER.  231 


was  not  more  difficult  to  teach  and  was  more  potent  and  more 
beneficial  in  its  influence.  The  testimony  made  the  stronger 
impression  on  me  because  at  the  time  I  was  disposed  from 
theoretical  considerations  to  hold  an  opposite  opinion  ;  I  was 
inclined  for  example  to  support  the  use  of  hypothetical  con- 
structions. Such  experience  as  I  afterwards  gained  shewed  the 
soundness  of  the  judgment  at  which  the  practical  teache;^  had 
arrived ;  and  I  have  also  received  the  emphatic  evidence  of 
others  who  had  good  opportunities  of  considering  the  question, 
and  had  come  to  the  same  conclusion.  I  have  myself  examined 
at  Woolwich  and  at  Addiscombe,  and  am  confident  that  the 
teaching  in  both  institutions  was  sound  and  zealous ;  but  I  have 
no  hesitation  in  saying  that  the  foundation  obtained  from  Euclid 
was  sounder  than  that  from  Legendre. 

Although  I  have  admitted  that  the  study  of  Euclid  is  one 
that  really  demands  patient  attention  from  the  beginner,  yet 
I  cannot  admit  that  the  tax  is  unreasonable.  My  own  experi- 
ence has  been  gained  in  the  following  manner.  Some  years 
since  on  being  appointed  principal  mathematical  lecturer  in  my 
college,  more  systematic  arrangements  were  introduced  for  the 
lectures  of  the  freshmen  than  had  been  previously  adopted  ;  and 
as  the  Euclid  seemed  to  be  one  of  the  less  popular  subjects  I 
undertook  it  myself.  Thus  for  a  long  period  the  way  in  which 
this  has  been  taught  in  schools,  and  the  results  of  such  teaching, 
have  been  brought  under  my  notice.  It  need  scarcely  be  said 
that  while  many  of  the  students  who  have  thus  presented  them- 
selves to  me  have  been  distinguished  for  mathematical  taste  and 
power,  yet  the  majority  have  been  of  other  kinds  ;  namely,  either 
persons  of  ability  whose  attention  was  fully  occupied  with  studies 
difi'erent  from  mathematics,  or  persons  of  scanty  attainments 
and  feeble  power  who  could  do  little  more  than  pass  the  ordinary 
examination.  I  can  distinctly  afiirm  that  the  cases  of  hopeless 
failure  in  Euclid  were  very  few  ;  and  the  advantages  derived 
from  the  study,  even  by  men  of  feeble  ability,  were  most  decided. 


232  APPENDIX  1. 


In  comparing  the  performance  in  Euclid  with  that  in  Arithmetic 
and  Algebra  there  could  be  no  doubt  that  the  Euclid  had  made 
the  deepest  and  most  beneficial  impression :  in  fact  it  might  be 
asserted  that  this  constituted  by  far  the  most  valuable  part  of 
the  whole  training  to  which  such  persons  were  subjected.  Even 
the  modes  of  expression  in  Euclid,  which  have  been  theoretically 
condemned  as  long  and  wearisome,  seemed  to  be  in  practice  well 
adapted  to  the  position  of  beginners.  As  I  have  already  stated 
there  appears  to  me  a  decided  improvement  gradually  taking 
place  in  the  knowledge  of  the  subject  exhibited  by  youths  on 
entering  the  University.  My  deliberate  judgment  is  that  our 
ordinary  students  would  suffer  very  considerably  if  instead  of 
the  well-reasoned  system  of  Euclid  any  of  the  more  popular 
but  less  rigid  manuals  were  allowed  to  be  taken  as  a  substitute. 

Let  me  now  make  a  few  remarks  on  the  demand  which  has 
been  made  to  allow  other  books  instead  of  Euclid  in  examina- 
tions. It  has  been  said :  "  We  demand  that  we  should  not  be, — 
as  we  are  now,  by  the  fact  of  Euclid  being  set  as  a  text-book 
for  so  many  examinations, — practically  obliged  to  adhere  to  one 
book.  Surely  such  a  request,  made  by  men  who  know  what  they 
want,  and  are  competent  to  form  an  opinion  on  the  subject, — 
and  made  in  earnest, — should  induce  the  Universities  and  other 
examining  bodies  to  yield  their  consent.  The  grounds  of  the 
demand  then  are  three  ;  that  it  is  made  in  earnest,  that  it  is 
made  by  those  who  know  what  they  want,  and  that  it  is  made 
by  those  who  are  competent  to  form  an  opinion  on  the  subject. 
I  need  not  delay  on  two  of  the  grounds  ;  the  experience  of  every 
day  shews  that  claimants  may  know  what  they  want,  and  be 
terribly  in  earnest  in  their  solicitations,  and  yet  it  may  be  the 
duty  of  those  to  whom  the  appeal  is  made  to  resist  it.  Moreover 
it  is  obvious  that  the  adoption  of  Euclid  as  a  text  book  is  pre- 
scribed by  those  who  are  equally  in  earnest  and  know  what  they 
recommend.  In  short  if  no  institution  is  to  be  defended  when 
it  is  attacked  knowingly  and  earnestly,  it  is  plain  that  no  institu- 
tion is  safe. 


TODHUNTER,  233 


I  turn  then  to  the  other  ground,  namelj^  that  the  demand  is 
made  by  men  who  are  competent  to  form  an  opinion  on  the 
subject.  Now  it  is  not  for  me  to  affect  to  speak  in  the  name  of 
the  University  of  Cambridge ;  mine  is  the  opinion  of  only  a 
private  unofficial  resident.  But  I  have  little  doubt  that  many 
persons  here  will  maintain,  without  questioning  the  competence 
of  the  claimants  to  form  an  opinion,  that  we  ourselves  are  still 
much  more  competent  to  form  an  opinion. 

For  it  will  not  be  denied  that  in  all  which  relates  to  mathe- 
matical knowledge  we  have  an  aggregate  of  eminence  which  far 
surpasses  w^hat  has  yet  been  collected  together  to  press  the 
demand  on  the  University.  Moreover  as  inspectors  and  judges 
we  occupy  a  central  position  as  it  were,  and  thus  enjoy  oppor- 
tunities which  do  not  fall  to  isolated  teachers  however  eminent 
and  experienced.  The  incessant  demands  made  upon  the  Uni- 
versity to  furnish  examiners  for  schools  and  for  the  local  exami- 
nations keep  us  as  a  body  practically  familiar  with  the  standard 
of  excellence  attained  in  various  places  of  instruction.  Then  as 
college  lecturers  and  private  tutors  we  have  the  strongest  motives 
for  keenly  discriminating  the  state  of  mathematical  knowledge 
in  different  schools,  as  shewn  by  the  performance  of  the  candi- 
dates when  brought  under  our  notice.  Moreover  some  of  the 
residents  in  the  University  by  continued  intercourse  w4th  old 
pupils,  now  themselves  occupying  important  positions  as  teachers, 
are  enabled  to  prolong  and  enlarge  the  experience  w^hich  they 
may  have  already  obtained  directly  or  indirectly.  If  it  is  obvious 
that  certain  teachers  by  ability  and  devotion  have  for  many  years 
sent  up  well-trained  pupils,  the  University  may  w^ell  consider 
that  it  would  be  neither  right  nor  wise  to  deprive  its  best 
friends  of  their  justly  earned  distinction,  by  relaxing  in  any  way 
the  rigour  of  the  examinations.  Instead  then  of  urging  an 
instant  acquiescence  with  demands  on  the  ground  that  those  who 
make  them  are  well  qualified  to  judge,  the  claimants  should 
endeavour  by  argument  to  convince  others  who  are  still  better 
qualified  to  judge. 


234  APPENDIX  L 


Here  let  me  invite  attention  to  the  following  remark  which 
has  been  made  in  support  of  the  claim  :  "  In  every  other  subject 
this  is  freely  accorded  ;  we  are  not  obliged  to  use  certain 
grammars  or  dictionaries,  or  one  fixed  treatise  on  arithmetic, 
algebra,  trigonometry,  chemistry,  or  any  other  branch  of  science. 
Why  are  we  to  be  tied  to  one  book  in  geometry  alone  % "  Now 
in  the  first  place  it  may  be  said  that  there  are  great  advantages 
in  the  general  use  of  one  common  book ;  and  that  when  one 
book  has  long  been  used  almost  exclusively  it  would  be  rash  to 
throw  away  certain  good  in  order  to  grasp  at  phantasmal  benefits. 
So  well  is  this  principle  established  that  we  have  seen  in  recent 
times  a  vigorous,  and  it  would  seem  successful,  effort  to  secure 
the  use  of  a  common  Latin  Grammar  in  the  eminent  public 
schools.  In  the  second  place  the  analogy  which  is  adduced  in  the 
remark  quoted  above  would  be  rejected  by  many  persons  as  involv- 
ing an  obvious  fallacy,  namely  that  the  word  geometry  denotes 
the  same  thing  by  all  who  use  it.  By  the  admirers  of  Euclid 
it  means  a  system  of  demonstrated  propositions  valued  more 
for  the  process  of  reasoning  involved  than  for  the  results  obtained. 
Whereas  with  some  of  the  modern  reformers  the  rigour  of  the 
method  is  of  small  account  compared  with  the  facts  themselves. 
We  have  only  to  consult  the  modern  books  named  in  a  certain 
list,  beginning  with  the  Essentials  of  Geometry,  to  see]  that 
practically  the  object  of  some  of  our  reformers  is  not  to  teach 
the  same  subject  with  the  aid  of  a  different  text-book,  but  to 
teach  something  very  different  from  what  is  found  in  Euclid, 
under  the  common  name  of  geometry. 

It  may  be  said  that  I  am  assuming  the  point  in  question, 
namely,  that  Euclid  is  the  best  book  in  geometry;  but  this  is 
not  the  case.  I  am  not  an  advocate  ior finality  in  this  matter; 
though  I  do  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  a  book  should  be  decidedly 
better  than  Euclid  before  we  give  up  the  advantages  of  uni- 
formity which  it  will  be  almost  impossible  to  secure  if  the 
present  system  is  abandoned.  But,  as  it  has  been  well  observed 
by  one  of  the  most  distinguished  mathematicians  in  Cambridge, 


TODHUNTER.  235 


"  The  demand  is  unreasonable  to  throw  aside  Euclid  in  favour  of 
any  compendium  however  meagre  and  however  unsound;  and 
this  is  really  the  demand  which  is  made :  it  will  be  time  enough 
to  consider  about  the  discontinuance  of  Euclid  when  a  better 
book  is  deliberately  offered."  It  may  be  added  that  the  supe- 
riority to  Euclid  must  be  established  by  indisputable  evidence ; 
not  by  the  author's  own  estimation,  the  natural  but  partial 
testimony  of  parental  fondness  ;  not  by  the  hasty  prediction  of 
some  anonymous  and  irresponsible  reviewer  ;  not  by  the  authority 
of  eminent  men,  unless  the  eminence  is  founded  on  mathematical 
attainments ;  not  even  by  the  verdict  of  teachers  who  are  not 
conspicuous  for  the  success  of  their  pupils.  The  decision  must 
rest  with  students,  teachers,  and  examiners,  of  considerable  repu- 
tation in  the  range  of  the  mathematical  sciences. 

It  must  be  allowed  that  there  is  diversity  of  opinion  among 
the  opponents  of  Euclid,  for  while  the  majority  seem  to  claim 
freedom  in  the  use  of  any  text-books  they  please,  others  rather 
advocate  the  construction  and  general  adoption  of  a  new  text- 
book. The  former  class  on  the  whole  seem  to  want  something 
easier  and  more  popular  than  Euclid;  among  the  latter  class 
there  are  a  few  whose  notion  seems  to  be  that  the  text-book 
should  be  more  rigorous  and  more  extensive  than  Euclid.  There 
are  various  considerations  which  seem  to  me  to  indicate  that  if 
a  change  be  made  it  will  not  be  in  the  direction  qI  greater  rigour 'y 
the  origin  of  the  movement,  the  character  of  the  text-books 
which  have  hitherto  been  issued,  and  the  pressure  of  more 
modern  and  more  attractive  studies,  combine  to  warn  us  that  if 
the  traditional  authority  which  belongs  to  Euclid  be  abandoned 
geometry  will  be  compelled  to  occupy  a  position  in  general 
education  much  inferior  to  that  which  it  now  holds. 

There  is  one  very  obvious  mode  of  advancing  the  cause  of  the 
anti-Euclidean  party,  which  I  believe  will  do  far  more  for  them 
than  the  most  confident  assertions  and  predictions  of  the  merits 
of  the  course  which  they  advocate  :  let  them  train  youths  on  their 


236  APPENDIX  L 


system  to  gain  the  highest  places  in  the  Cambridge  Mathematical 
Tripos,  and  then  other  teachers  will  readily  follow  in  the  path 
thus  opened  to  distinction.     But  it  may  naturally  be  said  that  as 
long  as  Euclid  is  prescribed  for  the  text-book,  the  conditions  of 
competition  are  unfair  towards  those  who  adopt  some  modern 
substitute ;     I   will   examine   this   point.      In  the   Cambridge 
Examination  for  Mathematical   Honours  there  are   at  present 
sixteen  papers ;  a  quarter  of  the  first  paper  is  devoted  to  book- 
work  questions  on  Euclid.     Now  suppose  that  looo  marks  are 
assigned  to  the  whole  examination,  and  that  about  five  of  these 
fall  to  the  book -work  in  Euclid.      A  student  of  any  modern 
system  would  surely  be  able  to  secure  some  of  these  five  marks, 
even  from  a  stern  Euclidean  partisan.     But  to  take  the  worst 
case,  suppose  the   candidate  deliberately  rejects   all  chance   of 
these  five  marks,  and  turns  to  the  other  matter  on  the  paper, 
especially  to  the  problems  ;  here  the  advantage  will  be  irresist- 
ibly on  his  side  owing  to  the  "superiority  of  the  modern  to  the 
ancient  methods  of  geometry  "  which  is  confidently  asserted.     It 
must  be  remembered  that  in  spite  of  all  warning  and  commands 
to  the  contrary,  examiners  will  persist  in  making  their  papers 
longer  than  can  be  treated  fully  in  the  assigned  time,  so  that  the 
sacrifice  of  the  book-work  will  be  in  itself  trifling  and  wall  be 
abundantly  compensated  by  the  greater  facility  at  the  solution 
of  problems  which  is  claimed  for  the  modern  teaching,  as  com- 
pared with  the  "  unsuggestiveness  "  of  Euclid,  and  by  the  greater 
accuracy  of  reasoning,  since  we  are  told  that  "  the  logical  train- 
ing to  be  got  from  Euclid  is  very  imperfect  and  in  some  respects 
bad."     Thus  on  the  whole  the  disciple  of  the  modern  school  will 
even  in  the  first  paper  of  the  Cambridge  Tripos  Examination  be 
more  favourably  situated  than  the  student  of  Euclid  ;  and  of 
course  in  the  other  papers  the  advantages  in  his  favour  become 
largely  increased.     For  we  must  remember  that  we  are  expressly 
told  that  Euclid  is  "  an  unsuitable  preparation  for  the  higher 
mathematical  training  of  the  present  day  ;  "  and  that  "those  who 
continue  their  mathematical  reading  with  a  view  of  obtaining 


TODIIUNTER.  237 


honours  at  the  University  .  .  .  will  gain  much  through  economy 
of  time  and  the  advantage  of  modern  lights." 

The  final  result  is  this ;  according  to  the  promises  of  the 
geometrical  reformers,  one  of  their  pupils  might  sacrifice  five 
marks  out  of  a  thousand,  while  for  all  the  remaining  995 
his  chance  would  be  superior  to  that  of  a  Euclid-trained  student. 
It  may  be  added  that  in  future  the  Cambridge  Mathematical 
Examinations  are  to  be  rather  longer  than  they  have  been  up 
to  the  date  of  my  writing ;  so  that  the  advantage  of  the  anti- 
Euclidean  school  will  be  increased.  Moreover  we  must  remember 
that  in  the  Smith's  Prizes  Examination  the  elementary  geometry 
of  Euclid  scarcely  appears,  so  that  the  modern  reformers  would 
not  have  here  any  obstacle  to  the  triumphant  vindication  of 
their  superiority  as  teachers  of  the  higher  mathematics.  The 
marvellous  thing  is  that  in  these  days  of  competition  for  educa- 
cational  prizes  those  who  believe  themselves  to  possess  such  a 
vast  superiority  of  methods  do  not  keep  the  secret  to  them- 
selves, instead  of  offering  it  to  all,  and  pressing  it  on  the  reluc- 
tant and  incredulous.  Surely  instead  of  mere  assertion  of  the 
benefits  to  be  secured  by  the  modern  treatment,  it  will  be  far 
more  dignified  and  far  more  conclusive  to  demonstrate  the  pro- 
position by  brilliant  success  in  the  Cambridge  Mathematical 
Tripos.  Suppose  we  were  to  read  in  the  ordinary  channels  of 
information  some  such  notice  as  this  next  January  :  "  The  first 
six  wranglers  are  considered  to  owe  much  of  their  success  to  the 
fact  that  in  their  training  the  fossil  geometry  of  Alexandria  was 
thrown  aside  and  recent  specimens  substituted  ; "  then  opposition 
would  be  vanquished,  and  teachers  would  wonder,  praise,  and 
imitate.  But  until  the  promises  of  success  are  followed  by  a 
performance  as  yet  never  witnessed  we  are  reminded  of  tlie  case 
of  a  bald  hairdresser  who  presses  on  his  customers  his  infallible 
specific  for  producing  redundant  locks. 

To  those  who  object  to  Euclid  as  an  inadequate  course  of 
plane  geometry  it  may  then  be  replied  briefly  that  it  is  easy, 


238      .  APPENDIX  I. 


if  thought  convenient  or  necessary,  to  supply  any  additional 
matter.  But  for  my  part  I  think  there  are  grave  objections 
to  any  large  increase  in  the  extent  of  the  course  of  synthetical 
geometry  which  is  to  be  prepared  for  examination  purposes. 
One  great  drawback  to  our  present  system  of  mathematical 
instruction  and  examination  is  the  monotony  which  prevails  in 
many  parts.  When  a  mathematical  subject  has  been  studied  so 
far  as  to  master  the  essential  principles,  little  more  is  gained  by 
pursuing  these  principles  into  almost  endless  applications.  On 
this  account  we  may  be  disposed  to  regard  with  slender  satisfac- 
tion the  expenditure  of  much  time  on  geometrical  conic  sections  ; 
the  student  seems  to  gain  only  new  facts,  but  no  fresh  ideas  or 
principles.  Thus  after  a  moderate  course  of  synthetical  geo- 
metry such  as  Euclid  supplies,  it  may  be  most  advantageous  for 
the  student  to  pass  on  to  other  subjects  like  analytical  geometry 
and  trigonometry  w^hich  present  him  with  ideas  of  another  kind, 
and  not  mere  repetitions  of  those  with  which  he  is  already 
familiar. 

It  has  been  said,  and  apparently  with  great  justice,  that  exami- 
nation in  elementry  geometry  under  a  system  of  unrestricted 
text-books  will  be  a  very  troublesome  process  ;  for  it  is  obvious 
that  in  different  systems  the  demonstration  of  a  particular  pro- 
position may  be  more  or  less  laborious,  and  so  may  be  entitled 
to  more  or  fewer  marks.  This  perplexity  is  certainly  felt  by 
examiners  as  regards  geometrical  conic  sections  ;  and  by  teachers 
also  who  may  be  uncertain  as  to  the  particular  system  which  the 
examiners  may  prefer  or  favour.  It  has  been  asserted  that  the 
objection  thus  raised  is  imaginary,  and  that  "  the  manuals  of 
geometry  will  not  differ  from  one  another  nearly  so  wddely  as 
the  manuals  of  algebra  or  chemistry  :  yet  it  is  not  difficult  to 
examine  in  algebra  and  chemistry."  But  I  am  unable  to  feel 
the  confidence  thus  expressed.  It  seems  to  me  that  much  more 
variety  may  be  expected  in  treatises  on  geometry  than  on 
algebra ;  certainly  if  we  may  judge  from  the  experience  of  the 


TOD  HUNTER.  239 


examiners  at  Cambridge  the  subject  of  geometrical  conies  is  the 
most  embarrassing  which  occurs  at  present,  and  this  fact  suggests 
a  conclusion  very  different  from  that  which  is  laid  down  in  the 
preceding  quotation.  Of  course  there  will  be  no  trouble  in 
examining  a  single  school,  because  the  system  there  adopted  will 
be  known  and  followed  by  the  examiner. 

I  have  no  wish  to  exaggerate  the  difficulty ;  but  I  consider  it 
to  be  real  and  serious,  more  especially  as  it  presents  itself  at  the 
outset  of  a  youth's  career,  and  so  may  cause  disappointment  just 
when  discriminating  encouragement  is  most  valuable.  But  I 
think  the  matter  must  be  left  almost  entirely  to  the  discretion 
of  examiners ;  the  attempts  which  have  been  made  to  settle  it 
by  regulation  do  not  seem  to  me  very  happy.  For  example,  I 
read :  *'  As  the  existing  text-books  are  not  very  numerous,  it 
would  not  be  too  much  to  require  examiners  to  be  acquainted 
with  them  sufficiently  for  the  purpose  of  testing  the  accuracy  of 
written,  or  even,  if  necessary,  of  oral  answers."  The  language 
seems  to  me  truly  extraordinary.  Surely  examiners  are  in 
general  men  of  more  mathematical  attainments  than  this  implies  ; 
for  it  would  appear  that  all  we  can  expect  them  to  do  is  to  turn 
to  some  text-book  and  see  if  the  student  has  correctly  repro- 
duced it.  The  process  in  a  mva  voce  examination  would  be 
rather  ignominious  if  when  an  answer  had  been  returned  by  a 
candidate  some  indifferent  manual  had  to  be  consulted  to  see  if 
the  answer  was  correct. 

I  have  heard  that  an  examining  board  has  recently  issued 
instructions  to  its  executive  officers  to  make  themselves  ac- 
quainted  with  the  various  text-books.  This  does  not  enjoin 
distinctly,  what  the  above  quotation  implies,  that  the  examiner 
is  to  accept  all  demonstrations  which  are  in  print  as  of  nearly 
equal  value ;  but  it  seems  rather  to  suggest  such  a  course. 
The  point  is  important  and  should  be  settled.  Suppose  a 
candidate  offered  something  taken  from  the  Essentials  of  Geo- 
metry, and  the  examiner  was  convinced  that  the  treatment  was 
inadequate  or  unsound ;    then  is  the  candidate  nevertheless  to 


240  APPENDIX  I. 


obtain  full  marks  %  Again,  it  may  be  asked,  why  printed  books 
alone  are  to  be  accepted ;  and  why  a  student  who  has  gone 
through  a  manuscript  course  of  geometry  should  be  precluded 
from  following  it  %  The  regulation  might  be  made  that  he  should 
submit  a  copy  of  his  manuscript  course  to  the  examiner  in 
order  that  it  might  be  ascertained  whether  he  had  reproduced 
it  accurately.  As  I  have  already  intimated,  the  only  plan 
which  can  be  adopted  is  to  choose  able  and  impartial  men  for 
examiners,  and  trust  them  to  appreciate  the  merits  of  the  papers 
submitted  by  the  candidate  to  them. 

The  examiners  will  find  many  perplexing  cases  I  have  no 
doubt ;  one  great  source  of  trouble  seems  to  me  to  consist  in 
the  fact  that  what  may  be  a  sound  demonstration  to  one  person 
with  adequate  preliminary  study  is  not  a  demonstration  to 
another  person  who  has  not  gone  through  the  discipline.  To 
take  a  very  simple  example  :  let  the  proposition  be,  The,  angles 
at  the  hase  of  an  isosceles  triangle  are  equal.  Suppose  a  candi- 
date dismisses  this  briefly  with  the  words,  this  is  evident  from 
symmetry  ;  the  question  will  be,  what  amount  of  credit  is  to  be 
assigned  to  him.  It  is  quite  possible  that  a  well-trained  mathe- 
matician may  hold  himself  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  pro- 
position by  the  consideration  of  symmetry,  but  it  does  not 
follow  that  the  statement  would  really  be  a  demonstration 
for  an  early  student.  Or  suppose  that  another  imbued  with 
"  the  doctrine  of  the  imaginary  and  inconceivable "  says  as 
briefly  "  the  proposition  is  true,  for  the  inequality  of  the  angles 
is  inconceivable  and  therefore  false  ; "  then  is  the  examiner  to 
award  full  marks,  even  if  he  himself  belongs  to  the  school  of 
metaphysics  which  denies  that  the  inconceivable  is  necessarily 
the  false  1 

It  has  been  urged  as  an  objection  against  Euclid  that  the 
number  of  his  propositions  is  too  great.  Thus  it  has  been  said 
that  the  1 7  3  propositions  of  the  six  books  might  be  reduced  to 
120,  and  taught  in  very  little  more  than  half  the  time  required 


TODHUNTER.  241 


to  go  through  the  same  matter  in  Euclid.  So  far  as  the  half 
time  is  concerned  this  seems  to  be  only  an  expression  of  belief 
as  to  the  result  of  an  untried  experiment ;  it  is  based  on  the 
comparison  of  a  few  other  books  with  Euclid,  one  of  these  being 
the  Course  of  the  late  Professor  Cape  ;  as  I  have  already  stated, 
actual  experience  suggests  a  conclusion  directly  contrary  to 
the  present  prediction.  As  to  the  number  of  propositions  we 
readily  admit  that  a  reduction  might  be  made,  for  it  is  obvious 
that  we  may  in  many  cases  either  combine  or  separate  according 
to  our  taste.  But  the  difficulty  of  a  subject  does  not  vary 
directly  as  the  number  of  propositions  in  which  it  is  contained  ; 
a  single  proposition  will  in  some  cases  require  more  time  and 
attention  than  .half  a  dozen  others.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the 
mixture  of  easy  propositions  with  the  more  difficult  is  a  great 
encouragement  to  beginners  in  Euclid ;  and  instead  of  diminish- 
ing the  number  of  propositions  I  should  prefer  to  see  some 
increase  :  for  example  I  should  like  to  have  Euclid  i.  26  divided 
into  two  parts,  and  Euclid  i.  28  into  two  parts. 

Again,  it  has  been  said  that  Euclid  is  artificial,  and  that  he 
"  has  sacrificed  to  a  great  extent  simplicity  and  naturalness  in 
his  demonstrations ; "  it  is  a  curious  instance  of  the  difference  of 
opinion  which  we  may  find  on  the  same  subject,  for,  with  a  much 
wider  experience  than  the  writer  whom  I  quote,  I  believe  that 
Euclid  maintains,  and  does  not  sacrifice,  simplicity  and  natural- 
ness in  his  system,  assuming  that  we  wish  to  have  strictness 
above  all  things. 

The  exclusion  of  hypothetical  constructions  has  been  repre- 
sented as  a  great  defect  in  Euclid  ;  and  it  has  been  said  that  this 
has  made  the  confused  order  of  his  first  book  necessary.  Con- 
fused order  is  rather  a  contradictory  expression ;  but  it  may  be 
presumed  that  the  charge  is  intended  to  be  one  of  confusion  :  I 
venture  to  deny  the  confusion.  I  admit  that  Euclid  wished  to 
make  the  sul)ject  depend  on  as  few  axioms  and  postulates  as 
possible;  and  this  I  regard  as  one  of  his  great  merits;  it  has 
been  shown  by  one  of  the  most  distinguished  mathematicians  of 

B 


2^42"  APPENDIX  L 


our  time  how  the  history  of  science  teaches  in  the  clearest 
language  that  the  struggle  against  self-imposed  restrictioDS 
has  been  of  the  most  signal  service  in  the  advancement  of 
knowledge. 

The  use  of  hypothetical  constructions  will  not  present  itself 
often  enough  to  produce  any  very  great  saving  in  the  demon- 
strations ;  while  the  difficulty  which  they  produce  to  many 
beginners,  as  shown  by  the  experience  to  which  I  have  already 
referred,  is  a  fatal  objection  to  them.  Why  should  a  beginner 
not  assume  that  he  can  draw  a  circle  through  four  given  points 
if  he  finds  it  convenient  % 

Finally,  I  hold  that  Euclid,  in  his  solution  of  the  problems 
he  requires,  supplies  matter  which  is  simple  and  attractive  to 
beginners,  and  which  therefore  adds  practically  nothing  to  their 
labours,  while  it  has  the  advantage  of  rendering  his  treatise  far 
more  rigorous  and  convincing  to  them. 

The  objections  against  Euclid's  order  seem  to  me  to  spring 
mainly  from  an  intrusion  of  natural  history  into  the  region  of 
mathematics ;  I  am  not  the  first  to  print  this  remark,  though  it 
occurred  to  me  independently.  It  is  to  the  influence  of  the 
classificatory  sciences  that  we  probably  owe  this  notion  that  it  is 
desirable  or  essential  in  our  geometrical  course  to  have  all  the 
properties  of  triangles  thrown  together,  then  all  the  properties 
of  rectangles,  then  perhaps  all  the  properties  of  circles  ;  and  so 
on.  Let  me  quote  authority  in  favour  of  Euclid,  far  more 
impressive  than  any  which  on  this  point  has  been  brought 
against  him  :  "  Euclid  .  .  .  fortunately  for  us,  never  dreamed  of 
a  geometry  of  triangles  as  distinguished  from  a  geometry  of  circles, 
.  .  .  but  made  one  help  out  the  other  as  he  best  could." 

Euclid  has  been  blamed  for  his  adherence  to  the  syllogistic 
method  ;  but  it  is  not  necessary  to  say  much  on  this  point, 
because  the  reformers  are  not  agreed  concerning  it :  those  who 
are  against  the  syllogism  may  pair  off  with  those  who  are  for 
the  syllogism.     We  are  told  in  this  connexion  that,  "  the  result 


TODHUNTER.  243 


is,  as  every  one  knows,  that  boys  may  have  worked  at  Euclid  for 
years,  and  may  yet  know  next  to  nothing  of  Greometry."  We 
may  readily  admit  that  such  may  be  the  case  with  boys  excep- 
tionally stupid  or  indolent ;  but  if  any  teacher  records  this  as 
the  average  result  of  his  experience,  it  must  I  think  be  singularly 
to  his  own  discredit. 

There  is,  I  see,  a  notion  that  the  syllogistic  form,  since  it 
makes  the  demonstrations  a  little  longer,  makes  them  more 
difficult ;  this  I  cannot  admit.  The  number  of  words  employed 
is  not  a  test  of  the  difficulty  of  a  demonstration.  An  examiner, 
especially  if  he  is  examining  vix)a  voce,  can  readily  find  out  where 
the  difficulties  of  the  demonstrations  really  lie  ;  my  own  expe- 
rience leads  me  to  the  conclusion  that  the  syllogistic  form  instead 
of  being  an  impediment  is  really  a  great  assistance,  especially  to 
early  students. 

" Unsuggestiveness "  has  been  urged  as  a  fault  in  Euclid; 
which  is  interpreted  to  mean  that  it  does  not  produce  ability  to 
solve  problems.  We  are  told :  "  Everybody  recollects,  even  if  he 
have  not  the  daily  experience,  how  unavailable  for  problems  a 
boy's  knowledge  of  Euclid  generally  is.  Yet  this  is  the  true 
test  of  geometrical  knowledge ;  and  problems  and  original  work 
ought  to  occupy  a  much  larger  share  of  a  boy's  time  than  they 
do  at  present."  I  need  not  repeat  what  I  have  already  said, 
that  English  mathematiciaus,  hitherto  trained  in  Euclid,  are 
unrivalled  for  their  ingenuity  and  fertility  in  the  construction 
and  solution  of  problems.  But  I  will  remark  that  in  the  im- 
portant mathematical  examinations  which  are  conducted  at 
Cambridge  the  rapid  and  correct  solution  of  problems  is  of 
paramount  value,  so  that  any  teacher  who  can  develop  that 
power  in  his  pupils  will  need  no  other  evidence  of  the  merits 
of  his  system. 

Euclid's  treatment  of  proportion  has  been  especially  marked 
out  for  condemnation ;  indeed,  with  the  boldness  which  attaches 
to  many  assertions  on  the  subject  of  elementary  geometry,  it 
has  been  pronounced  already  dead.     In  my  own  college  it  has 

R   2 


244  APPENDIX  I. 


never  been  laid  aside ;  only  a  few  montlis  since  one  of  our  most 
influential  tutors  stated  that  he  was  accustomed  to  give  a  pro- 
position out  of  the  fifth  book  of  Euclid  to  some  candidates  for 
emoduments,  and  he  considered  it  a  very  satisfactory  constituent 
of  the  whole  process  of  testing  them. 

I  should  exceedingly  regret  the  omission  of  the  fifth  book  of 
Euclid,  which  I  hold  to  be  one  of  the  most  important  parts  of 
the  training  supplied  by  Elementary  Geometry.  I  do  not  con- 
sider it  necessary  for  beginners  to  go  through  the  entire  book  ; 
but  the  leading  projDositions  might  be  mastered,  and  the  student 
-led  to  see  how  they  can  be  developed  if  necessary.  I  may  refer 
here  to  some  valuable  remarks  which  have  been  made  on  the 
subject  by  the  writer  of  a  Syllabus  of  Elementary  Geometry  .  .  . 
who  himself  I  believe  counts  with  the  reformers.  He  sums  up 
thus  "...  any  easy  and  unsatisfactory  short  cuts  (and  I  have 
sometimes  seen  an  inclination  for  such)  should  be  scouted,  as 
a  simple  deception  of  inexjDcrienced  students." 

However,  I  must  remark  that  I  see  with  great  satisfaction 
the  following  Resolution  which  was  adopted  at  a  recent  meeting 
of  the  Association  for  the  Improvement  of  Geometrical  Teaching  : 
"  That  110  treatise  on  Geometry  can  be  regarded  as  complete 
without  a  rigorous  treatment  of  ratio  and  proportion  either  by 
Euclid's  method,  or  by  some  equally  rigorous  method  of  limits." 
It  would  be  injudicious  to  lay  much  stress  on  resolutions  carried 
by  a  majority  of  votes ;  but  at  least  we  have  a  striking  contra- 
diction to  the  confident  statement  that  Euclid's  theory  of  propor- 
tion is  dead.  We  shall  very  likely  see  here,  what  has  been 
noticed  before,  that  a  course  may  be  j)i^oposed  which  differs 
widely  from  Euclid's,  and  then,  under  the  guidance  of  superior 
knowledge  and  experience,  the  wanderers  are  brought  back  to  the 
old  path.  Legendre's  return  to  Euclid's  treatment  of  parallels 
is  a  conspicuous  example  ;  see  the  valuable  paper  by  Professor 
Kelland  on  Superjwsition  in  the  Edinburgh  Transactions, 
Vol.  XXI. 

I  cannot  avoid  noticing  one  objection  which  has  been  urged 


TODHUNTER.  245 


against  Euclid  in  relation  to  his  doctrine  of  proportion  ;  namel}-, 
that  it  leaves  "  the '  half-defined  impression  that  all  profound 
reasoning  is  something  far  fetched  and  artificial,  and  differing 
altogether  from  good  clear  common  sense."  It  appears  to  me 
that  if  a  person  imagines  that  "  good  clear  common  sense  "  will 
\)t  sufficient  for  mastering  jDure  and  mixed  mathematics,  to  say 
nothing  of  contributing  to  their  progress, — the  sooner  he  is  un- 
deceived the  better.  Mathematical  science  consists  of  a  rich 
collection  of  investigations  accumulated  by  the  incessant  labour 
of  many  years,  by  which  results  are  obtained  far  beyond  the 
range  of  unassisted  common  sense ;  of  these  processes  Euclid's 
theory  of  proportion  is  a  good  type,  and  it  may  well  be  said  that 
from  the  degree  of  reverent  attention  which  [the  student  devotes 
to  it,  we  may  in  most  cases  form  a  safe  estimate  of  his  future 
2jrogress  in  these  important  subjects. 

In  conclusion  I  will  say  that  no  person  can  be  a  warmer 
advocate  than  I  am  for  the  improvement  of  Geometrical  Teacliing  : 
but  I  think  that  this  may  be  obtained  without  the  hazardous 
experiment  of  rejecting  methods,  the  efficacy  of  which  a  long 
experience  has  abundantly  demonstrated. 


APPENDIX  II. 

Exti^act  from  Mr.  De   Morgans  revieio   of  M7\ 

Wilson's  Geometry,  in  the  'Athenceicm' 

for  July  1 8,  1868. 

The  Schools'  Inquiry  Commission  has  raised  the  question 
whether  Euclid  be,  as  many  suppose,  the  best  elementary 
treatise  on  geometry,  or  whether  it  be  a  mockery,  delusion, 
snare,  hindrance,  pitfall,  shoal,  shallow,  and  snake  in  the 
grass. 

"We  pass  on  to  a  slight  examination  of  Mr.  Wilson's  book. 
We  specially  intend  to  separate  the  logician  from  the  geometer. 
In  the  author's  own  interest,  and  that  he  may  be  as  powerful 
a  defender  as  can  be  of  a  cause  we  expect  and  desire  to  see 
fully  argued,  we  recommend  him  to  revise  his  notions  of  logic. 
We  know  that  mathematicians  care  no  more  for  logic  than 
logicians  for  mathematics.  The  two  eyes  of  exact  science  are 
mathematics  and  logic  :  the  mathematical  sect  puts  out  the 
logical  eye,  the  logical  sect  puts  out  the  mathematical  eye; 
each  believing  that  it  sees  better  with  one  eye  than  with  two. 
The  consequences  are  ludicrous.  On  the  one  side  we  have, 
by  confusion  of  words,  the  great  logician  Hamilton  bringing 
forward  two  quantities  which  are  '  one  and  the  same  quantity,' 
Breadth  and  Depth,  while,  within  a  few  sentences,  '  the  greater 
the  Breadth,  the  less '  the  Depth.'  On  the  other  side,  we  have 
the   great    mathematician,   Mr.   Wilson,    also    by  confusion    of 


DE  MORGAN.  247 


words,  speaking  of  the  '  invariably  syllogistic  form  of  liis 
[Euclid's]  reasoning,'  and,  to  show  that  this  is  not  a  mere 
slip,  he  afterwards  talks  of  the  *  detailed  syllogistic  form '  as 
a  'source  of  obscurity  to  beginners,  and  damaging  to  true 
geometrical  freedom  and  power.' 

Euclid  a  book  of  syllogistic  form  !  We  stared.  We  never 
heard  of  such  a  book,  except  the  edition  of  Herlinus  and 
Dasypodius  (1566),  who,  quite  ignorant  that  Euclid  was 
syllogistic  already,  made  him  so,  and  reckoned  up  the  syllogi^rms. 
Thus  i.  47  has  ^  syllogismi  novem '  at  the  head.  They  did 
not  get  much  thanks  ;  the  book  was  never  reprinted,  and  was 
in  oblivion-dust  when  Hamilton  mentioned  the  zealous  but 
thick-headed  logicians,  as  he  called  them.  Prof.  Mansel,  in 
our  own  day,  has  reprinted  one  of  their  propositions  as  a 
curiosity.  In  1831,  Mr.  De  Morgan,  advocating  the  reduction 
of  a  few  propositions  to  detailed  syllogistic  form  as  an  exercise 
for  students,  gave  i.  47  as  a  specimen,  in  the  Library  of  Useful 
Knowledge ;  this  Avas  reprinted,  we  believe,  in  the  preface  to 
various  editions  of  Lardner's  Euclid.  A  look  will  show  the 
difference  between  Euclid  and  syllogistic  form.  Had  the 
Elements  been  syllogistic,  it  would  have  been  quoted  in  all 
time,  as  a  ^^vQQi  of  the  rapid  diffusion  of  Aristotle's  writings, 
that  they  had  saturated  his  junior  contemporary  with  their 
methods :  with  a  controversy,  most  likely,  raised  by  those  who 
would  have  contended  that  Euclid  invented  syllogistic  form  for 
himself.  Now  it  is  well  known  that  diffusion  of  Aristotle's 
writings  commenced  after  his  death,  and  that  it  was — not  quite 
correctly — the  common  belief  that  evulgation  did  not  take  place 
until  two  hundred  years  after  his  death.  Could  this  belief 
ever  have  existed  if  Euclid  had  invariably  used  '  syllogistic 
form '  % 

What  could  have  been  meant  ?  Craving  pardon  if  wrong, 
we  suspect  Mr.  Wilson  to  mean  that  Euclid  did  not  deal  in 
arguments  with  su2)pressed  premisses.  Euclid  was  quite  right : 
the  first  reasonings  presented  to  a  beginner  should  be  of  full 


248  APPENDIX  11. 


statement.  He  may  be  trained  to  suppression :  but  the  true 
way  to  abbreviation  is  from  the  full  length.  Mr.  "Wilson  does 
not  use  the  phrases  of  reasoning  consistently.  He  tells  the 
student  that  a  corollary  is  '  a  geometrical  truth  easily  deducible 
from  a  theorem ' :  and  then,  to  the  theorem  that  only  one 
jDerpendicular  can  be  drawn  to  a  straight  line,  he  gives  as  a 
corollary  that  the  external  angle  of  a  triangle  is  greater  than 
the  internal  opposite.  This  is  not  a  corollary  from  the  theorem, 
but  a  matter  taken  for  granted  in  proving  it. 

Leavins:  this,  with  a  recommendation  to  the  author  to 
strengthen  his  armour  by  the  study  of  logic,  we  pass  on  to 
the  system.  Tliere  is  in  it  one  great  point,  which  brings  dov/n 
all  the  rest  if  it  fall',  and  may  j^erhaps — but  we  must  see 
Part  II.  before  we  decide^support  the  rest  if  it  stand.  Tliat 
jDoint  is  the  treatment  of  the  angle,  which  amounts  to  this, 
that  certain  notions  about  direction,  taken  as  self-evident,  are 
permitted  to  make  all  about  angles,  parallels  and  all,  immediate 
consequences.  The  notion  of  continuous  change,  and  consequences 
derived  from  it,  enters  without  even  an  express  assumption : 
'continually'  is  enough. 

Mr.  Wilson  would  not  have  ventured  expressly  to  postulate 
that  when  a  magnitude  changes  continuously,  all  magnitudes 
which  change  with  it  also  change  continuously.  He  knows 
that  when  a  point  moves  on  a  line,  an  angle  may  undergo  a 
sudden  change  of  two  right  angles.  He  trusts  to  the  beginner's 
perception  of  truth  in  the  case  before  him  :  the  whok  truth 
would  make  that  beginner  feel  that  he  is  on  a  foundation  of 
general  principles  made  safe  for  him  by  selection,  and  only 
safe  because  the  exceptions  are  not  likely  to  occur  to  his  mind. 
On  this  we  write,  as  Newton  wrote  on  another  matter,  Falsa  ! 
Falsa  !    Non  est  Geometria  ! 

What  '  direction '  is  we  are  not  told,  except  that  '  straight 
lines  which  meet  have  different  directions.'  Is  a  direction  a 
magnitude  %  Is  one  direction  greater  than  another  ?  We  should 
suppose   so;    for   an   angle,  a    magnitude,  a  thing  which  is  to 


DE  MORGAiV.  249 


be  halved  and  quartered,  is  the  '  difference  of  the  direction ' 
of  '  two  straight  lines  that  meet  one  another.'  A  better  defini- 
tion follows ;  the  '  quantity  of  turning '  by  which  we  pass  from 
one  direction  to  another.  But  hardly  any  use  is  made  of  this, 
and  none  at  the  commencement.  And  why  two  definitions  ? 
Is  the  difference  of  two  directions  the  same  tldny  as  the  rotation 
by  which  we  pass  from  one  to  the  other  ?  Is  the  difference 
of  position  of  London  and  Rugby  a  number  of  miles  on  the 
railroad  1  Yes,  in  a  loosely-derived  and  popular  and  slip-slop 
sense :  and  in  like  manner  we  say  that  one  man  is  a  pigeon-pie, 
and  another  is  a  shoulder  of  lamb,  when  we  describe  their 
contributions  to  a  pic-nic.  Biit  non  est  geometria  !  Metaphor 
and  paronomasia  can  draw  the  car  of  jDoetry ;  but  they  tumble 
the  waggon  of  geometry  into  the  ditch. 

Parallels,  of  course,  are  lines  which  have  the  same  direction. 
It  is  stated,  as  an  immediate  consequence,  that  two  lines  which 
meet  cannot  make  the  same  angle  with  a  third  line,  on  the 
same  side,  for  they  are  in  different  directions.  Parallels  are 
knocked  over  in  a  trice.  There  is  a  covert  notion  of  direction, 
which,  though  only  defined  with  reference  to  lines  which  meet, 
is  straightway  transferred  to  lines  which  do  not.  According 
to  the  definition,  direction  is  a  relation  of  lines  which  do  meet, 
and  yet  lines  which  have  the  same  direction  can  be  lines  which 
never  meet.  There  is  a  great  qiiant'ity  of  turning  wanted ; 
turning  of  implied  assumption  into  expressed.  Mr.  Wilson 
M'ould,  we  have  no  doubt,  immediately  introduce  and  defend 
all  we  ask  for;  and  we  quite  admit  that  his  system  has  a 
right  to  it.  How  do  you  know,  we  ask,  that  lines  which  have 
the  same  direction  never  meef?  Answer — lines  which  meet 
have  different  directions.  We  know  they  have;  but  how  do 
we  know  that,  under  the  definition  given,  the  relation  called 
direction  has  any  application  at  all  to  lines  which  never  meet  % 
The  use  of  the  notion  of  limits  may  give  an  answer  :  but  what 
is  the  system  of  geometry  which  introduces  continuity  and 
limits  to  the  mind  as  yet  untaught  to  think  of  space  and  of 


250  APPENDIX  II. 


magnitude  1  Answer,  a  royal  road.  If  the  difficulty  were 
met  by  expressed  postulates,  tke  very  beginner  himself  would 
be  frightened. 

There  is  a  possibility  that  Mr.  Wilson  may  mean  that  lines 
which  make  the  same  angle  with  a  third  on  the  same  side  are 
in  the  same  direction.  If  this  be  the  case,  either  he  assumes 
that  lines  equally  inclined  to  one  straight  line  are  equally 
inclined  to  all, — and  this  we  believe  he  does,  under  a  play  on 
the  word  '  direction ' ;  or  he  makes  a  quibble  only  one  degree 
above  a  pun  on  his  own  arbitrary  assumption  of  his  right  to 
the  word  'same*:  and  this  we  do  not  believe  he  does.  He 
should  have  been  more  explicit :  he  should  have  said,  My  system 
involves  an  assumption  wliich  has  lain  at  the  root  of  many 
attempts  upon  the  question  of  parallels,  and  has  always  been 
scouted  as  soon  as  seen.  He  should  have  added,  I  assume 
Euclid's  eleventh  axiom  :  I  have  a  notion  of  direction ;  I  tell 
you  that  lines  which  meet  have  different  directions;  I  imply 
that  lines  which  make  different  angles  v/ith  a  third  have  also 
different  directions ;  and  I  assume  that  lines  of  different  directions 
will  meet.  Mr.  Wilson  is  so  concise  that  it  is  not  easy  to  be 
very  positive  as  to  how  much  he  will  admit  of  the  above,  or 
how  he  will  get  over  or  round  it.  When  put  upon  his 
defence  he  must  be  more  explicit.  Mr.  AYilson  gives  four 
explicit  axioms  about  the  straiglit  line  :  and  not  one  about  the 
angle. 

We  feel  confidence  that  no  such  system  as  Mr.  Wilson  has 
put  forward  will  replace  Euclid  in  this  country.  The  old 
geometry  is  a  very  English  subject,  and  the  heretics  of  this 
orthodoxy  are  the  extreme  of  heretics :  even  Bishop  Colenso 
has  written  a  Euclid.  And  the  reason  is  of  the  same  kind  as 
that  by  which  the  classics  have  held  their  ground  in  education. 
There  is  a  mixture  of  good  sense  and  of  what,  for  want  of  a 
better  name,  people  call  prejudice :  but  to  this  mixture  we  owe 
our  stability.     The  proper  word  is  2>osfjudice,  a  clinging  to  past 


DE  MORGAN.  251 


experience,  often  longer  than  is  held  judicious  by  after  times. 
We  only  desire  to  avail  ourselves  of  this  feeling  until  the  book 
is  produced  which  is  to  supplant  Euclid  ;  we  regret  the  manner 
in  which  it  has  allowed  the  retention  of  the  faults  of  Euclid ; 
and  we  trust  the  fight  against  it  will  rage  until  it  ends  in  an 


amended  form  of  Euclid. 


APPENDIX  III. 

Proof  that,  if  any  one  Proposition  of  Table  II 

he  granted  as  an  Axiom,  the  rest  can  he 

deduced  from  it.     (See  pp.  34,  40.) 


"  .  .  ,  and  so  we  make  it  quite  a  merry-go-rounder."  I  was  obliged  to 
consider  a  little  before  I  understood  what  Mr.  Peggotty  meant  by  this 
figure,  expressive  of  a  complete  circle  of  intelligence. 


It  is  to  be  proved  that,  if  any  one  of  the  Propositions  of 
Table  II  be  granted,  the  rest  can  be  proved. 

It  is  assumed  that  the  lesser  of  two  unequal  finite  magnitudes 
of  the  same  kind  may  be  multiplied  so  as  to  exceed  the  greater. 

Euclid  I,  1  to  28,  is  assumed  as  j^roved. 

It  is  assumed  that,  where  two  Propositions  are  Contranominals, 
t^o  that  each  can  be  proved  from  the  other,  it  is  not  necessary  to 
include  both  in  the  series  of  proofs. 

Lemma  1. 

A  Pair  of  Lines,  of  which  one  contains  two  points  equidistant 
from  the  other,  have  a  common  perpendicular. 


E     1.     F 


-B 


u    K    n 


Let  AB  contain  2  points  E,  F,  equidistant  from  CD.  From 
E,  F,  draw  EG,  FH,  j_  CD ;  bisect  GB  in  K,  and  EF  in  L, 
and  join  EL. 


APPENDIX  III.  253 


hence,  if  the  diagram  be  reversed,  and  so  phiced  on  its 
former  traces  that  G  coincides  witli  //,  and  //  with  G,  K  re- 
taining its  position,  GE  coincides  with  HF,  and  II F  with  GE ; 

.*.  E  coincides  with  F,  and  F  with  E  ; 

.•.  L  retains  its  position  ; 

.-.  Z  GKL  coincides  with  Z  HKL,  and  is  equal  to  it ; 

.-.   Zs  at  A'  are  right. 

Similarly  Zs  at  Z  are  right. 

Therefore  a  Pair  of  Lines,  &c.  Q.  E.  D. 


(<.).  II.  1. 

A   Pair  of  separatioiial  Lines   are  eqiiaUy  inclined   to  any 
transversal. 

[N.B.  The  Contranominal  of  this  will  be  proved  at  the  end  of 
the  series.] 

(/3).     II.  16  {a). 

Two  intersecting  Lines  cannot  both  be  separational  from  the 
same  Line. 


Let  AEB,  GEffhe  two  intersecting  Lines,  and  CD  another 
Line.  It  is  to  be  proved  that  they  cannot  both  be  separational 
from  CD. 

In  CD  take  any  point  F;  and  join  EF. 
Now,  if  possible,  let  AB,  Gil  hoth  be  separational  from  CD; 
.'.  Zs  AEF,  GEF  are  both  equal  to  lEFD  ;  [(a). 

.*.  they  are  equal  to  each  other ;  which  is  absurd. 
Therefore  two  intersecting  Lines  &c.  Q.  E.  D. 


254  APPENDIX  III. 


(yy     11.  6. 
A    Pair  of  se]}arational  Lines  are  equidistantial  from  each 


Either. 


A 


V, 


B 


K 


Let  AB,  CD  be  separational  Lines  :  it  shall  be  proved  that 
they  are  equidistantial  from  each  other. 

In  AB  take  any  2  points  E,  F ;  and  draw  EG,  FH,  j_  CD. 
Now,  if  FH>EG,  from  it  cut  off  KH  equal  to  EG\    and 
join  EK ; 

then,  •.•  EG=KH, 

.'.  EK,  CD  have  a  common  perpendicular;   [Lemma  1. 
.-.  EK  is  separational  from  CD  ;  [Euc.  I.  27. 

.-.  AB,  EK,  intersecting  Lines,  are  both  separational 
from  CD  ;  which  is  absurd  ;  [(/S). 

.-.  FHi^noi  >EG. 
Similarly  it  may  be  proved  that  EG  is  not  >FH. 
Therefore  EG=FH. 

Similarly  it  may  be  proved  that  any  2  points  in  ^^  are 
equidistant  from  CD,  and  that  any  2  points  in  CD  are  equi- 
distant from  AB. 

Therefore  AB,  CD  are  equidistantial  from  each  other. 
Therefore  a  Pair  &c.  Q.  E.  D. 

(a).    IL  11. 

A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  are  equally  inclined  to  a  certain 
transversal,  are  equidistantial  from  each  other. 

A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  are  equally  inclined  to  a  certain 
transversal,  are  separational;  [Euc.  L  27. 

also  a  Pair  of  separational  Lines  are  equidistantial  from  each 
other;  [(y). 

.-.  a  Pair  of  Lines,  &c.  Q.  E.  D. 


APPENDIX  III.  255 


(.).     II.  8. 

Through  a  given  point,  without  a  given  Line,  a  Line  may  he 
drawn  such  that  the  two  Lines  are  equidistantial  from  each  other. 

For,  if  through  the  given  point  there  be  drawn  a  transversal, 
there  can  also  be  drawn  through  it  a  Line  such  that  the  two 
Lines  make  equal  Zs  with  the  transversal;  [Euc.  L  23. 

and  this  Line  will  be  such  that  the  two  Lines  are  equi- 
distantial from  each  other.  [(6). 

Therefore,  &c.  Q.  E.  D. 

(C).     11.  17. 

A  Line  cannot  recede  from  and  then  approach  another;  nor 
can  one  approach  and  then  recede  from  another  on  the  same  side 
of  it. 


L.^y 


If  possible,  let  ABC  first  recede  from,  and  then  approach, 
DjE;  that  is,  let  the  perpendicular  £G  be  >  each  of  the  two 
perpendiculars  AF,  CH. 

From  GB  cut  off  GK  >  each  of  the  two,  AF,  CH. 

Now  a  Line  may  be  drawn,  through  K,  equidistantial  from 
DE;  ^  [(.). 

and  the  points  A,  C  will  lie  on  the  side  of  it  next  to  DE, 
and  B  on  the  other  side ; 

.-.  it  will  cut  AB  between  A  and  B,  and  BC  between  B 
and  C. 

Let  L,  M  be  the  points  of  intersection  ;  and  join  LM\ 

,*.   the  2  Lines  LBM,  LKM  contain  a  space ;    which  is 
absurd. 

Similarly  it  may  be  proved  that  ABC  cannot  first  approach 
and  then  recede  from  DE  on  the  same  side  of  it. 

Therefore  a  Line  &c.  (J.  E.  D. 


256 


APPENDIX  III. 


(,).     11.  13. 

A  Pair  of  Lines,  of  which  one  has  two  points  on  the  same  side 
of,  and  equidistant  from,  the  other,  are  eqiddistantial  from  each 
other. 

ELF 


G     K     H 

Let  A  B  contain  two  points  M,  F,  equidistant  from  CD.  From 
E,  F,  draw  EG,  FH,  _l  CD  ;  bisect  GH  in  K,  and  EF  in  L, 
and  join  KL. 

Now  EG-FH',  [hyjj. 

hence,  if  the  diagram  be  reversed,  and  so  placed  on  its 
former  traces  that  G  coincides  with  H,  and  H  with  G,  K  re- 
taining its  position,  GE  coincides  with  HE,  and  HE  with  GE  ] 

.'.  E  coincides  with  F,  and  F  with  E  ; 

.-.  L  retains  its  position ; 

.*.,  if  there  be  a  point  in  LA  whose  distance  is  <  LK,  there 
is  another  such  point  in  LB,  and  the  Line  AB  will  first  recede 
from  and  then  approach  CD  ;  which  is  absurd.  [(C). 

Similarly  if  there  be  one  whose  distance  is  >LK. 

:.  AB  \^  equidistantial  from  CD. 

Similarly  it  may  be  proved  that  CD  is  equidistantial  from 
AB. 

Therefore  a  Pair  of  Lines,  &c.  Q.  E.  D. 

Lemma  2. 
Through  a  given  2^oint  may  he    draiv7i  a  common  jx'^jpen- 
dicular  to  a  given  Pair  of  Lines,  of  which  each  is  equidistantial 
from  the  other. 

ELF 


a    K    11 


APPENDIX  III.  257 


Let  AB,  CD  be  the  given  Pair  of  Lines. 

Tbrougli  the  given  point  draw  a  Line  perpendicular  to  AB^ 
and  let  it  meet  AB  in  L.  Li  AB  take  any  2  points  E,  l\ 
equidistant  from  L.  From  E,  F,  draw  EG,  FH,  perpendicular 
to  CD.     Bisect  6^i/^  at  iT ;  and  join  A''Z. 

Now  E,  F  are  2  points,  in  AB,  equidistant  from  CD ;  and 
GH  is  bisected  in  A",  and  EF  in  L  ; 

.'.  KL  is  a  common  perpendicular;  [Lemma  1. 

.'.  it  coincides  with  the  Line  drawn,  through  the  <riveu 
point,  perpendicular  to  AB,  since  both  meet  AB  at  L ; 

.'.  KL  is  the  Line  required. 

Q.  E.  F. 

{&).     IL9. 

A  Fair  of  Lines,  of  which  one  has  two  points  on  the  same 
side  of,  and  equidistant  from,  the  other,  are  equally  inclined  to 
any  transversal. 


H   E 


F     K 


Let  AB  contain  two  points  equidistant  from  CD,  and  let  EF 
be  a  certain  transversal :  it  shall  be  proved  that  LAEF—LEFD. 

Now  AB,  CD,  are  equidistantial  from  each  other.  \{r]). 

Bisect  EF  at  G ;  through  G  let  UGK  be  drawn  a  common 
perpendicular  to  AB  and  CD.  [Lemma  2. 

Hence,  in  Triangles  GEH,  GFK,  side  GE  and  Zs  EGH, 
GHE,  are  respectively  equal  to  side  GF  and  Zs  FGK,  GKF; 

.'.  Z  GEH^L  GFK.  [Euc.  L  26. 

Therefore  a  Pair  of  Lines,  &c.  Q.  E.  D. 


258  APPENDIX  III. 


W.     II.  3- 

Through  a  given  pointy  without  a  given  Line,  a  Line  may  he 
drawn  such  that  the  tioo  Lines  are  equally  inclined  to  any  trans- 
versal. 

Take  a  second  point,  on  the  same  side  of  the  given  Line  and 
at  the  same  distance  from  it ;  and  join  the  2  points. 

Then  the  Line,  so  drawn,  and  the  given  Line,  are  equally 
inclined  to  any  transversal.  \{6). 

Therefore  through  a  given  point,  &c.  Q.  E.  D. 

(X).     IL  18  {h). 

The  angles  of  a  Triangle  are  together  equal  to  two  right 
angles. 


Let  ABC  be  a  Triangle.     It  is  to  be  proved  that  its  3  angles 
are  together  equal  to  2  right  angles. 

Through  A   let  DAE  be   drawn,  such  that   DAE,  BC  are 
equally  inclined  to  any  transversal.  [(k). 

Then  IB=IDAB,  and  IC=Z.EAC; 

.-.  AsB,  C,  BAC=ls  DAB,  EAC,  BAG; 

=  2  rt  Zs.  [Euc.  L  13. 

Therefore  the  angles  &c.  Q.  E.  D. 

W.   II- 4. 

A  Pair  of  Lines,  wliich  are  equally  inclined  to  a  certain  trans- 
versal, are  so  to  any  transversal. 

E    G       ^ 


F        H    " 


APPENDIX  III.  25{> 


Let  AB,  CD  be  equally  inclined  to  EF;  and  let  Gil  be  any 
other  transversal.     It  shall  be  proved  that  they  are  equally 
inclined  to  GH. 
Join  EH, 

Because  Zs  of  Triangle  EFH  together  =  2  rt  Zs,  and  like- 
wise tho^e  of  Triangle  EGH,  [(X). 
/.  angles  of  Figure  FG  together=4  rt  angles  ; 
also,  by  hypothesis,  Z  s  GEF,  EFH  together  =  2  rt  Z  s  ; 
.-.  remaining  Z  s  EGH,  GHF  together  =  2  rt  Z  s  ; 
.'.  AB,  CD  are  equally  inclined  to  GH. 
Therefore  a  Pair  of  Lines,  &c.                               Q.  E.  B: 

CONTEANOMIXAL    OF   (a).       IL  2. 

A  Pair  of  Lines,  which  make  with  a  third  Line  two  interior 
angles,  on  one  side  of  it,  together  less  than  two  right  angles,  will 
meet  on  that  side  if  prodMced. 


F 


Let  ABC,  DEF  be  two  Triangles  such  that  Z  s,  A,  D  are 
equal,  and  DE,  DF  equimultiples  of  AB,  A  C. 

From  DE  cut  off  successive  parts  equal  to  AB;  and  let  the 
points  of  section  be  G,  H.     At  G,  H  make  Z  s  equal  to  Z  E. 

Then  the  Lines,  so  drawn,  are  separational  from  EF  and 
from  one  another  ;  [Euc.  I.  28. 

.*.  these  Lines   meet  DF  between  D  and  F;    call  these 
points  K,  L. 

At  G,  H  make  Z  s  equal  to  Z  D. 

Then  the  Lines,  so  drawn,  are  separational  from  DF; 

.'.  they  respectively  meet  HL  between  H  and  L,  and  EF 
between  E  and  F;  call  these  points  M,  N. 

S    2 


260  APPENDIX  III. 


Because  Triangles  DGK,   GHM^  HEN  are   on  equal  bases 
and  have  their  base-Z  s  respectively  equal, 

.-.  DK,  GM,  HN  are  equal.  [Euc.  I.  26. 

Join  GL. 
Because  DL,  GM  are  equally  inclined  to  BE^ 

:.  they  are  equally  inclined  to  GL  ;  [  (/x). 

.-.  Z  s  KLG,  LGM  are  equal. 
Similarly,  *.•  GK^  HL  are  equally  inclined  to  DE, 
.'.  they  are  equally  inclined  to  GL ; 
.-.  Z  s  EGL,  GLM  are  equal. 
Because  Triangles  LGK,  GLM  are  on   same  base  LG  and 
have  their  base-Z  s  respectively  equal, 

.-.  KL  =  GM,  i.e.  =  BK.  [I.  26. 

Similarly  it  may  be  proved  that  LF  =  HN^  i.  e.  =  BK. 
Hence  BE,  BF  are  equimultiples  of  BG,  BK,  i.e.  of  AB, 
BK', 

but  they  are  also  equimultiples  oi  AB,  AC ; 

.:  BK  =  AC. 
Because  Triangles  ABC,  BGK  have  Z.s  A,  B  equal,  and  AB, 
AC  respectively  equal  to  BG,  BK, 

.'.  Z s,  B,  BGK  are  equal,  and  likewise  As  C,  BKG.  [I.  4. 
Because  GK,  EF  are  equally  inclined  to  BE, 
'  .•.  they  are  equally  inclined  to  BF;  [(/^)- 

i.  e.  Z  s  BKG,  BFE  are  equal ; 
.*.  As  B,  C  are  respectively  equal  to  As  E,  F. 
Hence,  two  Triangles,  which  have  their  vertical  angles  equal, 
and  the  2  sides  of  the  one  respectively  equimultiples  of  those 
of  the  other,  have  their  base-angles  respectively  equal. 


APPENDIX  III. 


261 


A 

K"\ 

X^ 

k/ 

^\ 

C           L 

)                                               1 

M 

Now  let  AB,  CD  make  with  AC  two  interior  L^BAC,  ACD 
together  <  2  right  Zs.  It  shall  be  proved  that  they  will 
meet  if  produced  towards  B,  T). 

In  CD  take  any  point  D.  Join  AB.  At  zl  make  LB  AH 
equal  to  Z  CBA. 

Hence  AH^  CB  are  equally  inclined  to  all  transversals  ;     [(/u). 
.-.  L^  HAG,  ACD  together  =  2  right  Z s  ; 
.-.  they  together  >  /.^  BAC,  ACB-, 
:.  AH  AC  >  IBAC/i.e.  >  I  BAB; 
.-.  I  CBA  >  A  BAB. 
At  B,  in  Line  BA,  make  an  Z  equal  to  Z  BAB  ; 

then  the  Line,  so  drawn,  will  fall  within  Z  CBA,  and  will 
meet  CA  between  C  and  A.     Call  this  point  K. 

In  d  produced  take  CL  a  multiple  of  CK,  and  >  C^. 
And  in  CB  produced  take  CM  the  same  multiple  of  CB  that 
CL  is  of  CA\     And  join  LM. 

Because  Triangles  CKB,  CLM  have  a  common  vertical 
Z,  and  the  2  sides  of  the  one  respectively  equimultiples  of 
those  of  the  other, 

/. ,  by  what  has  been  already  proved,  Z  s  CKB,  CLM  are 
equal. 

Because  AB,  KB  are  equally  inclined  to  AB, 

.-.  they  are  equally  inclined  to  CL  ;  [  (/i). 

.-.  Z  CAB  =  Z  (7A'Z>  i.  e.  =  Z  CZJ/; 
.-.  AB  is  separational  from  LM ;  [Euc.  L  28. 

.-.  if  produced,  it  will  meet  CM. 
Therefore  a  Pair  of  Lines,  &c.  Q.E.D. 


APPENDIX  IV. 

List  of  Propositions  of  Euc.  I,  II,  with  references 

to  their  occurrence  in  the  manuals  of  his 

Modern  Rivals. 

§  1.     Keferences  to  Legendre,  Cuthbertson,  and 
Henrici. 


Euclid 

Legendre 

CUTHBERTSON 

Henrici 

Page 

I 

I 

Page 

I 

Page 

Ax  10 

Ax     4 

6 

Ax 

2 

Ax  4 

22 

11 

Th      1 

>> 

Th  8  Cor 

17 

Th 

58 

12 

23 

26 

>> 

72 

1        Pr 

Pr  A 

11 

2        „ 

ip) 

74 

3        „ 

(q) 

75 

129 

4      Th 

Th     6 

10 

Th    1 

4 

Th 

5        „ 

12 

14 

2 

5 

Cor 

Cor 

)> 

6      Th 

Th    13 

15 

4 

7 

Cor 

7      Th 

(r) 

76 

8        „ 

Th  11  Sch 

14 

5 

8 

Th 

129 

9       Pr 

Pr      5 

51 

Pr   B 

12 

10        „ 

1 

49 

C 

13 

11        „ 

2 

50 

7 

16 

12        „ 

3 

" 

11 

20 

APPENDIX   IV. 


2G3 


§  1.     Refekences  to  Wilson,  Pierce,  and 

"WlLLOCK. 


Euclid 

Wilson 

Pierce 

Willogk 

1 
1 

I 

I 

Page 

Page 

Page 

Ax  10 

Ax 

2 

3 

§16   Th 

6 

11 

Th 

7 

Th 

10 

12 

1       Pr 

§    1 

33 

2        „ 

2 

34 

3        „ 

3 

36 
46 

4      Th 

Th 

16 

26 

§    51,52 

15 

9 

5        „ 

8 

21 

55 

16 

1 

40 

Cor 

Cor 

>» 

56 

17 

6      Th 

10 

22 

58 

)) 

6(i) 

43 

Cor 

Cor 

5> 

59 

5> 

7       Th 

60 

18 

8        „ 

18 

28 

61 

)> 

8 

45 

9       Pr 

Pr 

1 

40 

138 

39 

5 

35 

10        „ 

3 

42 

132 

38 

6 

36 

11         „ 

2 

41 

134 

>) 

7 

M 

12        „ 

4 

42 

133 

)> 

8 

>> 

264 

APPENDIX  IV.     § 

1. 

Euclid 

Legendre 

CUTHBERTSON 

Heneici 

Page 

Page 

Page 

13      Th 

Th  2 

7 

Th    9 

18 

14        „ 

4 

9 

10 

19 

15        „ 

5 

>7 

6 

14 

Th 

62 

16  (a)  „ 

13 

22 

(^) 

3? 

33 

17        „ 

23 

18        „ 

14 

15 

14 

24 

Th 

108 

19        „ 

» 

5> 

15 

25 

55 

33 

20        „ 

8 

11 

16 

26 

33 

109 

21        „ 

9 

12 

17 

27 

II 

22       Pr 

PrD 

30 

23        „ 

Pr    4 

51 

E 

31 

I 

24      Th 

ThlO 

12 

This 

28 

Th 

133 

25        „ 

Sch 

13 

19 

29 

35 

33 

26  (a)  „ 

7 

11 

3 

6 

33 

129 

w. 

25  Cor 

43 

71 

27      Th 

Th24  Sch 

28 

Th20 

36 

Th 

28(a),, 

J5 

)» 

>j 

37 

,, 

{b). 

22 

25 

3? 

33 

29(a),, 

24  Cor  2 

28 

21 

38 

33 

(h)„ 

Sch 

J) 

33 

33 

33 

W  " 

24 

3> 

33 

39 

33 

30       „ 

25 

29 

22 

40 

33 

72 

II 

31       Pr 

Pr    6 

52 

Lemma 

34 

APPENDIX  IV.      { 

s   1. 

265 

Euclid 

Wilson 

Fierce 

■ 

WiLLOCK 

Page 

Page 

Page 

13      Th 

Th  1 

8 

14 

» 

>5 

§      24 

8 

Th    4 

11 

15       „ 

)j 

9 

23 

7 

2 

10 

16(a),, 

Th  7  Cor  4 

20 

w. 

>> 

j> 

12 

13 

17 

,, 

>' 

18        „ 

9 

21 

62 

18 

6 

43 

19 

11 

22 

>j 

5> 

6(2) 

,, 

20        „ 

13 

24 

7 

44 

21        „ 

Th 

35 

40 

12 

22       Pr 

Pr    5 

43 

143 

40 

1 

54 

23        „ 

5  Corl 

44 

136 

39 

9 

37 

24       Th 

Thl7 

27 

63 

19 

12 

47 

25        „ 

19 

29 

>> 

»» 

26(a),, 

15 

26 

54 

16 

10 

46 

W„ 

11 

}> 

27      Th 

28  (a)  „ 

(&)„ 

29  (a)  „ 

{b)„ 

W» 

30        „ 

31       Pr 

266 

APPENDIX  IV.     § 

1. 

EUCTJD 

Legendee 

CUTHBERTSON 

Heneici 

I 

Page 

Page 

Page 

32(a)Th 

Th  19  Cor  6 

23 

Th24 

42 

Th 

81 

(^)    . 

19 

20 

J) 

jj 

>* 

Cor  1 

20 

23 

30  Cor 

49 

83 

2 

30 

48 

ji 

33      Th 

30 

32 

23 

41 

121 

M{a)„ 

28 

30 

26 

44 

120 

{b)„ 

" 

31 

>) 

» 

jj 

35      Th 

Th31 

52 

36        „ 

Cor 

53 

37        „ 

32  Cor 

54 

38        „ 

3) 

•)•> 

39        „ 

33 

55 

40 

Cor 

>j 

41        „ 

32 

54 

42       Pr 

Pr   L 

59 

43       Th 

Th34 

56 

44       Pr 

PrM.Cor 

60 

45        „ 

KCor 

61 

Cor 

46       Pr 

Pr  K 

51 

46     Cor 

III 

Th27 
35 

45 
57 

47       Th 

Thll 

71 

36 

58 

48        „ 

APPENDIX  IV.      § 

1. 

267 

Euclid 

Wilson 

Pierce 

AViLLOCK 

Page 

Page 

Page 

32(a)  Th 

Th  7 

20 

§    71 

21 

ThUCorl 

15 

(&)  . 

■>■) 

65 

20 

14 

14 

Cor  1 

6    Cor 

16 

72 

21 

2 

6 

)> 

33       Th 

34  (a)  „ 

W  . 

35      Th 

36        „ 

37 

38        „ 

39        „ 

40 

41 

42       Pr 

43      Th 

44       Pr 

45        „ 

Cor 

46       Pr 

46      Cor 

47       Th 

29 

63 

256 

74 

14 

84 

48        „ 

18 

88 

268 

APPENDIX  IV.     § 

1. 

Euclid 

Legendke 

CUTHBERTSON 

Henrici 

II 

III 

Page 

II 

Page 

Page 

1      Th 

Thl 

82 

2        „ 

Corl 

83 

3        „ 

Cor  2 

11 

4        „ 

Th    8 

69 

Th2 

84 

Cor 

5      Th 

Cor 

10 

70 

6      Th 

7        „ 

9 

5> 

2 

84 

8        „ 

>5 
I 

85 

9        „ 

Th(m) 

72 

10        „ 

Cor 

" 

II 

11       Pr 

PrB 

89 

12      Th 

This 

74 

Th3 

86 

13        „ 

12 

73 

4 

87 

14       Pr 

PrA 

88 

APPENDIX  IV.      § 

1. 

269 

Euclid 

AViLSON 

PlEECE 

WiLLOCK 

II 

Page 

Page 

Page 

1      Th 

2        „ 

3        „ 

4        „ 

Th  25 

60 

Cor    3 

74 

Cor 

5      Th 

27  Cor 

62 

10 

82 

Cor 

27 

61 

6 

76 

6      Th 

11 

83 

7      Th 

26 

60 

5 

75 

8       „ 

9 

78 

9       „ 

28 

63 

12 

83 

10       „ 

13 

84 

11       Pr 

Ex    3 

67 

14 

104 

12       Th 

Th  31 

66 

16 

87 

13        ,, 

30 

65 

17 

88 

14       Pr 

(4) 

71 

§289 

84 

3 

96 

270 


APPENDIX  IV.     §  2. 


§2. 

Keferences 

TO    THE    OTHEE 

MoDEEN  Rivals. 

1 

1 

'  Syllabus  '- 

Euclid 

Chauvenet 

LOOMIS 

Manual 

I 

I 

Page 

I 

Page 

I 

Page 

Ax  10 

Ax 

12 

Axil 

17 

Def  5 

7 

11 

1      Cor 

14 

1     Cor 

18 

Th    1 

12 

12 

14      Cor  3 

26 

23  Cor  3 

34 

1     Pr 

2      „ 

3      „ 

4     Th 

20  Th 

30 

6Th 

22 

Th  5 

18 

5      „ 

25    „ 

33 

10    „ 

24 

6 

20 

Cor 

Cor 

34 

Cor  2 

25 

Cor 

5> 

6    Th 

27       „ 

5) 

11    „ 

3) 

8 

22 

Cor 

Cor 

JJ 

Cor 

J> 

Cor 

» 

7     Th 

8      „ 

22       „ 

31 

15    „ 

27 

15 

28 

II 

V 

9     Pr 

28  Pr 

78 

5Pr 

95 

Pr     1 

61 

10      „ 

25    „ 

76 

1  „ 

93 

4 

63 

11      „ 

26     „ 

77 

2  „ 

94 

2     ' 

62 

12      „ 

27  „ 

?> 

3  „ 

j> 

3 

35 

I 

I 

13    Th 

2  Th 

15 

2Th 

19 

Th  2 

13 

14      „ 

3    „ 

17 

3  „ 

20 

3 

14 

15      „ 

4     „ 

)> 

5  „ 

j> 

4 

)» 

16(a),, 

9 

22 

W» 

3> 

33 

17      „ 

18 

32 

18      „ 

26    „ 

34 

12  „ 

25 

10 

23 

19      „ 

28    „ 

35 

})    » 

5J 

11 

24 

20      „ 

17    „ 

29 

8  „ 

23 

12 

25 

21W» 

9  „ 

24 

13 

26 

W» 

19    » 

30 

APPENDIX  IV.     §  2. 


271 


§  2.     References  to  the  other  Modern  Eivals. 


Euclid 

Morell 

Reynolds 

Wright 

I 

I 

Page 

I 

Page 

I 

Page 

Ax  10 

Ax 

1 

Ax 

1 

11 

Th 

iCor 

5 

Ax 

2 

Th 

6 

12 

j> 

25  Cor 

26 

„  16  Sch 

35 

1  Pr 

2    „ 

3    „ 

4Th 

Th 

5 

9 

Thl4 

15 

Th  8    (2) 

16 

5   „ 

)j 

10 

13 

„  11 

12 

,,    9    (3) 

19 

Cor 

Corl 

5> 

Cor  2 

Cor 

20 

6Th 

3J 

11 

14 

„  12  Cor 

13 

n    9    (i) 

18 

Cor 

Cor 

15 

Cor 

20 

7Tli 

8  „ 

)> 

9 

12 

„  13 

14 

.    8    (3) 

16 

II 

9Pr 

Pr 

9 

66 

Pr    2 

30 

Pr    9 

87 

10  „ 

„      1 

29 

„     8 

86 

11   ,, 

„      3 

31 

»   11 

88 

12  „ 

» 

7 

64 

)>      j> 

>j 

)>    j> 

>) 

13      Th 

Th 

2 

6 

Th  1 

3 

Th   2 

8 

14 

j> 

3 

7 

3>         3> 

j> 

„     3 

,, 

15 

5> 

4 

8 

»    2 

4 

»     5 

11 

16  (a)  „ 

„  10Cor2 

12 

(&)„ 

}) 

J) 

17 

18 

5J 

12 

15 

„   12 

13 

„     9  (4) 

19 

19 

}> 

3> 

}> 

J>        ?J 

>> 

.     9  (2) 

18 

20 

,.     3 

5 

3> 

13 

21 {a)  „ 

)J 

8 

12 

>,     4 

n 

»     6 

14 

(b)  ,, 

272 

APPENDIX  IV.     \ 

>2. 

Euclid 

Chauvenet 

LOOMIS 

'  Syllabus  '- 
Manual 

II 

Page 

V 

Page 

Page 

22      Pr 

34  Pr 

81 

Pr  5 

64 

23       „ 

29     „ 

79 

4     Pr 

95 

6 

65 

I 

I 

24      Th 

24  Th 

33 

13     Th 

26 

Thl4 

27 

25       „ 

Cor 

>> 

14       „ 

27 

16 

29 

26(a),, 

21     „ 

31 

7       „ 

23 

7 

21 

W» 

33 

17 

30 
43 

27       „ 

14     „ 

25 

22      „ 

Th21 

28(«)„ 

Cor  1 

j> 

j>        » 

» 

Q>),, 

,.   2 

26 

21       „ 

32 

29(a),, 

13     „ 

24 

23      „ 

33 

22 

44 

w., 

Cor  2 

25 

23  Cor 

46 

(^).. 

»    3 

)5 

33 

)> 

30       „ 

12     „ 

24 

24      „ 

34 

24 

» 

II 

V 

31     Pr 

30  Pr 

79 

6     Pr 

96 

Pr     7 

66 

I 

I 

32(a)Th 

18     Cor  1 

29 

27     Th 

36 

Th25 

47 

W„ 

„   Th 

5) 

3)               3> 

3> 

55 

j> 

Corl 

29    „ 

37 

28      „ 

37 

26 

48 

„  2 

Cor  2 

38 

29      „ 

j> 

Cor 

49 

33      Th 

32        „ 

40 

32       „ 

?> 

30 

53 

34       „ 

30    „ 

39 

30       „ 

38 

27,  28 

28 

50 

II 

35      „ 

Th    1 

82 

36      „ 

37       „ 

38       „ 

39       „ 

Th  2Cor3 

84 

40      „ 

)) 

)> 

41       „ 

APPENDIX  IV.     §  2. 


273 


Euclid 

^MOEELL 

Reynolds 

Weight 

Page 

Page 

II 

Page 

22       Pr 

Pr     6 

64 

Pr     7 

32 

Pr     6 

83 

23        „ 

„      1 

61 

„      4 

32 

„       1 

79 

24       Th 

Th      7 

10 

Th  7 

15 

25         „ 

26  (a)  „ 

„       6 

10 

Thl5 

16 

.,     8  (i) 

16 

w. 

33 

27         „ 

„     25 

25 

„  7  Cor  2 

9 

„   16 

28  (a)  „ 

»       j> 

>; 

»  7 

'5 

5>          J> 

w. 

>>       ?» 

>5 

Cor  3 

?> 

>)          J) 

29  (a)  „ 

„     24 

24 

„  8  Cor  2 

10 

>>          J5 

W» 

„     23 

22 

„  8 

JJ 

J>          J) 

w. 

„     24 

24 

Cor  3 

JJ 

J>          ?3 

30         „ 

V     22 

22 

„  9 

11 

„   14  Sch 

60 

II 

31        Pr 

Pr     8 

65 

Pr    7 

85 

32(a)Th 

Th  28  Corl 

28 

ThlO 

11 

ThlO  Cor 

41 

W  . 

„  28 

27 

>j    >i 

3' 

3,   19 

33 

Corl 

„   29 

29 

„   18 

20 

3.  20 

42 

2 

„  30 

30 

>3        >5 

j> 

Cor 

43 

33       Th 

»  33 

33 

„   17 

20 

„  22 

48 

34        „ 

„   31 

31 

,,  16 
and  III  1 

19 
60 

3,  21 

47 

III 

IV 

35        „ 

Th  2 

61 

Th    1 

185 

36        „ 

Cor 

37        „ 

,,     4 

62 

Cor 

186 

38         „ 

Corl 

39         „ 

»■• 

Cor  2 

63 

Sch 

187 

40         „ 

j> 

,, 

41         „ 

,.    3 

62 

274 


APPENDIX  IV.     §  2. 


Euclid 

Chauvenet 

Looms 

'  Syllabus  '- 
Manual 

42  Pr 

Page 

Page 

Pr    1 

Page 

99 

43  Th 

Th    4 

86 

44  Pr 

45  „ 

Cor 

46  Pr 

133 

Pr    2 

100 

46  Cor 

47  Th 

48  „ 

IV 

10     Th 

IV 

11     Th 

73 

Th    9 

91 

II 

1  Th 

2  „ 

3  „ 

4  „ 

Cor 
5Th 

Cor 
6Th 

7  „ 

8  „ 

9  „ 
10    „ 

8  Th 

10       „ 

9  „ 

71 

73 
72 

II 

Th5 

Cor  2 
Corl 

Th  6 

8  Cor 

8 

8  Cor 

7 

13 

3J 

87 
88 

5) 
J5 

91 
90 
91 
89 

96 

11  Pr 

113 
112 

136 

Pr    6 

103 

12  Th 

13  „ 

16     Th 
15       „ 

13     Th 
12       „ 

76 
75 

ThlO 
11 

94 
95 

14  Pr 

12     Pr 

22     Pr 

103 

Pr    4 

101 

APPENDIX  IV.     § 

2. 

275 

Euclid 

MORELL 

Reynolds 

"Wright 

Page 

Page 

Page 

42  Pr 

Pr  1 

76 

Pr  2 

198 

43  Th 

Th  1   Cor 

60 

44  Pr 

45  „ 

Cor 

46  „ 

V 

IV 

46       Cor 

47  Th 

Th      8 

149 

Thl2 

69 

Th  2 

187 

48  „ 

II 

IV 

ITh 

2  „ 

3  „ 

4  „ 

Th     9 

151 

Th  9 

67 

Th  4 

190 

Cor 

Th 

5 

191 

Cor 

„     11 

152 

„   11 

68 

6  Cor 

193 

6Th 

„    6 

192 

7  „ 

„     10 

152 

„   10 

e>7 

4   Sch 

191 

8  „ 

9  „ 

10  „ 

11  Pr 

Pr  3 

198 

III 

IV 

12  Th 

Th    22 

101 

Thl7 

97 

Th  7 

193 

13  „ 

„     21 

100 

,,   16 

M 

8 

194 

14  Pr 

Pr   2  Sch 

198 

T    2 


^  THE   END. 


^. 


Late 

Due 

,tr  ■  Vt^l 

^. 

'^ 

:j/8 

OCTt' 

•1Q7R 

1 

kaaa  vK  r 

11^ 

'     ) 

Library  Bureau  ( 

)at.  no.  1137 

mu 


ca.*?J002  00212  0942 

Euclid  and  h.s  modern  rivals. 


scni 


