Win ci -IK na 

in-i-i ____v____ J , MM ,^ * . 1 1 '.- "T" 
Books will be issued only on presen 
tation of proper library cards. 

Unless labeled otherwise, books may 

be retained for four weeks. Borrowers 

findingbooksmarked, defaced or mutilatea 

are expected to report same at library 

desk; otherwise the last borrower will be 

held retponsible for all imperfections 

discovered. ., . , n 

The card Holder is responsible for all 

koolts drawn on his card. 

?" NO books issued unless penalties are 

^ I Lost cards and change of residence 
nwst be reported promptly: 




? ENVELO-MJ COk, KANSAS COT, MO- 



** I * 

* *** * *~ * * 



KUCLID 



ANZ> HIS 



MODERN RIVALS. 



OP 



EUCLID I 



Arranged in their Logical Sequence. 



13 



r 
15 



5 6 16 



7 18 17 26(8) 27 

8 19 



20 24 

21 25 




E\ 
'" 



AND HIS 



MODERN RIVALS 



BY 



CHARLES L. DODGSON, M.A. 

Senior Student and Mathematical Lecturer 
of Christ Church, Oxford 



'All for your delight 

We are not here. That you should here regent you 
The actors are at hand ; and, by their show, 
You shall know all, that you are like to know/ 



MACMILLAN AND CO. 
1879 

\_All rig Jits reserved} 



OXFORD: 

BY BS. PICKAUD HALL, M.A., AND J. H. STACY, 

PBXNTTE:R.S TO THE UNIVERSITY, 



10 192? 



IBetrtcatefc 

to 

tfje memotg 
of 



PBOLOGFE. 



* ridentem dicere verum 
Quid vetat ? ' 



THE object of this little book is to furnish evidence, 
first, that it is essential, for the purpose of teaching or 
examining in elementary Geometry, to employ one text 
book only; secondly, that there are strong a priori reasons 
for retaining, in all its main features, and specially in its 
sequence and numbering of propositions and in its treat 
ment of parallels, the Manual of Euclid; and thirdly, 
that no sufficient reasons have yet been shown for aban 
doning it in favour of any one of the modern Manuals 
which have been offered as substitutes. 

It is presented in a dramatic form, partly because it 
seemed a better way of exhibiting in alternation the argu 
ments on the two sides of the question; partly that I 
might feel myself at liberty to treat it in a rather lighter 
style than would have suited an essay, and thus to make 
it a little less tedious and a little more acceptable to 
unscientific readers. 

In one respect this book is an experiment, and may 
chance to prove a failure : I mean that I have not thought 



PROLOGUE. 



it necessary to maintain throughout the gravity of style 
which scientific writers usually affect, and which has some 
how come to be regarded as an f inseparable accident ' of 
scientific teaching. I never could quite see the reason 
ableness of this immemorial law : subjects there are, no 
doubt, which are in their essence too serious to admit of 
any lightness of treatment but I cannot recognise Geo 
metry as one of them. Nevertheless it will, I trust, be 
found that I have permitted myself a glimpse of the comic 
side of things only at fitting seasons, when the tired reader 
might well crave a moment's breathing-space, and not on 
any occasion where it could endanger the continuity of 
a line of argument. 

Pitying friends have warned me of the fate upon which 
I am rushing : they have predicted that, in thus abandon 
ing the dignity of a scientific writer, 1 shall alienate the 
sympathies of all true scientific readers, who will regard 
the "book as a m&iejeu d' esprit, and will not trouble them 
selves to look for any serious argument in it. But it must 
be borne in mind that, if there is a Scylla before me, there 
is also a Charybdis and that, in my fear of being read 
as a jest, I may incur the darker destiny of not being read 
at all. 

In furtherance of the great cause which I have at heart 
the vindication of Euclid^s masterpiece I am content to 
run some risk ; thinking it far better that the purchaser of 
this little book should read it, though it be with a smile, 
than that, with the deepest conviction of its seriousness of 
purpose, he should leave it unopened on the shelf. 

To all the authors, who are here reviewed, I beg to 
tender my sincerest apologies, if I shall be found to have 
transgressed, in any instance, the limits of fair criticism. 
To Mr. Wilson especially such apology is due partly 



PROLOGUE. xi 



because I have criticised his book at great length and 
with no sparing hand partly because it may well be 
deemed an impertinence in one, whose line ' of study has 
been chiefly in the lower branches of Mathematics, to 
dare to pronounce any opinion at all on the work of a 
Senior Wrangler. Nor should I thus dare, if it entailed 
my following him np f yonder mountain height ' which Jie 
has scaled, but which I can only gaze at from a distance : 
it is only when he ceases c to move so near the heavens/ 
and comes down into the lower regions of Elementary 
Geometry,' which I have been teaching for nearly five- 
and-twenty years, that I feel sufficiently familiar with 
the matter in hand to venture to speak. 

Let me take this opportunity of expressing my grati 
tude, first to Mr. Todhunter, for allowing me to quote 
ad libiimm from the very interesting Essay on Elementary 
Geometry, which is included in his volume entitled c The 
Conflict of Studies, and other Essays on subjects connected 
with Education, 5 and also to reproduce some of the beau 
tiful diagrams from his edition of Euclid ; secondly, to the 
Editor of the Athenaeum, for giving me a similar per 
mission with regard to a review of Mr. Wilson's Geometry, 
written by the late Professor De Morgan, which appeared 
in that journal, July 18, 1868. 



ABGUMENT OF DBAMA. 



ACT I. 



Preliminaries to examination of 
Modern Rivals. 



SCENE I. 
[MINOS and EHADAMANTHUS.] 

PAGE 

Consequences of allowing the use of various Manuals 
of Geometry : tha't we must accept 

(i) c Circular ' arguments 1 

(a) Illogical do 2 

Example from Cooley . . . . . 

,, Wilson 4 



xiv ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. 

SCENE II. 
[Minos and EUCLID.] 



i . A priori reasons for retaining Euclid's Manual. 



We require, in a Manual, a selection rather than a 

complete repertory of Geometrical truths . . 6 

Discussion limited to subject-matter of Euc. I, II. . 8 

One fixed logical sequence essential . . . 

One system of numbering desirable .... 10 
A priori claims of Euclid's sequence and numeration 

to be retained 11 

New theorems might be interpolated without change 
of numeration ........ 



2,. Method of procedure in examining Modern Rivals. 



Proposed changes which, even if proved to be essential, 
would not necessitate the abandonment of -Euclid's 

Manual: . . ,. . IS 

(i) Propositions to be omitted ; 
(3) " to be replaced by new proofs ; 

(3) New propositions to be added. 
Proposed changes which, if proved to be essential, 
would necessitate such abandonment : . . .15 
(i) Separation of Problems and Theorems ; 
3 Different treatment of Parallels. 



ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. XV 

PAGE 

Other subjects of enquiry : . . . . 15 

(3) Superposition; 

(4) Use of diagonals in Euc. II ; 

(5) Treatment of Lines ; 

(6) of Angles; 

(7) Euclid's propositions omitted ; 

(8) newly treated ; 

(9) New propositions ; 
(10) Style, &e. - 

List of authors to be examined, viz. : . . .16 
Legendre, Cuthbertson, Wilson, Pierce, Willock, 
Chauvenet, Loomis, Morell, Reynolds, Wright, 
Syllabus of Association -for Improvement of Geo 
metrical Teaching, Wilson's e Syllabus '-Manual. 



3. The combination, or separation, of Problems- 
and Theorems. 



Reasons assigned for separation . . . .18 
Reasons for combination : . . . . .19 

(i) Problems are also Theorems; 

(2,) Separation would necessitate a new numer 
ation, 

(3) and hypothetical constructions. 



4. Syllabus of propositions relating to Pairs ofl/ines. 

Three classes of Pairs of Lines : . . . .20 
(i) Having two common points ; 



xvi ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. 

PAGE 

(3) Having a common point and a separate point ; 
(3) no common point. 

Four kinds of properties'; as to . . .21 

(i) common or separate points; 
(2,) equality, or otherwise, of angles made with 
transversals ; 

(3) equidistance, or otherwise, of points on the 

one from the other ; 

(4) direction. 

Symbols to be employed 22 

Method of deducing contranominal propositions . 25 
Propositions divisible into two classes : . . .27 

(1) Deducible from undisputed axioms j 

(2) disputable 

Three classes of Pairs of Lines : . . . 

(1) Coincidental ; 

(2) Intersectional; 

(3) Separational. 

Subjects and predicates of propositions concerning 
these three classes : 

Coincidental . . . . . . J5 

Intersectional ,29 

Separational 30, 

TABLE I. Containing undisputed Axioms, and Theorems 
admitted to le real, valid, and deducifile from undis 
puted Axioms ....... 32 

Subjects and predicates of other propositions concern 
ing Separational Lines 34 

TABLE II. Consisting of Theorems admitted to le real 
and valid, but not deducible from undisputed Axioms* 
They require, for proof, at least one Axiom, viz. 
either one of themselves, or else the proposition ' sD is 
real 5 35 



ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. xvii 

PAGE 

Theorems of Table II, which have been proposed as 
Axioms : .....*.. 37 
(i) Euclid's Axiom ; 
(3) T. Simpson's Axiom ; 

(3) Clavius' 

(4) Playfair's 

(5) The c Ahmedabad ' Axiom, ' 

Method by which it will be shown (in App. V) that 
any Theorem of Table II is sufficient logical basis 
for all the rest 38 

c Real/ and c valid/ propositions defined . . 

TABLE III. Consisting of valid lut ideal propositions ; 
some leing undisputed, Axioms, " the rest Theorems 
deducible from undisputed Assioms : lut all defending 
for their reality on that of^sD* . . . . 40 

TABLE IV. Consisting cereal Theorems, not admitted to 
le valid: their validity depending on the reality of 
<s' 41 



5. Playfair's Axiom. 



Is Euclid's Ax. 12 axiomatic? 42 

Need of test for meeting of finite Lines . . ^43 
Euclid's and Playfair's Axioms deducible, each from 

the other 55 

Reasons for preferring Euclid's Axiom : 

(1) Playfair's does not show which way the Lines 

will meet ; 44 

(2) Playfair's is less comprehensible ; . 45 

(3) and asserts more than Euclid's, the additional v 

matter being superfluous . 

** > ' b 



xviii ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. 

PAGE 

Objection to Euclid's Axiom (that it is the converse 
of I. 17) untenable 46 



6. Principle of Superposition. 



Used by Moderns in Euc. I. 5 



46 



7. Omission of Diagonals in Hue. II. 



Proposal tested by comparing Euc. II. 4, with Mr. 
Wilson's version of it 



ACT II. 

[MINOS and 



Manuals which reject Euclid's treatment 
of Parallels. 



SCENE I. 
Introductory 35 



ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. xix 



SCENE II. 

Treatment of Parallels ly methods involving 
infinite series. 



LEGENDKE* 

PAGE 

Treatment of Line . . . . . . .54 

Angle 56 

, 3 Parallels ....... 

Test for meeting of finite Lines , . . .57 
One instance of * Petitio Principii ' . . . .58 

Manual unsuited for beginners .,... 



SCENE III. 



Treatment of Parallels ly angles made with transversals. 



COOLEY. 

Style of Preface 59 

Treatment of Parallels 61 

Utter collapse of Manual 62 

ba 



xx ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. 



SCENE IV. 



Treatment of Parallels ly equidistances. 



Treatment of Parallels by direction. 



i. WILSON. 

Introductory ^ 

Treatment of Line " 

Angle 

Extension of limit of 'angle' to sum of four right 
angles 



CUTHBERTSON. 

PAGE 

Treatment of Line 63 

Attempted proof of Euclid's (tacitly assumed) Axiom, 

that two Lines cannot have a common segment . 64 
Treatment of Angle . . . . . . .65 

Parallels ...... 

Assumption of the Ahmedabad Axiom . . .66 
Euclid's i^th Axiom replaced by a Definition, two 

Axioms, and five Theorems . . . . .67 
Test for meeting of two finite Lines . . . .68 
Manual a modified Euclid 69 



SCENE V. 



ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. xx i 

c Straight ' angles 74 

Meaning of 'direction' 76 

< Opposite ' directions 78 

e Same 9 and f different ' directions . . . .79 
Axiom < sD is real ' discussed . . . . 81 

Property < sD ' can neither be defined, nor constructed, 

nor tested 82 

* Separational directions ' not identical with < coinci 
dental directions ' g s 

Virtual assumption of<*8 is reaP (which Euclid proves 

in I. 37), as Axiom . g@ 

Axiom c slf is real ' discussed 

Axiom ' sD is real ' rejected, and Axiom < si/ is real ' 

granted with limitations 88 

Axiom e different Lines which meet one another have 

different directions * granted 

Axiom ' Lines with different directions would meet ' 

discussed 

and rejected JQ 

Diagram of c same J and * different ' directions con 
demned 

' sD 3 accepted as (ideal) definition .... Q\ 
' Parallel/ as used by Wilson, to be replaced by phrase 

< ^-related ' . 

Definition discussed 

Theorem ' ^-related Lines do not meet' accepted . 93 
Theorem c Lines, ^-related to a third, are so to each 
other,' discussed, and condemned as a ' Petitio Prin- 

cipii* 

Axiom c Angle may be transferred, preserving direc 
tions of sides 3 discussed 95 

If angle be variable, it involves fallacy 'Adicto secm- 
dun Quid ad dictum Simpliciter ' . 



xxii ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. 

PAGE 

If it be constant., the resulting Theorem (virtually 
identical with the Axiom) involves fallacy ' Petitio 

Principii ' 96 

If angle be constant, the Axiom involves two assump 
tions : viz. that 
(i) there can be a Pair of different Lines that 

make equal angles with any transversal . 100 
(a) Lines, which make equal angles with a cer 
tain transversal, do so with any transversal 101 

Axiom rejected 102 

Ideas of c direction ' discussed J} 

Theory of ' direction ' unsuited for teaching . .104 

Test for meeting of finite Lines discussed : . . 

it virtually involves Euclid's Axiom . . .105 

or if not, it causes hiatus in proofs . , .106 

List of Euclid's propositions which are omitted . . iQft 

General survey of book : 108 

An c Illicit process of the Minor ' . . . ,, 

A false Corollary 109 

A plethora of negatives yy 

A superfluous datum 110 

Cumbrous proof of Euc. I. 34 , . . .ill 

An unintelligible Corollary 

A unique c theorem of equality ' . . .112 

A bold assumption 113 

Two cases of ' Petitio Principii ' . 
A problem 3^ pages long > 

A fifth case of ' Petitio Principii ' , . .114 
A sixth 

' J3 

Summing-up, and rejection of Manual . . .115 



ARGUMENT OP DRAMA. 



2. PIERCE. 

PAGE 

Treatment of Line . . . . . . .118 

Introduction of Infinitesimals . . . . .119 

Treatment of Parallels . . . . . . 

Angle viewed as ' difference of direction ' . . .120 

Assumption of Axiom sD is real ' . . . .121 

List of Euclid's Theorems which are omitted . .122 

Manual not adapted for beginners . . . . 



3. WILLOCK. 

Treatment of Parallels . . . . . .124 

Virtual assumption of Axiom ' &D is real ' . . . 
Assumption of Axiom c separational Lines have the 
same direction' ....... 126 

General survey of book : . . . . .127 

Difficulties introduced too soon . . . . 

Omission of coincidental ' Lines . . .129 
1 Principle of double conversion 3 discussed, and 

condemned as illogical . . . . 

Mysterious passage about incommensurables ' .131 
Manual rejected ........ 



XXIV 



ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. 



ACT III 

Manuals which adopt Euclid's treatment 
of Parallels. 



SCENE I. 



PAGE 

Introductory . . , . . . . .132 

3. CRAUVENET. 
General survey 134 

3. LOOMIS. 
j&eneral survey . . . . . . .136 

4. MORELL. 

Treatment of Line 137 

Angle 139 

Parallels . 

General survey : 

'Direct/ 'reciprocal, 5 and 'contrary' Theorems . 140 

Sentient points 141 

A false assertion . . , . . .143 
A speaking radius . . . . . .144 

Eatios and common measures 



ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. xxv 

PAGE 

Derivation of c homologous ' , . . .145 

Mensuration of areas 146 

A logical fiasco 147 

Manual rejected 148 



5. REYNOLDS. 

General survey 149 

List of Euclid's Theorems omitted . . . .150 



6. WEIGHT. 

Quotations from preface 151 

General survey : . . . . . . .152 

Specimen of verbose obscurity . . . .153 



SCENE II. 



I. Sylldbm of the Association for the Improvement of 
Geometrical Teaching. 



Introduction of Nostradamus, a member of the Asso 
ciation . . . . . * . .155 
Treatment of Line . . . . : . .157 

Angle 158 

Parallels 161 

Test for meeting- of finite Lines . . . . 
Ee-arrangement of Euclid's Theorems . . .162 



xxvi ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. 

PAGE 

General survey : . . . . . . .163 

A* c Theorem 5 is a c statement of a Theorem ' . 

Rule of Conversion 

Miscellaneous inaccuracies . . . .164 

Summing-up . . . . . . , .167 



2,. Wilson's ' Syllabus '-Manual* 



Introductory 169 

A Theorem is a * statement of a Theorem ' . . .170 
Rule of Conversion . . . . . . . 

Every Theorem a c means of measuring ' . . . 
Straight angles 9 . . . . . . 

Miscellaneous inaccuracies . . . . . 

The Manual's one great merit . . . . .171 

No test for meeting of finite Lines . . . .172 

Propositions discussed in detail : 

An important omission . . . . .173 

An illogical conversion . . . . . 

6 Un enfant terrible 9 . . . * . .175 

Summary of results : 180 

Of 73 propositions of Euclid, this Manual has 
14 omitted ; 
43 done as in Euclid ; 

10 done by new but objectionable methods, viz. 
I illogical; 

I 'hypothetical construction ', 
h needlessly using { superposition ' ; 
Qt algebraical; 

4 omitting the diagonals of Euc. II. ; 
6 done by new and admissible methods. 



ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. xxvii 

PAGE 

No reason for abandoning Euclid's sequence and nu 
meration . . . . . . . .181 

Nor for regarding this Manual as anything but a 
revised Euclid . . . . . . . 

Summing-up ......... 



ACT IV. 

and EUCLID.] 



Manual of Euclid. 



i. Treatment of Pairs of Lines. 



Modern treatment of Parallels 183 

Playfair's Axiom 184 

Test for meeting of finite Lines . . . . 



2. IlucUcFs constructions. 



c Arbitrary restrictions ' .186 

c Exclusion of hypothetical constructions 5 , . ,187 



xxvm 



ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. 



3. Euclid's demonstrations. 



PAGE 



' Invariably syllogistic form ' 188 

f Too great length of demonstration ' 

c Too great brevity of demonstration ' . .189 
' Constant reference to axioms ' 



4. Euclid's style. 



Artificiality, unsuggestiveness, and want of sim 
plicity 191 



5. THuclicPs treatment of Lines and Angles. 

Treatment of 'Line . . . . * .191 

Angle : 

s declination from ' accepted . . . .192 

must be less than sum of two right angles . 

; multiple angles ' in VI. 33 . . . 

proof for Ax. 10 accepted . . . .193 



6. Omissions, alterations, and additions, suggested ly 
Modern Rivals. 



Omission of I. 7 suggested . . . . .194 



ARGUMENT OF DRAMA. 



Reasons for retaining it : 

needed to prove I. 8 . . . .194 
not included in new I. 8 . . . . 

proves rigidity of triangle 

I. 7, 8 analogous to III. 23, 24 . . .195 
bears on practical science . . . 
Omission of II. -8 suggested 

Reason for retaining it, its use in Geometrical 
Conic Sections ...... 99 

Alterations suggested : 
New proofs for I. 5 : 

c hypothetical construction ' . . . .196 

superposition . . . . . . )3 

treating sides as ' obliques l . . . 

as radii of a circle . . .197 

Inversion of order of I. 8, 24; rejected 

99 I- 18, 19, 20; do. . . 

Fuller proof of I. 24 ; accepted . . . . 3S 

Algebraical proofs of II. ; rejected . . . 3J 
Additions suggested : 

New Axiom; accepted . . . . .198 

Two new Theorems ; do. . . . . . 



7. Tfe summing- 



Euclid's farewell speech . . . . . .190 



APPENDICES, 



I. 

PAGE 

Extract from Mr. Todhunter's essay on < Ele 
mentary Geometry? included in ' The Con 
flict of Studies, &c! . , , .201 

II 

Extract from Mr. De Morgan's review of 
Mr. Wilson's Geometry, in the ' Athenceum ' 
for July 1 8, 1868 221 

III. 

The eunoiations of Tables I-IV stated in 
full : with references to the various writers 
who have assumed or proved them . . 227 



APPENDICES. 



IV. 

PAGE 

The various methods of treating Parallels, 
adopted by Euclid and his Modern Rivals 240 



V. 

Proof that, if any one proposition of Table II 
be granted as an Axiom, the rest can be 
deduced from it . . . . .275 



VI. 

List of propositions of Euc. I, II, with refer 
ences to their occurrence in the manuals 
of his Modern Rivals : 

i. References to Legendre, Cuthbertson, Wilson^ Pierce, 

Willoclc, and Wilson's < Syllabus' -Manual . .286 

2. "References to ike other Modern Rivals . .294 



ACT I 

SCENE I. 

* Confusion worse confounded/ 

-[Scene, a College study. Time, midnight. Mrsros dis 
covered seated between two gigantic piles of manuscripts. 
Ever and anon he takes a paper from one heap> reads it, 
makes an entry in a book> and with a weary sigh transfers 
it to the other heap. His hair ', from much running of fingers 
through it> radiates in all directions, and surrounds his head 
like a halo of glory > or like the second Corollary of Euc. 
I. 33. Over one paper he ponders gloomily, and at length 
breaks out in a passionate soliloquy. ,] 

Min. So, my friend! Thafs the way you prove I. 19, 
is it? Assuming I. 20? Cool, refreshingly cool! But 
stop a bit ! Perhaps he doesn't c declare to win ' on Euclid. 
Let's see. Ah, just so! 'Legendre, 5 of course! Well, 
I suppose I must give him full marks for it : what's the 
question worth ? Wait a bit, though ! Where's his paper 
of yesterday? IVe a very decided impression he was all 
for ' Euclid ' then : and I know the paper had I. 30 in it. 

B 



MINOS AND [ACT I. 



. . . Ah, here it is ! I think we do know the sweet 
Roman hand. 5 Kerens the proposition, as large as . life, 
and proved by I. 19. 'Now, infidel, I have thee on the 
hip ! 9 You shall have such a sweet thing to do in viva- 
voce, my very dear friend! You shall have the two 
propositions together, and take them in any order you 
like. It's my profound conviction that you don't know 
how to prove either of them without the other. They'll 
have to introduce each other, like Messrs. Pyke and Pluck. 
But what fearful confusion the whole subject is getting 
into ! (Knocking heard.) Come in ! 

Enter EHADAMANTHUS. 

JRAad. I say ! Are we bound to mark an answer that's 
a clear logical fallacy ? 

Min. Of course you are with that peculiar mark which 
cricketers call c a duck's egg/ and thermometers c zero/ 

It had. Well, just listen to this proof of I. 29. 

Heads. 



H\ 



c Let IF meet the two parallel lines AB, CD, in the 
points Off. The alternate angles AGE, GET), shall be 
equal. 



Sc. I.] RHADAMANTHUS. 



'For AGH and EGB are equal because vertically oppo 
site, and 12GB is also equal to GHD (Definition 9) ; there 
fore AGH is equal to GHD, but these are alternate 
angles.' 

Did you ever hear anything like that for calm assump 
tion? 

Mm. What does the miscreant mean by e Definition 9 ' ? 

Rhad. Oh, that's the grandest of all ! You must listen 
to that bit too. There's a reference at the foot of the page 
to c Cooley.' So I hunted up Mr. Cooley among the heaps 
of Geometries they've sent me (by the way, I wonder if 
they've sent you the full lot ? Forty-five were left in my 
rooms to-day, and ten of them I'd never even heard of 
till to-day !) well, as I was saying, I looked up Cooley, 
and here's the Definition. 

Reads. 

Right lines are said to be parallel when they are 
equally and similarly inclined to the same right line, or 
make equal angles with it towards the same side. 5 

Mm. That is very soothing. So far as I can make 
it out, Mr. Cooley quietly assumes that lines, which make 
equal angles with one line, do so with all. If we had 
Mr. Cooley in the Schools, I fhmk we should pluck him. 

Shad. But as to this answer ? 

Min. Oh, give it full marks! What have we to do 
with logic, or truth, or falsehood, or right, or wrong? 
c We are but markers of a larger growth' only that we 
have to mark foul strokes, which a respectable billiard- 
marker doesn't do as a general rule ! 



MINOS AND [ACT I. 



RJiad. There's one thing more I want you to look at. 
Here's a man who puts c Wilson ' at the top of his paper, 
and proves Euc. I. 3 a from first principles, it seems to 
me, without using any other theorem at all. 

Min, The thing sounds impossible. 

Rkad. So /should have said. Here's the proof. 



G 



r> 




c Slide Z DBA along BF into position GAP, GA having 
same direction as DC (Ax. 9) ; similarly slide L 
along AE into position GAG. Then the ext. /.s 
FAG, GAC=o&Q re volution = two straight Zs. But the 
ext. and int. Zs = 3 straight Zs. Therefore the int. Zs = 
one straight Z = 3 right angles. Q. E. D.' 

I'm not well up in ' Wilson' : but surely he doesn't beg 
the whole question of parallels in one axiom like this ! 

Min. Well, no. There's a theorem and a corollary. But 
this is* a sharp man : he has seen that the axiom does just 
as well by itself. Did you ever see one of those conjurers 
bring a globe of live fish out of a pocket-handkerchief? 
That's the kind of thing we have in Modern Geometry. 
A man stands before you with nothing but an axiom in 
his hands. He rolls up his sleeves. ( Observe, gentlemen s 
I have nothing concealed. There is no deception ! ' And 



Sc. I.] RHADAMANTHUS. 



the next moment you have a complete theorem, Q. E. D. 
and all ! 

Rhad. Well; so far as / can see, the proof's worth 
nothing. What am I to mark it ? 

Mm. Full marks : we must accept it. Whjj my good 
fellow, I'm getting into that state of mind, I'm ready to 
mark any thing and any body. If the Ghost in Hamlet 
came up this minute and said c Mark me ! ' I should say 
c I will ! Hand in your papers ! 3 

Rkad. Ah, it's all very well to chaff, but it's enough 
to drive a man wild, to have to mark all this rubbish ! 
Well, good night! I must get back to my work. \E%it. 

Min f (indistinctly) I'll just take forty winks, and 

Snores. 



ACT I. 



SCENE II. 



OVK dyaQov TroXvKOipavirj' & Koipavos tffroi, 
Efs 



[MiNOS deeping: to him enter the Phantasm of EUCLID. 
MINOS opens his eyes and regards him with a blank and 
stony gaze, without letraying the slightest surprise or even 
inter e$t.~\ 



i. A priori reasons for retaining 
Euclid s Manual. 



Euc. Now what is it you really require in a Manual 
of Geometry ? 

Min. Excuse me, but with all respect to a shade whose 
name I have reverenced from early boyhood is not that 
rather an abrupt way of starting a conversation ? Remem 
ber, we are two thousand years apart in history, and con 
sequently have never had a personal interview till now. 
Surely a few preliminary remarks 



EUCLID'S MANUAL. 



Em. Centuries are long, my good sir, but my time 
to-night is short : and I never was a man of many words. 
So kindly waive all ceremony and answer my question. 

Min. Well, so far as I can answer a question that comes 
upon me so suddenly, I should say a book that will exer 
cise the learner in habits of clear definite conception, and 
enable him to test the logical value of a scientific argument. 
Hue. You do not require, then, a complete repertory of 
Geometrical truth ? 

Min. Certainly not. It is the <be>yaa rather than the 
epyov that we need here. 

HUG. And yet many of my Modern Rivals have thus 
attempted to improve upon me by filling up what they 
took to be my omissions. 

Min. I doubt if they are much nearer to completeness 
themselves. 

Hue. I doubt it too. It is } I think, a friend of yours 
who has amused himself by tabulating the various theorems 
which might be enunciated in the single subject of Pairs of ' 
Lines. How many did he make them out to be ? 
Mm. About two hundred and fifty, I believe. 
Hue. At that rate, there would probably be, within the 
limits of my First Book, about how many ? 
Min. A thousand, at least. 

Hue. What a popular school-book it will be! How 
boys will bless the name of the writer who first brings 
out the complete thousand ! 

'- Mm. I think your Manual is fully long enough already 
for all possible purposes of teaching. It is not in the 
region of new matter that you need fear your Modern 



8 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT 1. 

Eivals : it is in quality, not in quantity, that they claim 
to supersede you. Your methods of proof, so they assert, 
are antiquated, and worthless as compared with the new 
lights. 

Hue. It is to that very point that I now propose to 
address myself: and, as we are to discuss this matter 
mainly with reference to the wants of beginners, we may 
as well limit our discussion to the subject-matter of Books 
I and II. 

Min. I am quite of that opinion. 

Hue. The first point to settle is whether, for purposes of 
teaching and examining, you desire to have one fixed 
logical sequence of propositions, or would allow the use 
of conflicting sequences, so that one candidate in an ex 
amination might use X to prove 7", and another use Y to 
prove X or even that the same candidate might offer 
loth proofs, thus arguing in a circle.' 

Min. A very eminent Modern Rival of yours, Mr. Wilson, 
seems to think that no such fixed sequence is really neces 
sary. He says (in his Preface 3 p. 10) ' Geometry when 
treated as a science, treated inartificially, falls __into a 
certain order from which there can be no very ' wide 
departure ; and the manuals of Geometry will not differ 
from one another nearly so widely as the manuals of 
algebra or chemistry ; yet it is not difficult to examine 
in algebra and chemistry.' 

Hue. Books may differ very c widely 5 without differing 
in logical sequence. Let me give you a few instances 
of conflicting logical sequences in Greometry. Legendre 
proves my Prop. 5 by Prop. 8, 18 by 19, 19 by 20, 37 by 



So. II. I.] EUCLID'S MANUAL. 9 

38, 39 by 33. Cuthbertson proves 37 by 41. Reynolds 
proves 5 by 20. When Mr. Wilson has produced simi 
larly conflicting sequences in the manuals of algebra or 
chemistry, we may then compare the subjects: till then, 
his remark is quite irrelevant to the question. 

Mm. I do not think he will be able to do so : indeed 
there are very few logical chains at all in those subjects 
most of the propositions being proved from first principles. 
I think I may grant at once that it is essential to have 
one definite logical sequence, however many manuals we 
employ : to use the words of another of your Bivals, 
Mr. Cuthbertson (Pref. p. viii.), 'enormous inconvenience 
would arise in conducting examinations with no recog 
nised sequence of propositions. 3 This however applies to 
logical sequences only, such as your Props, 13,, 15, 16, 
18; 19, o, 21;, which form a continuous chain. There 
are many propositions whose place in a manual would be 
partly arbitrary. Your Prop. 8, for instance, is not wanted 
till we come to Prop. 48, so that it might occupy any 
intermediate position^ without involving risk of circular 
argument. 

~Euc* Now, in order to secure this uniform logical 
sequence, we should require to know, as to any particular 
proposition, what other propositions were its logical de 
scendants, so that we might avoid using any of these 
in proving it ? 

Min. Exactly so. 

HUG. We might of course give this information by 
attaching to* each enunciation references to its logical 
descendants: but this would be a very cumbrous plan. 



10 - MINOS AND EUCLID. [AcT I. 

A better way would be to give them in the form of 
a genealogy, but this would be very bulky if the enuncia 
tions themselves were inserted : so that it would be de 
sirable to have numbers to distinguish the enunciations. 
In that case (supposing my logical sequence to be adopted) 
the genealogy would stand thus : (see Frontispiece]. 

Min. Would it not be enough to publish an arranged 
list (which would be all the better if numbered also), and 
to enact that no proposition should be used to prove any 
of its predecessors ? 

Hue. That would hamper the writers of manuals very 
much more than the genealogy would. Suppose, for 
instance, that you adopted; in the list, the order of 
theorems in my First Book, and that a writer wished 
to prove Prop. 8 by Prop. 47 : this would not interfere 
with my logical sequence, and yet your list would bar him 
from doing so. 

Min. But we might place 8 close before 48, and he 
would then be free to do as you suggest. 

Ewe. And suppose some other writer wished to prove 
34 by 8 ? 

Min. I see now that any single list must necessarily 
prevent many possible arrangements which would not 
conflict with the agreed-on logical sequence. And yet 
this is what the Committee of the Association for the 
Improvement of Geometrical Teaching have approved of, 
namely, e a standard sequence for examination purposes/ 
and what the Association have published in their i Sylla 
bus of Plane Geometry. 5 

JSuc. I think they have overlooked the fact that they 



Sc. II. I.] EUCLID'S MANUAL. 11 

are enacting many more sequences, as binding on writers, 
than the one logical sequence which they desire to secure. 
Their list would be fitly supplemented by a ( standard ' 
genealogy. But in any case we are agreed that it is 
desirable to have a standard list of enunciations, numbered 
for reference ? 

Mm. We are. 

JEwc. The next point to settle is, what sequence and 
numbering to adopt. You will allow, I think, that there 
are strong a priori reasons for retaining my numbers. The 
propositions have been known by those numbers for two 
thousand years ; they have been referred to probably by 
hundreds of writers in many cases by the numbers only, 
without the enunciations : and some of them, I. 5 and I. 47 
for instance c the Asses 3 Bridge ' and ' the Windmill ' 
are now historical characters, and their nicknames are 
6 familiar as household words.' 

Min. Even if no better sequence than yours could be 
found, it might still be urged that a new set of numbers 
must be adopted, in order to introduce,, in their proper 
places, some important theorems which have been added 
to the subject since your time. 

Euc. That want, if it were proved to exist, might, 
I think, be easily provided for without discarding my 
system of numbers. If you wished, for instance, to insert 
two new propositions between I. 13 and I. 14, it would be 
far less inconvenient to call them 13 B and 13 C than 
to abandon the old numbers. 

Min. I give up the objection. 

Euc. You will allow then, I think, that my sequence 



12 MINOS AND EUCLID. [A CT L 

and system of numbers should not be abandoned without 
good cause? 

Min. Oh, certainly. And the onus probandi lies clearly 
on your Modern Rivals, and not on you. 

Hue. Unless, then, it should appear that one of my 
Modern Rivals, whose logical sequence is incompatible 
with mine, is so decidedly better in his treatment of really 
important topics, as to make it worth while to suffer all 
the inconvenience of a change of numbers, you would not 
recognise his demand to supersede my Manual ? 

Min. On that point let me again quote Mr. Wilson. 
In his Preface, p. [5, he says, In a few years I hope that 
our leading mathematicians will have published, perhaps 
in concert, one or more text-books of Geometry, not 
inferior, to say the least, to those of France, and that 
they will supersede Euclid by the sheer force of superior 
merit/ 

~EuG. And I should be quite content to be so superseded. 
c A fair field and no favour ; is all I ask. 



2. Method of procedure in examining 
Modern Rivals. 



Min. You wish me then to compare your book with 
those of your Modern Rivals ? 

Enc. Yes. But, in doing this, I must beg you to bear 
in mind that a Modern Rival will not have proved his 
case if he only succeeds in showing 



Sc. II. 2.] * MODERN RIVALS. 13 

(i) that certain propositions might with advantage be 
omitted (for this a teacher would be free to do, so long 
as he left the logical sequence complete) ; 

or (2) that certain proofs might with advantage be 
changed for others (for these might be interpolated as 
1 alternative proofs ') ; 

or (3) that certain new propositions are desirable (for 
these also might be interpolated). 

All these matters will need to be fully considered here 
after, if you should decide that my Manual ought to be 
retained : but they do not constitute the evidence on which 
that decision should ,be based. 

Min. That) I think, you have satisfactorily proved. But 
what would you consider to be sufficient grounds for 
abandoning your Manual in favour of another ? 

Euc. There are two defects, and two only, alleged to exist 
in my Manual, which I regard as crucial in this matter. . 
The first concerns my arrangement of Problems and 
Theorems : the second my treatment of Parallels. 

If it be agreed that Problems and Theorems ought to be 
treated separately, my system of numbers must of course 
be abandoned, and no reason will remain why my Manual 
should be retained as a whole ; which is the only point 
I am concerned with. This question you can, of course, 
settle on its own merits, without examining any of the 
new Manuals. 

If, again, it be agreed that, in treating Parallels, some 
other method, essentially different from mine, ought to -be 
adopted, I feel that, after so vital a change as that, in 
volving (as no doubt it would) the abandonment of my 



14 MINOS AND EUCLID. [AcT I. 

sequence and numbers, the remainder of my Manual would 
not be worth fighting for, though portions of it might 
be embodied in the new Manual. To settle this question, 
you must, of course, examine one by one the new methods 
that have been proposed. 

Min. You would not even ask to have your Manual 
retained as an alternative for the new one ? 

Hue. No. For I think it essential for purposes of teach 
ing, that in treating this vital topic one uniform method 
should be adopted; and that this method should be the 
best possible (for it is almost inconceivable that two 
methods of treating it should be equally good). An 
alternative proof of a minor proposition may fairly be 
inserted now and then as about equal in merit to the 
standard proof, and may make a desirable variety: but 
on this one vital point it seems essential that nothing 
but the best proof existing should be offered to the limited 
capacity of a learner. Yacuis committere venis nil nisi lene 
decet. 

Min. I agree with you that we ought to have one 
system only, and that the best, for treating the subject 
of Parallels. But would you have me limit my examina 
tion of your ' Modern Kivals ' to this single topic ? 

Hue. No. There are several other matters of so great 
importance, and admitting of so much variety of treat 
ment, that it would be well to examine any method of 
dealing with them which differs much from mine not 
with a view of substituting the new Manual for mine, 
but in order to make such changes in my proofs as may 
be thought desirable. There are other matters again, 



Sc. II. 2.] MODERN RIVALS. 15 

where changes have been suggested, which you ought 
to consider, but on general grounds, not by examining 
particular writers. 

Let me enumerate what I conceive should be the sub 
jects of your enquiry, arranged in order of importance. 

(i) The combination, or separation, of Problems and 
Theorems. 

(3) The treatment of Pairs of Lines, especially Parallels, 
for which various new methods have been suggested, 
viz. : 

(a) Proofs involving infinite series : suggested by 
LEGENDRE. 

(j8) Angles made with transversals : COOLEY. 
(y) Equidistance : CUTHBERTSON. 

(b) Direction : WILSON,, PIERCE, WILLOCK. 

(e) The substitution of c Playfair's Axiom * for my 
Axiom 13. 

If your decision, on these two crucial questions, be 
given in my favour, we may take it as settled, I think, 
that my Manual ought to be retained as a whole : how 
far it should be modified to suit modern requirements will 
be matter for further consideration. 

(3) The principle of superposition. 

(4) The use of diagonals in Book II. 

These two are general questions, and will not need.th^e 
examination of particular authors. After this, it will be 
well, in order that your enquiry into the claims of my 



16 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT I. 

Modern Rivals may be as complete as possible, to review 
them one by one, with reference to their treatment of 
matters not already discussed, especially : 

(5) Right Lines. 

(6) Angles, including right angles. 

(7) Propositions of mine omitted. 

(8) Propositions of mine treated by a new method. 

(9) New propositions. 

(10) And you may as well conclude, in each case, with a 
general survey of the book, as to style, &c. 

The following may be taken as a fairly complete cata 
logue of the books to be examined : 

1. Legendre. 8. Loomis. 

2. Cooley. 9- Morell. 

3. Cuthbertson. 10. Reynolds. 

4. Wilson. ii. Wright. 

5. Pierce. J3. Wilson's ' Syllabus '- 

6. Willock. Manual. 

7. Chauvenet. 

You should also examine the Syllabus, published by the 
Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teach 
ing, on which the last-named Manual is based. Not that 
it can be considered as a 'Rival' in fact, it is not a 
text-book at all, but a mere list of enunciations but 
because, first, it comes with an array of imposing names 
to recommend it, and secondly, it discards my system of 
numbers, so that its adoption, as a standard for exami 
nations, would seriously interfere with the retention of 
my Manual as the standard text-book. 



Sc. II. 2.] MODERN RIVALS. 17 

Now, of these questions, I shall be most happy to dis 
cuss with you the general ones (I mean questions I, 3 (e), 
3, and 4) before we conclude this interview : but, when it 
comes to criticising particular authors, I must leave you 
to yourself, to deal with them as best you can. 

Min. It will be weary work to do it all alone. And 
yet I suppose you cannot, even with your supernatural 
powers, fetch me the authors themselves? 

Euc. I dare not. The living human race is so strangely 
prejudiced. There is nothing men object to so emphati 
cally as being transferred by ghosts from place to place. 
I cannot say they are consistent in this matter : they 
are for ever r raising 5 or 'laying 5 us poor ghosts we 
cannot even haunt a garret without having the parish 
at our heels, bent on making us change our quarters : 
whereas if I were to venture to move one single small 
boy sa y to lift him by the hair of his head over only 
two or three houses, and to set him down safe and 
sound in a neighbour's garden why, I give you my 
word, it would be the talk of the town for the next 
month ! 

Mm. I can well believe it. But what can you do for 
me ? Are their Doppelg anger available ? 

Euc. I fear not. The best thing I can do is to send 
you the Phantasm of a German Professor, a great friend 
of mine. He has read all books, and is ready to defend 
any thesis, true or untrue. 

Hin. A charming companion ! And his name ? 

EUG. Phantasms have no names only numbers. You 
may call him c Herr Niemand,' or, if you prefer it, e Num- 

c 



18 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT I. 

her one - hundred - and - twenty-three - million - four - hundred 
and-fifty-six-thousand-seven-hundred-and-eighty-nine/ 

Min. For constant use, I prefer ( Herr Niemand. 3 Let 
us now consider the question of the separation of Pro 
blems and Theorems. 



3. The combination, or separation, of 
Problems and Theorems. 



C. I shall be glad to hear, first, the reasons given 
for separating them, and will then tell you my reasons for 
mixing them. 

Min. I understand that the Committee of the Associa 
tion for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching, in 
their Report on the Syllabus of the Association, consider 
the separation as * equivalent to the assertion of the 
principle that, while Problems are from their very nature 
dependent for the form, and even the possibility, of their 
solution on the arbitrary limitation of the instruments 
allowed to be used, Theorems, being truths involving no 
arbitrary element, ought to be exhibited in a form and 
sequence independent of such limitations. 5 They add 
however that 'it is probable that most teachers would 
prefer to introduce Problems, not as a separate section of 
Geometry, but rather in connection with the Theorems 
with which they are essentially related/ 

Euc. It seems rather a strange proposal, to print the 
propositions in one order and read them in another. But 



Sc. II. 3.] PROBLEMS AND THEOREMS. 19 

a stronger objection to the proposal is that several of 
the Problems are Theorems as well such as I. 46, for 
instance. 

Mm. How is that a Theorem ? 

Euc. It proves that there is such a thing as a square. 
The definition, of course, does not assert real existence : 
it is merely provisional. Now, if you omit I. 46, what 
right have you, in I. 47, to say c draw a square ' ? How 
do you know it to be possible ? 

Mm. We could easily deduce that from I. 34. 

Due. No doubt a Theorem might be introduced for that 
purpose : but it would be very like the Problem : you 
would have to say ' if a figure were drawn under such and 
such conditions,, it would be a square/ Is it not quite as 
simple to draw it ? 

Then again take I. 31, where it is required to draw 
a parallel. Although it has been proved in I. 27 that 
such things as parallel Lines egoist, that does not tell us 
that, for every Line and for every point without that 
Line, there exists a real Line, parallel to the given Line 
and passing through the given point. And yet that is a fact 
essential to the proof of I. 32. 

Min. I must allow that I. 31 and I. 46 have a good 
claim to be retained in their places : and if two are to 
be retained, we may as well retain all. 

Hue. Another argument, for retaining the Problems 
where they are, is the importance of keeping the number 
ing unchanged a matter we have already discussed. 

But perhaps the strongest argument is that it saves 
you from 'hypothetical construction's,' the danger of 



20 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT T. 

which has been so clearly pointed out by Mr. Tod- 
hunter (see pp. 196, 205, 206, 217). 

Min. I think you have proved your case very satis 
factorily. The next subject is ' the treatment of Pairs of 
Lines. 5 Would it not be well, before entering on this 
enquiry, to tabulate the accepted truths respecting Pairs 
of Lines ? 

Sue. That will be an excellent plan. It will both give 
you a clear view of the field of your enquiry, and enable 
you to recognise at once any doubtful axioms which you 
may meet with. 

Mm. Will you then favour me with your views on this 
matter ? 

Euc. Willingly. It is a subject which I need hardly say 
I considered very carefully before deciding what definitions 
and axioms to adopt. 



4. Syllabus of propositions relating to 
Pairs of Lines. 



Let us begin with the simplest possible case, a Pair of 
infinite Lines which have two common points, and which 
therefore coincide wholly, and let us consider how such 
a Pair may be defined, and what other properties it 
possesses. 

After that we will take a Pair of Lines which have 
a common point and a separate point ('a separate point ' 
being one that lies on one of the Lines but not on the 



Sc. II. 4.] PAIRS OF LINES. 21 

other), and which therefore have no other common points, 
and treat it in the same way. 

And in the third place we. will take a Pair of Lines 
which have no common point. 

Now the properties of a Pair of Lines may be -ranged 
under four headings : 

(1) as" to common or separate points ; 

(2) as to the equality, or otherwise, of angles made with 
transversals ; 

(3) as to the equidistance, or otherwise, of points on the 
one from the other ; 

(4) as to direction. 

We might distinguish the first two classes,, which I have 
mentioned, as e coincident ' and ' intersecting ' : and these 
names would serve very well if we were going to consider 
only infinite Lines; but, as all the relations of infinite 
Lines, with regard to angles made with transversals, 
equidistance of points, and direction., are equally true of 
finite portions of them, it will be well to use names which 
will include them also. And the names I would suggest 
are coincidental ' and ; intersectional. 5 

By e coincidental Lines/ then, I shall mean Lines which 
either coincide or would do so if produced : and by < inter- 
sectional Lines ' I shall mean Lines which either intersect 
or would do so if produced. 

In the same way, when I speak of < Lines having a com 
mon point,' or of c Lines having two common points/ I 
shall mean Lines which either have 'such points or would 
have them if produced. 



22 



MINOS AND EUCLID. 



[ACT I. 



I will tabulate for you the propositions relating to Pairs 
of Lines, with the aid of some of those Algebraical symbols 
in which modern Mathematicians take so much delight. 

Mm. I should much like to see that done. 

Hue. You will find the symbolical form much the most 
convenient for reference, but I will also give you the same 
tables printed in full, without symbols. (See App. III.) 
The symbols I would suggest are these : 

(i) As to points belonging to the Pair: 
Symbol. Meaning. 

c one is common ; 
co two are so ; 
C all are so ; 

one is separate (i.e. the Lines are different) ; 
all but one are so (nothing asserted as to the 

excepted point) ; 
8 all are so ; 

X one is common and the rest separate (i. e. it 
asserts c $_i'). 

(3) As to angles made with the Pair by trans 
versals : 

one makes equal angles ; 
all do so ; 

one makes unequal angles ; 
all do so. 

Particular properties under this heading may be distin 
guished by subscripts, as follows : 



Sc. II. 



PAIRS OF LINES. 



23 



Symbol. Meaning. 

one transversal 

makes equal alternate angles ; 
makes equal exterior and interior opposite 

angles ; 
makes two interior angles on the same side 

together equal to two right angles ; 
t r is at right angles to both Lines. 

[Observe that the subscripts are the initials of c alternate/ 
c exterior/ { interior/ and c right ' ; while the subscript m } * 
which includes all these, is the first consonant of ' omnis'~\ 

id makes unequal alternate angles ; 

tj makes unequal exterior and interior opposite 

angles ; 
makes two interior angles on the same side 

together unequal to two right angles; 
is at right angles to one Line, but not so to the 
other. 

A double accent asserts what a single one does, but with 
additional details : 

makes one of two alternate angles (viz. that 
which is exterior to the triangle formed by 
the Lines) greater than the other; 
makes exterior angle of a triangle greater 

than interior opposite angle ; 
makes two interior angles of a triangle to 
gether less than two right angles. 



MINOS AND EUCLID. 



[ACT I. 



(3) As to points lying on one of the Lines and on the 
same side of the other : 

Meaning. 
two points on one Line, which lie on the same 

side of the other, are equidistant from it ; 
all on each Line are so ; 
two on one Line are not equidistant from the 

other ; 
all on each Line, which lie on the same side of 

the other, are so; 
the Lines diverge without limit, i.e. a point 

may be found on each, whose distance from 

the other shall exceed any assigned length. 



f 



7 



(4) As to the relative directions of the Lines : 

they have a common point and 
cD coincidental directions ; 
cD f not coincidental directions. 

[N.B. No meaning is, so far, assigned to 'D 9 or ( D" 
when used of Lines not known to have a common point.] 

Any accented letter denies what the letter asserts : e. g. 
' G' ' denies that the Lines have a common point, i. e. asserts 
c x?. 3 Also F represents the word ' proves.' 



With regard to a set of three Lines, a\/B y asserts that 
two of them have property ' a,' that another combination 
of two has property c /3, 5 and the remaining combination 
property c y.' As an example of the use of this notation, 

F 



a | j8 | F | | y asserts that, if three Lines be such 
that two of them have property ' a, 5 and another two 



So. II. 4-] PAIRS OF LINES. 25 

property f /3/ it may thence be proved that the remain 
ing two have property e y.' 



c S 



CC - _i 

C s 

t m - T* 

T f , 

*- m *W 

e F 

E -/. 



I will now arrange these symbols in 
two columns of ' contradictories ' : 

With these symbols we may work 
out the ' contranominal 3 of a proposi 
tion almost like a sum in Arithmetic. 
The simplest instance of a pair of con 
tranominals is * a proves /3, not-/3 proves 
not -a ' ; which would be symbolically 
written c a TP /3, /3' F a' ' ; where each property is affected 
with a not' and transposed to the opposite side. (This 
is curiously like the algebraical rule for transposing a 
quantity from one side of an equation to the other, with 
a change of sign.) 

A more complicated instance would be ' a/3y TP V where 
we may interchange 8 with any one of the three, and so 
get three contranominals, e /3y8' V a, ayS' TP /3' 5 a/38' TP yV 

Mm. Would ' a8' TP fiy ' be a legitimate contranominal ? 

jEW. No. a8' proves that the combination fiy is untrue : 
but this does not necessarily lead to fi'y, which would 
imply each to be untrue. All we can say is that a8' proves 
that some one of these three, /3'y, /3y', /3'y' 3 is true ; but 
we do not know which. The rule is, to transpose only 
one quantity at a time. 

Min. We might then transpose /3y, considered as one 
single property ? 

Hue. Certainly : and the resulting contranominal would 
be ' a8' TP (/3y)V that is, c all things, which are ce a-and- 
not-8," are not "/3-and-y." ' 



26 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT I. 

Mm. What are the contranorainals of c a P /3y ' ? 

j?#. That is merely one sentence containing two dis 
tinct propositions, c a P /3 J and f a P y. 5 Nothing is gained 
by writing them together. 

Mm. Will the same rules apply to the properties of 
three Lines? 

Hue. Exactly the same : ( a \ /3 | IP | | y J yields 
two eontranominalsj a| \y P |/3'| / and c |/3|y' 



P a', 

We might get a third by taking a and /3 as a 
1 assertion; might we not ? 



Euc. Yes. That would give us ' | | y' P ( a \ /3 )V 

Mm. Might not some contranominals fail of being true, 
owing to their subject being non-existent ? For instance, 
if we know that < a/By P V we may infer that c a/36' P /,' 
but this will be true only if a/38' really exists. 

Ene. A proposition, whose subject is unreal, is not neces 
sarily untrue. It may be logically valid that is, its predi-* 
cate may be a necessary logical sequence of its subject. 
When we find that any contranominal proposition is un 
real, though valid, it shows that some one of the data of 
the original proposition was superfluous. 

Min. How do you make that out ? 

Uuc. Why, we know that everything (and a fortiori 
every a/3) must be one of the two, 6 or ^ : if then we are 
told that a/3" is unreal, that is, that no a/3 is 6', we may 
conclude that every one of them is 8, that is, that 'a/3 P 5': 
so that y was superfluous. 

Min. I see that. 

Euc. There is yet another fact which we may deduce 



Sc. II. 4.] PAIRS OF LINES, 27 

from ' a/3y If S/ where a/By is real ; namely., that a/3y is 
real also. 

Now the propositions relating to Pairs of Lines may be 
divided into two classes, the first covering the ground 
occupied by my axiom TO (' two straight lines cannot en 
close a space 3 ) and my propositions I. 16, 17, 27, 28, 31; 
the second that occupied by my Axiom 1 2 and propositions 
1.^9, 30, 3 a. Those in the first class are logical deductions 
from axioms which have never been disputed : the second 
class has furnished, through all ages, a battle-field for rival 
mathematicians. That some one of the propositions in this 
class must be assumed as an axiom is agreed on all hands, 
and each combatant in turn proclaims his own special 
favourite to , be the one axiomatic truth of the series, 
insisting that all the rest ought to be proved as theorems. 

Let us now consider the properties of Pairs of Lines. 

Such pairs may be arranged in three distinct classes. 
I will take them separately, and enumerate, for each class, 
first the ' subjects/ and secondly the c predicates,' of pro 
positions concerning it. 

Min. Let us make . sure that we understand each other 
as to those two words. I presume that a ' subject ' will 
include just so much * property' as is needed to indicate 
the Pair of Lines referred to, i.e. to serve as a sufficient 
definition for them? 

Hue. Exactly so. Now, if we are told, with regard to 
a certain Pair of Lines, that 

(i) they have two common points ; 

or (2) they have a common point, and make equal 
angles with a certain transversal; 



28 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT I. 

or (3) they Lave a common point, and one of them 
has two points on the same side of, and equidistant from, 
the other; 

or (4) they have a common point and coincidental 
directions ; 

we may prove, with regard to this Pair of Lines, that 
(i) they have all points common, i. e. they coincide 
wholly ; 

and (2) they mate equal angles with all transversals ; 
and (3) all points on each are equidistant from the other; 
and (4) they have coincidental directions. 

We assert, in short, that a Pair of Lines, which pos 
sesses any one of the properties ' ccf ( cf, m ' f ce* c c,' 
possesses all the properties ' C? <TJ 'H,' <.' Such a 
Pair of Lines may be called c coincidental.' 

Mm. There is something unsatisfactory in your second 
'subject,' : ct^ Does it not include more than is neces 
sary? I should have said that any one of these four 
ctj c ctj f ct^ c ct r j would have been a sufficient 'sub 
ject 3 : but ' ct> m * includes the whole four, does it not? 

Hue. You are quite right. But you will admit that, if 
any one of the four be given, it is a matter of the simplest 
geometrical proof to deduce the other three ? 

Mm. No doubt. 

Hue. I think, then, that it will be convenient to agree 
that, when c t m J occurs in the subject of a proposition, it 
shall mean 'any one of the four t a) t e , t^ t r * and that 
when f l j m * occurs in the predicate, it shall mean 'all the 



Sc. II. 4.] PAIRS OF LINES. 29 

four T a , T e , T* T r : Thus the proposition <^ m ? T m > is 
equivalent to l t a , or t e > or ^, or r , TP T a and ^ and ^ 
and T r ' ; so thai it really involves sixteen propositions. 
Min. That is clear enough. 



A 




j^w0. There is, perhaps, a little obscurity in such a 
symbol as ' ^ ' when applied to a Pair of coincidental Lines : 
a diagram would make it clear. Let the lines AS, CD, 
in the first figure be supposed to coincide, and to become 
the Line KL in the second : then the two interior angles 
BGH, GHD, become the angles LMF, EML. 

Min. Quite so. 

Hue. Let us go on to the second class of Pairs of Lines. 

If we are told, as to a certain Pair of Lines, that 

(i) they have a common and a separate point ; 

or (-2) they have a common point, and make unequal 
angles with a certain transversal ; 

or (3) they have a common point, and one of them has 
two points not-equidistant from the other ; 

or (4) they have a common point but not coincidental 
directions ; 

we may prove, with regard to this same Pair of Lines, 
that 

(i) they have all other points separate; 



30 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT I. 

and (3) they make unequal angles with all transversals ; 

and (3) every two points on each are not-equidistant 
from the other; 

and (4) a point may be found on each, whose distance 
from the other shall exceed any assigned length ; 

and (5) they have not coincidental directions. 

We assert, in short, that a Pair of Lines, which pos 
sesses any one of the properties ( cs* ' ct^ ( off 6 oZ// 
possesses all the properties <X, 3 e T^ < F? c /7 < B V Such 
a Pair of Lines may be called ' intersectional. 5 

And thirdly, if we are told, with regard to a certain Pair 
of Lines, that 

(i) they have a separate point, and make equal angles 
with a certain transversal ; 

or (2) they have a separate point, and one of them has 
two points on the same side of, and equidistant from, the 
other ; 

we may prove, with regard to this same pair of Lines, 
that they have no common point. 

We assert, in short, that a Pair of Lines, which pos 
sesses- either of the properties ' ' st m ? ( se* possesses the 
property e S' (which might also be used as a definition). 
Such a Pair of Lines may be called ' separational.' 



$. Why not use your own word c parallel ' ? 
Eue. Because that word is not uniformly employed, by 
modern writers, in one and the same sense. Wilson, 
Willock, and Pierce, mean by it 'sD'\ Cooley means 



Sc. II, 4 .J 



PAIRS OF LINES. 



31 



either ' st a * or <$T a , 9 it is not clear which; and any writer 
on the c equidistant ' method might fairly adopt the mean 
ing c se ' or sJE.* I would advise you, in discussing the 
works of my Modern Rivals, to disallow the use of the 
word 'parallel' altogether, and to ohlige each writer to 
adopt a word which shall express his own definition. 

,Min. There is one other question I wish to ask. In 
defining < e 5 as asserting that e two points on one Line, 
which lie on the same side of the other, are equidistant 
from it/ do you include the case of their lying on the 
other Line ? 

flue. Certainly. You may take them as lying on either 
side you like, and at zero -distances. The only case 
excluded is, where hoth points are outside the other Line, 
and on opposite sides of it. 

Min. I understand you. 

Muc. So far as we have- now got, the subjects and 
predicates of propositions concerning the three Classes 
may be tabulated thus : 



SUBJECTS. 



PREDICATES. 



cc, ct 


m , ce, cD 


C, T m 


,4 


D 


cs, ct 


, rf rT)' 

m'j V 3 CJJ 


X, T m 


',f, 


7, D' 


S 1 


mi 8& 


8 







I. Coincidental 
II. Intersectional 
III. Separational 



The following Table contains nineteen propositions, of 
which some are axiomatic, some need to be proved but 
require only : undisputed 3 axioms. I have placed contra- 
nominal propositions in the same Line : 



32 



MINOS AND EUCLID. 



[ACT I. 



TABLE I. [See p. 227.] 


Containing undisputed Axioms, and Theorems 
admitted to be real, valid, and deducille 


from undisputed Axioms. 


COINCIDENTAL. 


INTEKSECTIONAL. 


SEPAEATIONAL. 


1. ccf C 


S.fiJ.lPKor^ 






= cc unique 






(a) csTX 




3. ct m f C 
6. ce IP C 


7. llf 


8. sefS 






9. affreal 




10. J?r 




11. cDf C 


12. zrsr 






13. slf real 




14. 'cc f D 


15. (i) Iff S_i 






/ \ -ry : TTT 




16. C\c\ f \\c 


17. c\c\ S~f X\ \ 


18. |c|5?*|| 


! 


= f X\X\ 




19. sE\c7\ f \ I 



N.B. Under 4 are included : 

X ? J a / = ext. Z of A ^ int. alt. Z 
X F 2V = ext. Z of A : int. opp. Z 
X "P 2V = ^ ^ nt - ^^ofA^^L^ 
1" ? 2> = ext - ^ of A > int. alt. Z 
J IP 2> = ext. Z of A > int. opp. Z 
X F T# = 2 int. Z^ofA < ^L^ 



Sc. II. 4.] PAIRS OF LINES. 33 

No. 19 requires some explanation, since one of the three 
Lines, to which it refers, is not assumed to be a straight 
Line. The Theorem asserts that, if there be given a 
straight Line and a point not on it; and if through the 
point there be drawn a second Line (not assumed to be 
straight) such that all points on it are equidistant from 
the first Line ; and if a third (straight) Line be drawn, 
having a point common with the first Line, and diverging 
from it without limit ; this third Line will intersect the 
second. 

Min. That is quite satisfactory. I was just going to 
remark that No. 19 could not be taken to be a real 
Theorem, until we have proved that a real pair of Lines 
can have the property ' sB* 

Euc. You are quite right. 

Mia. In 4, 7, 10, and 12, is not the subject ' too ex 
tensive ? cs ' would be enough : you do not require Z. 5 

JSuc. No doubt : but as the symbols are shown by 2 (2) 
to be interchangeable, each involving the other, it is sim 
pler, I think, after proving 2 (2), to drop c cs ' altogether, 
and to use c X 5 only. 

Min. I observe that you have omitted two contra- 
nominals deducible from 11 and 15 (2). 

HUG. You mean < s "P ' and <X'J7 IP 8.' My reason 
for so doing is that we do not yet know either subject 
to be real. 

Mm. That is quite satisfactory. 

Hue. We will now go a little further into the subject of 
separational Lines, as to which Table I. has furnished us 
with only three propositions. There are, however, many 



34 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT I. 

other propositions concerning them, which are fully ad 
mitted to be true, though no one of them has yet been 
proved from undisputed axioms: and we shall find that 
they are so related to one another that, if any one be 
granted as an axiom, all the rest may be proved ; but, 
unless some one be so granted, none can be proved. Two 
thousand years of controversy have not yet settled the 
knotty question which of them, if any, can be taken as 
axiomatic. 

If we are told, with regard to a certain Pair of Lines, 
that either 

(i) they have no common point (i.e. all points belong 
ing to the Pair are i separate 3 ) ; 

or (a) they have a separate point, and make equal angles 
with a certain transversal ; 

or (3) they have a separate point, and one of them con 
tains two points equidistant from the other ; 

we may prove (though not without the help of some 
disputed axiom) that 

(i) they make equal angles with all transversals ; 

and (2) all points on each are equidistant from the other, 

That is, if we are told that they have any one of the pro 
perties 8, st m , se? we may prove that they have both the 
properties <T m ,E: These propositions, with the addition 
of my own I. 30, I. 33, and certain others, I will now 
arrange in a tabular form, placing contranominals in the 
same line. 



So. II. 4-] 



PAIRS OF LINES, 



35 



TABLE II. [See p. 232.] 

Consisting of Theorems admitted to "be real 
and valid, 'but not deducible from undis 
puted Axioms. They require, for proof, at 
least one Axiom, viz. either one of them 
selves, or else the proposition ' sD is real/ 



SEPABATIONAL. 


UfTERSEOTIONAL. 


1. (i) Ls, which have sides 
of one separational from 
sides of other, each from 
each, are equal 


*.(!)**+* 


3. sT m real 

4. st m IP T m 
6. STE 
8.* sE real 


7* /IP X " 


9. se f T m 
11. st m IP E 
13. se IP 18 


10. atrf f F 
12. *fT T m , 
14. s^F ^ 


15. (i) |S|S1PJ'J | 


16*(i)JT| ( !P-( \S\8)' 


(I) c\S\S V C\ \ 
*~ sS unique 


(z)X\S\ f | |X 


(3) * | # | * f # | | 



17.* A Line cannot recede from and then approach 
another ; nor can one approach and then recede from 
another on the same side of it. 

18. (i) ext. Z of A = i int. opp. Z s. 
(2) 3 Z s of A = 2 L s. 



36 MINOS AND EUCLID. [AcT I 



Would you be so kind as to translate No. 15 (i) 
into English ? 

Hue. c Two Lines, each of which is separational from a 
third Line, are not intersectional/ 

Mm. "Why not say e are separational'? Then it would 
exactly represent your I. 30. 

Hue. Because they might be coincidental. My proposi 
tion is not quite accurately expressed : it ought to have 
been enunciated thus: 'Different Lines, which are parallel 
to the same Line, are parallel to each other. 3 Its true 
equivalent is No. 15 (3). 
Mm. Would you now translate No. 15 (2) ? 
Hue. 'Two Lines, which have a common point, and of 
which each is separational from a third Line, are coinci 
dental/ This is equivalent to e If, through a point outside 
a given Line,, a Line be drawn separational from the first, 
such a Line is unique, i.e. only one such Line can be 
drawn.' 

Min. Would you now translate No. 16 (a) ? 
Hue. ' A Line^ which is intersectional with one of two 
separational Lines, is intersectional with the other.' It is 
contranominal to No. 15 (i). 

Mm. Is not the ' predicate ' too extensive ? The true 
contradictory of c $' is '<?,' so that your conclusion ought 
not to assert more than that they have a common point. 

Hue. You are quite right : but we may fairly assume as 
an axiom that X\S\ IP | \s, that is, that a Line, which 
is intersectional with (and so has a point common with) 
one of two separational Lines, has a point separate from 
the other. And this '*/ combined with the '<?/ which you 



So. II 4.] PAIRS OF LINES. 37 

say is the -logical conclusion, gives f cs* which justifies my 
conclusion c X 3 

Mm. Some of these propositions seem to be much less 
axiomatic than others. 

Hue. No doubt of it. The following have been proposed 
as Axioms (I have marked them with asterisks in the 
Table) : 

2 (a). *st w >f X'', i.e. 'Different Lines , which make un 
equal angles with a certain transversal, are inter sectional. : 
This is my choice, or rather a particular case of it, viz. 
si? f X; 'Different Lines : , which make with a transversal 
two interior angles together less than two right angles^ are 
inter sectional? 

7. f /"PX 5 ; i.e. * Different Lines } of which one contains 
two points unequally distant from the other ', are intersec- 
tional* This is T. Simpson's Axiom. 

8. c sE reaV '; i.e. 'Through a point, outside a given Line, 
a Line can be drawn such" that the Pair shall be equidistant 

from each other? This is virtually Clavius' Axiom, though 
he only asserts the possibility of making the new Line 
equidistant from the given Line. 



16 (i). ' Z\ | ? ( I S | S )' ' ; i.e. ' Intersectional Lines 
cannot loth le separational from the same Line! This is 
Play fair's Axiom. ' Some writers prefer to assume its 
contranominal, viz. 15 (2). ' $S unique'; i.e. < Through a 
given point, outside a given Line } only one Line can le 
drawn sejoarational from it? 

17. c A Line cannot recede from and then approach another; 



38 MINOS AND EUCLID. [AcT I. 

nor can one approach and then recede from another on the 
same side of it. 3 This might be called { the Ahmedabad 
Axiom, 3 as it first appeared in an Arabic MS. of my 
Manual, which was found there in 1817 : it has been 
adopted by E. Simpson and by Cuthbertson. 

Mm. I suppose I must take it on trust that any one of 
these 1 8 is sufficient logical basis for the other 17 : I can 
hardly ask you to go through 306 demonstrations ! 

Hue. I can do it with 13. You will grant me that, when 
two propositions are contranominal, so that each can be 
proved from the other ; I may select either of the two for 
my series of proofs, but need not include both ? 

Mm. Certainly. 

Hue. First I will give you 4, 3, 11, 8, 17, 13, 9, 18, in 
a cyclical series like a circulating decimal, each being 
proved by its predecessor only, and the last being used to 
prove the first. Hence, if any one of these eight be given 
as an axiom, the rest can be proved from it. 

Secondly, I will give you 16 (i), 1 (2), 6, in a similar 
series. 

Thirdly, I will shew that, when either series has been 
proved, a member of the other series can be deduced. 

Min. That will come to the same thing as a cyclical 
series made of the eighteen. 

Hue. Here are the proofs, which you can read afterwards 
at your leisure. (See Appendix V.) I will now give 
you two Tables of propositions relating to direction, 
which you will find useful when reviewing the writers 
who have adopted that theory. 



So. II. 4.] PAIRS OF LINES. 39 

You understand, of course, that I mean, by a c real ' pro 
position, one whose subject is admitted to be real; by an 
'ideal' proposition, one whose subject is not admitted to 
be real ; and, by a ' valid ' proposition, one whose pre 
dicate is admitted to be a necessary sequence of the 
subject, whether that subject be real or not. For in 
stance, a circular square has four corners' is a 'valid/ 
but { ideal,' proposition. 

Min. I understand. 

JSuc. In Table III, which I am about to lay before 
you, the subjects of the propositions are all c ideal 9 : hence, 
in this Table, the symbol f "F ' must not be taken to mean 
e proves,' but * would prove if the subject really existed.' 



MINOS AND EUCLID. 



[ACT I, 



TABLE III. [See p. 236.] 

Consisting of valid but ideal propositions; 
some being undisputed Axioms, the rest 
Theorems deducible from undisputed Ax 
ioms : but all depending for their reality 
on that of ' sD! 



SEPAEATIONAL. 



1. sDf 8 

2. (i) Zs, which have the 

sides of the one 'sD'- 
related to those of the 
other, each to each, 
are equal 



3. sD ? 

4. ~\~C 



6. (i) \tD\sDtV\ 



(3)"* 




(a) a sJ)\sDf ~c~\ 

= sD unique 
(3) s \sD\sD f ~S 



INTEBSECTIONAL. 



>TP 3 



(2) c\c \sD~f | XI 



8. I 



( \sD\sl))' 



So. II. 4.] 



PAIRS OF LINES. 



41 



TABLE IV. [See p. 238.] 

Consisting of real Theorems, not admitted to 
be valid: their validity depending on the 
reality of ' sD! 



SEPABATIOITAL. 



rKfTERSECTIOXAL. 



1. sD real 

2. ? D 



3. (i) V IP c 



4. (i) An Z may be trans 

ferred, preserving its 
magnitude and the 
directions of its sides 
0) sDT m real 

5. st m 7 D 
7. se If D 



9V 



42 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT I. 



5. Play fairs Axiom. 



Euc. The next general question to be discussed is the 
proposed substitution of Playfair's Axiom for mine. The 
question arises near the end of the series of propositions 
by which I prove I. 32. This series (omitting- elementary 
axioms) consists of Props. 4, 13, 15, 16, 2,J, 28, Ax. 13, 
Prop. 29. 

Hin. Down to the end of I. 28 there is no disputed 
point. My first question must be why you mention Ax. 
12 after Prop. 28? It usually stands at the beginning 
of the Book. 

Hue. Because it is not axiomatic until Prop. 28 has 
been proved. What is an axiom at one stage of our 
knowledge is often anything but an axiom at an earlier 
stage. Some of my critics, who have vehemently denied 
this to be an axiom, seem to have altogether overlooked 
the fact that there is no occasion whatever to ask the reader 
to assent to it until just before Prop. 39, where it is first 
wanted. 

Mm. There can be no objection to our postponing the 
consideration of it until the first twenty-eight propositions 
have been proved. The great question is whether it is 
axiomatic then. 

Euc. I am quite aware of that : and it is because this is 
not only the great question of the whole First Book, but 
also the crucial test by which my method, as compared 
with those of my Modern Eivals,' must stand or fall, 



Sc. II. 5-] PLA YFAIR'S AXIOM. 43 

that I entreat your patience in speaking- of a matter which 
cannot possibly be dismissed in a few words. 

Min. Pray speak at whatever length you think necessary 
to so vital a point. 

Hue. Let me remark in the first place it is a minor 
matter, but yet one that must come in somewhere, and 
I do not want to break the thread of my argument that 
we need, in any complete geometrical treatise, some prac 
tical geometrical test by which we can prove that two 
given finite Lines will meet if produced. My 13th Axiom 
serves this purpose a secondary purpose it is true and 
it is incumbent on any one, who proposes to do away with 
this axiom, to provide some sufficient substitute. 

Min. I admit all that. 

Hue. My next remark will be best explained with the 
help of a diagram. 




Let AB and CD make, with HF 9 the two interior angles 
BEF 9 EFD, together less than two right angles. Now if 
through H we draw the Line GH such that the angles 
HJEF, MFD may be equal to two right angles, it is easy 
to show (by Prop. 38) that <?.H~and CD are c separational. 3 

Min. Certainly. 

Hue. We see, then, that any Lines which have the 
property (let us call it : a 3 ) of making, with a certain 
transversal, two interior angles together less ' than two 



44 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT I. 

right angles, have also the property (let us call it 0') 
that one of them intersects a Line which is separational 
from the other. 

Min. I grant it. 

Em. Now suppose you decline to grant my isth Axiom, 
but are ready to grant Playfair's Axiom, that two inter- 
sectional Lines cannot both be separational from the same 
Line: then you have in fact granted my Axiom. The 
two are in the same boat, and must sink or swim together. 

Min. Be good enough to prove that. 

Hue. Lines, which have property c a/ have property 
</3. 5 Lines, which have property </3,' meet if produced; 
for, if not, there would be two Lines both separational 
from the same Line, which is absurd. Hence LineSj 
which have property 'a, 3 meet if produced. 

Min. I see now that those who grant Playfair's Axiom 
have no right to object to yours : but they may still 
prefer Playfair's as the best. 

Hue. I will now give you some reasons for preferring 
mine. 

In the first place,, Playfair's Axiom (or rather the contra- 
nominal of it which I have been using, that ' a Line which 
intersects one of two separational Lines will also meet the 
other ') does not tell us which way we are to expect the 
Lines to meet. But this is a very important matter in 
constructing a diagram. 

Min. We might obviate that objection by re-wording it 
thus : * If a Line intersect one of two separational Lines, 
that portion of it which falls between them will also meet 
the other.' 



So. II. 5-J PLA YFAIR'S AXIOM. 45 

Hue. We might: and therefore I lay little stress on 
that objection. 

In the second place, it is surely a more difficult con 
ception for a beginner to grasp. I put before him a Pair 
of Lines, a transversal, and two angles whose sum is less 
than two right angles all clear positive conceptions. 
Playfair requires him to realise a Pair of Lines which never 
meet, though produced to infinity a negative conception, 
which does not convey to the mind any clear notion of the 
relative position of the Lines. 

Min. I am inclined to grant that yours has a slight 
advantage in respect of clearness of conception. 

Hue. In the third place, Playfair's Axiom asserts more 
than mine does : and all the additional assertion is 
superfluous, and a needless strain on the faith of the 
learner. 

Min. I do not see that in the least. 

Mic. It is rather an obscure point, but I think I can 
make it clear. "We know that all Pairs of Lines which 
have property e a,' have also property c /3'; but we do 
not know as yet (till we have proved I. 39) that all which 
have property /3/ have also property e a.' 

Min. That is so. 

&c. Then, for anything we know to the contrary, class 
'0' may be larger than class 'a.' Hence, if you assert 
anything of class ' /3,' the logical effect is more extensive 
than if you assert it of class c a 5 : for you assert it, not 
only of that portion of class c /3 3 which is known to be 
included in class <a, } but also of the unknown (but 
possibly existing) portion which is not so included. 



46 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT I. 

Min. I see that now, and consider it a real and very 
strong reason for preferring your axiom. 

But so far you have only answered Playfair. What do 
you say to the objection raised by Mr. Potts? ( A stronger 
objection appears to be that the converse of it forms Euc. I. 
17; for both the assumed axiom and its converse should be 
so obvious as not to require formal demonstration.' 

Euc. Why, I say that I deny the general law which 
he lays down. (It is, of course, the technical converse that 
he means, not the logical one. c All X is Z 5 has for its 
technical converse 'All T isX 3 ; for its logical, ( Some T 
is X 5 ) Let him try his law on the axiom c The whole is 
greater than a part/ and its technical converse c Anything 
greater than a part of a magnitude is equal to the whole 
magnitude ' ! 

Min. I withdraw the objection. 



6. The Principle of Superposition. 



Min. The next subject is the principle of c superposition/ 
You use it twiqe only (in Props. 4 and 8) in the First 
Book : but the modern fancy is to use it on all possible 
occasions. The Syllabus indicates (to use the words of 
the Committee) c the free use of this principle as desirable 
in many cases where Euclid prefers to keep it out of 
sight/ 

Euc. Give me an instance of this modern method. 

'Mm. It is proposed to prove I. 5 by taking up the 



So. II. 6.] PRINCIPLE OF SUPERPOSITION. 47 

isosceles triangle, turning it over, and then laying it down 
again upon itself. 

Hue. Surely that has too much ot the Irish Bull about 
it ; and reminds one a little too vividly of the man who 
walked down his own throat, to deserve a place in a 
strictly philosophical treatise ? 

Min. I suppose its defenders would say that it is con 
ceived to leave a trace of itself behind, and that the 
reversed triangle is laid down upon the trace so left. 

Hue. That is, in fact, the same thing as conceiving that 
there are two coincident triangles, and that one of them 
is taken up, turned over, and laid down upon the other. 
And what does their subsequent coincidence prove ? Merely 
this : that the right-hand angle of the first is equal to the 
left-hand angle of the second, and vice versa. To make 
the proof complete, it is necessary to point out that, 
owing to the original coincidence of the triangles, this 
same c left-hand angle of the second J is also equal to the 
J^-hand angle of the first : and then,, and not till then, 
we may conclude that the base-angles of the first 
triangle are equal. This is the full argument, strictly 
drawn out. The Modern books on Geometry often attain 
their much-vaunted brevity by the dangerous process of 
omitting links in the chain ; and some of the new proofs, 
which at first sight seem to be shorter than mine, are 
really longer when fully stated. In this particular case 
I think you will allow that I had good reason for not 
adopting the method of superposition ? 

Mm. You had indeed. 

e. Mind, I do not object to that proof, if appended 



48 MINOS AND EUCLID. [AcT I. 

to mine as an alternative. It will do very well for more 
advanced students. But, for beginners, I think it much 
clearer to have two non-isosceles triangles to deal with. 

Mm. But your objection to laying a triangle down 
upon itself &OQS not apply to such a case as I. 34. 

Euc. It does not. Let us discuss that case also. The 
Moderns would, I suppose, take up the triangle ABC 
and apply it to DEI so that AB should coincide with 
DE? 

Min. Yes. 

Hue. Well, that would oblige you to say 6 and join 0, in 
its new position, to H and F. : The- words 'in its new 
position' would be necessary, because you would now 
have two points in your diagram, both called <<?.' And 
you would also be obliged to give the points D and E 
additional names, namely <A' and 5.' All which would 
be very confusing for a beginner. You will allow, I think, 
that I was right here in constructing a new triangle 
instead of transferring the old one ? 

Mm. Cuthbertson evades that difficulty by re-naming 
the point C, and calling it e .' 

Hue. And do the points A and B take their names with 
them? 

Mm. No. They adopt the names ' D * and '.? 

Euc. It is very like making a new triangle ! 

Mm. It is indeed. I think you have quite disposed of 
the claims of ' superposition.' The only remaining subject 
for discussion is the omission of the diagonals in Book II. 



So. II. 7-] OMISSION OF DIAGONALS. 



7. The omission of diagonals in Euc. II. 



Euc. Let us test it on my II. 4. We will go through 
my proof of it, and then the proof given by some writer 
who ignores the diagonal, supplying if necessary any of 
those gaps in argument which my Modern Rivals so often 
indulge in, and which give to their proofs a delusive air of 
neatness and brevity. 

c If a line ~be divided into any two parts, the square' of the 
line is equal to the squares of the two parts together with 
twice their rectangle. 

A C B 




Let AB be a line, divided at C\ then shall the square 
of AB be equal to the squares of AC, CB, with twice the 
rectangle of AC, CB. 

On AB describe the square ADfiB ; join BD ; from C 
draw CF parallel to AD or BE, cutting BD at ; and 
through draw EK parallel to AB or JDE. 

v AS cuts the parallels JD, OF, 

.-. the exterior angle <?.#= the interior opposite angle 
ALB. P- 3 9 



MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT I. 



.-. the angle AD=the angle ABB ; [I. 5 

.-. the angle G^=the angle ABD\ 

.-. CG=C; [1.6 

but BK= CG, and <?JT= CB ; [I. 34 

.'. CK is equilateral. 

It is also rectangular, since the angle CBK is right. 

[L 46. Cor. 

.*. CK is a square. 

Similarly jEFis a square and = the square of AC. [I. 34 

Also, v AG, GE are equal, being complements^ [I. 43 

.-. ^(5 and <?.#= twice ^ff ; 

= twice the rectangle of ^(7, CT, since 
CG=C. 

But these four figures make up AE, the square of AB. 

Therefore the square of AB &c. Q. E. D.' 

That is just 136 words, counting from ' On AB describe ' 
down to the words 'since CGCB? What author shall 
we turn to for a rival proof ? 

Min. I think Wilson will be best. 

Euc. Very well. Do the best you can for him. You 
may use all my references if you like, and if you can do 
so legitimately. 

Jfm. 'Describe a square ADEB on AB. Through C 
draw CF parallel to AD, meeting - ' 

Euc. You must insert c or BEj to make the comparison 
fair. 

Min. Certainly. I will mark the necessary insertions 
by parentheses. ' Through C draw CF parallel to AD (or 
BE), meeting DE in F. 3 



So. II. 7.] OMISSION OF DIAGONALS. 51 

flue. You may omit those four words, as they do not 
occur in my proof. 

Mia. Very well. Cut off (from CF) CG^CB. Through 

draw HK parallel to AS (or DU). It is easily shewn 
that CK, HF are the squares of CB, AC\ and that AG, 
GU, are each of them the rectangle of AC, CB? 

Uuc. We can't admit c it is easily shewn ' ! He is bound 
to give the proof. 

Min. I will do it for him as briefly as I can. c v CG= 
CE, and BK^CG, and GK=CB, .: CKis equilateral. It 
is also rectangular, since the angle CBK is right. .'. CK 
is a square.' I'm afraid I mustn't say c Similarly HF is 
a square ' ? 

MUG. Certainly not : it requires a different proof. 

Mm. < Because CF^AD^AB, and CG, CS, parts of 
them, are equal ; .-. the remainder GFfhe remainder 
AC,=HG. But JZD= ^ and VI^HG; .-. J7^is equi 
lateral. It is also rectangular, since the angle HDF is 
right. .*. HF is a square,, and = the square of AC. Also 
^ is the rectangle of AC, CB } since GG=CB: I fear 

1 can't assume 6r# to be equal to AG? 

"Euc. I fear I cannot permit you to assume the truth 
of my I. 43. 

Mm. c Also GE is the rectangle of AC, CB, since GF 
AC, and GK=CB. /. ^((r and GE= twice the rectangle 

of AC, CB: 

Hue. That will do. How many words do you make it ? 
Mm. 158. 

Hue. Then the omission of the diagonal, instead of short 
ening the proof, has really lengthened it by twenty -two 

E 2, 



52 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT I. So. II. 

words ! Well ! Has it any advantage in the way of neat 
ness to atone for its greater length ? 

Mm. Certainly not. It is quite unsymmetrical. I very 
much prefer your method of appealing to the beautiful 
theorem of the equality of complements. 

Euc. Then that concludes our present interview : we will 
meet again when you have reviewed my Modern Rivals 
one by one. If you had any slow music handy, I would 
vanish to it : as it is 

Vanishes without slow music. 



ACT II 

SCENE I. 

' E fumo dare lucem.' 

[MiNOS skewing. To Mm enter, first a cloud of tolacco- 
smoke; secondly the towl, and thirdly the stem, of a gigantic 
meerschaum; fourthly the phantasm of HEER NIEMAND ; 
carrying a pile of phantom-looks > the works of Ihiclid's 
Modern Rivals^ phantastically bound.] 

Niemand. The first author we have to consider is 
M. Legendre, is it not? 

Minos, (aside) Not a single word of greeting! He 
plunges in medias res with a more fearful suddenness than 
Euclid himself! (Aloud] It is so, mein lieber Herr. 

Nie. No time to waste in civil speeches ! It is for you 
to question, for me to answer. I have read M. Legendre's 
book. Ach! It is beautiful! You shall find in it no 
flaw! 

Min. I do not expect to do so. 



ACT II 

SCENE II. 



Treatment of Parallels Toy methods 
involving infinite series. 



LEGENDRE. 

*Pine by degrees, and beautifully less.' 

Nie. I lay before you c Elements de Geometrie ' by Mons, 
A. M. LEGEWDRE, the i^ih edition, 1860. 

Mm. Let me begin by asking you (since I consider you 
and your client as one in this matter) how you define 
a straight Line. 

Nie. As e the shortest path from one point to another/ 

Min. This does not seem to me to embody the primary 
idea which the word c straight ' raises in the niind. Is 
not the natural process of thought to realise first the 
notion of e a straight Line/* and then to grasp the fact 
that it is the shortest path between two points ? 



LEGENDRE. 55 



Me. That may be the natural process : but surely you 
will allow our definition to be a legitimate one ? 

Mm. I think not: and I have the great authority of 
Kant to support me. In his < Critique of Pure Keason,' he 
says (I quote from Meiklejohn's translation, in Bohn's 
Philosophical Library, pp. 9, 10), 'Mathematical judg 
ments are always synthetical . . . " A straight line between 
two points is the shortest" is a synthetical proposition. 
For my conception of straight contains no notion of quan 
tity, but is merely qualitative. The conception of the 
shortest is therefore wholly an addition, and by no analysis 
can it be extracted from our conception of a straight line.' 

This may fairly be taken as a denial of the fitness of the 
axiom to stand as a definition. For all definitions ought 
to be the expressions of analytical, not of synthetical, judg 
ments : their predicates ought not to introduce anything 
which is not already included in the idea corresponding to 
the subject. Thus, if the idea of 'shortest distance' cannot 
be obtained by a mere analysis of the 'Conception repre 
sented by c straight Line/ the axiom ought not to be used 
as a definition. 

Nie. We are not particular as to whether it be taken as 
a definition or axiom : either will answer our purpose. 

Mm. Let us then at least banish it from the definitions. 
And now for its claim to be regarded as an axiom. It 
involves the assertion that a straight line is shorter than 
any curved line between the two points. Now the length 
of a curved line is altogether too difficult a subject for 
a beginner to have to consider : it is moreover unnecessary 
that he should consider it at all, at least in the earlier 



56 LEGENDRE. [Acr II. 

parts of Geometry : all he really needs is to grasp the fact 
that it is shorter th.an any IroJcen line made up of straight 
lines. 

]\ 7 ie. That is true. 

Mm, And all eases of broken lines may be deduced 
from their simplest case, which is Euclid's I. 20. 

Nie. "Well, we will abate our claim and simply ask to 
have I. 20 granted us as an axiom. 

Min. But it can be proved from your own axioms : and 
it is a generally admitted principle that, at least in dealing 
with beginners, we ought not to take as axiomatic any 
theorem which can be proved by the axioms we already 
possess. 

Nie. For beginners we must admit that Euclid's method 
of treating this point is the best. But you will allow ours 
to be a legitimate and elegant method for the advanced 
student ? 

Min. Most certainly. The whole of your beautiful 
. treatise is admirably fitted for advanced students : it is 
only from the ieyinner's point of view that I venture to 
criticise it at all. 

Your treatment of angles and right angles does not, 
I think, differ much from Euclid's ? 

Nie, Not much. We prove , instead of assuming, that 
all right angles are equal, deducing it from the axiom 
that two right lines cannot enclose a space. 

Min. I think some such proof a desirable interpolation. 

I will now ask you how you prove Euc. I. 29 and 32. 

Nie. What preliminary propositions will you grant us 
as proved ? 



So. II.] PARALLELS. 57 

Mm. Euclid's series consists of Props. 4, 13, 15, 16, 
27, 28, Ax. I2 3 and Props. 39, 32. I will grant you as 
much of that series as you have proved by methods not 
radically differing from his. 

Nie. That is, you grant us Props. 4, 13, and 15. Prop. 
1 6 is not in our treatise. The next we require is Prop. 6. 

Min. That you may take as proved. 

Nie. And, next to that, Prop. 30 : that we assume as 
an axiom, and from it, with the help of Prop. 6, we deduce 
Prop. 19. 

Min. For our present purpose you may take Prop. 19 
as proved. 

Nie. From Props. 13 and 19 we deduce Prop. 32 ; and, 
from that, Ax. 13 ; from which Prop. 29 follows at once. 

Min. Your proof of Prop. 32 is long, but beautiful. 
I need not, however, enter on a discussion of its merits. 
It is enough to say that what we require is a proof suited 
to the capacities of leginnen, and that this theorem of 
yours (Prop, xix, at p. 30) contains an infinite series of 
triangles, an infinite series of angles, the terms of which 
continually decrease so as to be ultimately less than any 
assigned angle, and magnitudes which vanish simulta 
neously. These considerations seem to me to settle the 
question. I fear that your proof of this theorem, though 
a model of elegance and perspicuity as a study for the 
advanced student, is wholly unsuited to the requirements 
of a beginner. 

Nie. That we are not prepared to dispute. 

Min. It seems superfluous, after saying this, to ask 
what test for the meeting of Lines you have provided : 



58 LEGENDRE. [ACT II. So. II. 

but we may as well have that stated, to 'complete the 
enquiry. 

Nie. We give Euclid's isth axiom, which we prove 
from Prop. 33, using the principle of Euc. X. i (second 
part), that c if the greater of two unequal magnitudes be 
bisected, and if its half be bisected, and so on ; a magni 
tude will at length be reached less than the lesser of the 
two magnitudes.' 

Min. That again is a mode of proof entirely un suited to 
beginners. 

I have observed only one instance of what may be called 
faulty logic. It occurs in Prob. I (p. 49), where, in order 
to bisect a given Line, we are told to assume a length 
'greater than half of it.' This would appear to require 
the previous solution of the Problem, and therefore is, 
strictly speaking, a ^Petitio Principal 

The general style of your admirable treatise I shall not 
attempt to discuss : it is one I would far rather take as 
a model to imitate than as a subject to criticise. 

I can only repeat, in conclusion, what I have already 
said, that your book, though well suited for advanced ' 
students, is not so for beginners. 

Nie. At this rate we shall make short work of the 
twelve Modern Rivals \ 



ACT II. 

SCENE III. 



Treatment of Parallels by angles 
made with transversals. 



COOLEY. 

* The verbal solemnity of a hollow logic.' 

COOLEY, Prqf. p. 20. 

Nie. I have now the honour to lay before you ( Tke 
Elements of Geometry, simplified and explained,' by W. D. 
COOLEY, A.B., published in 1860. 

Min. Please to hand me the book for a moment. I wish 
to read you a few passages from the Preface. It is always 
satisfactory is it not? to know that a writer, who 
attempts to 'simplify 3 Euclid, begins his task in a be 
coming spirit of humility, and with some reverence for 
a name that the world has accepted as an authority for 
two thousand years, 

Nie. Truly. 



60 COOLEY. [ACT II 

MINOS reads. 

'The Elements of Plane Geometry . . . are here pre 
sented in the reduced compass of 36 propositions, perfectly- 
coherent, fully demonstrated, and reaching quite as far as 
the 173 propositions contained in the first six books of 
Euclid.' Modest, is it not ? 

Nie. A little high-flown, perhaps. Still, you know, if 
they really are e fully demonstrated ' 

Ml%, If! In page 4 of the Preface he talks of c Euclid's 
circumlocutory shifts ' : in the same page he tells us that 
the doctrine of proportion, as propounded by Euclid, runs 
into prolixity though wanting in clearness ': and again, in 
the same page, he states that most of Euclid's ex absnrdo 
proofs c though containing little,' yet 'generally puzzle 
the young student, who can hardly comprehend why 
gratuitous absurdities should be so formally and solemnly 
dealt with. These propositions therefore are omitted from 
our Eook of Elements, and the Problems also, for the 
science of Geometry lies wholly in the Theorems. Thus 
simplified and freed from obstructions, the truths of 
Geometry may, it is hoped, be easily learned, even by 
the youngest. 3 Eut perhaps the grandest sentence is at 
the end of the Preface. 'Then as to those Propositions 
(the first and last of the 6th Book), in which, according 
to the same authority ' (he is alluding to the Manual of 
Euclid by Galbraith and Haughton), Euclid so beautifully 
illustrates his celebrated definition, they appear to our 
eyes to exhibit only the verbal solemnity of a hollow logic, 
and to exemplify nothing but the formal application qf 



Sc. III'.] PARALLELS. 61 

a nugatory principle. 3 Now let us see, mein Herr, whether 
Mr. Cooley has done anything worthy of the writer of 
such brave 'orts' (as Shakespeare has it): and first let 
me ask how you define Parallel Lines. 

NIEMAND reads. 

' Eight Lines are said to be parallel when they are 
equally and similarly inclined to the same right Line, or 
make equal angles with it towards the same side. 5 
* Min. That is to say,, if we see a Pair of Lines cut by 
a certain transversal, and are told that they make equal 
angles with it, we say ' these Lines are parallel"; and 
conversely, if we are told that a Pair of Lines are parallel, 
we say 'then there is a transversal, somewhere, which 
makes equal angles with them '? 

Nie. Surely, surely. 

Min. Eut we have no means of finding it ? We have 
no right to draw a transversal at random and say c this is 
the one which makes equal angles with the Pair '? 

Nie. Ahem ! Ahem ! Ahem ! 

Min. You seem to have a bad cough. 

Nie. Let us go to the next subject. 

Mm. Not till you have answered my question. Have 
we any means of finding the particular transversal which 
makes the equal angles ? 

Nie. I am sorry for my client, but, since you are so 
exigeavut^ I fear I must confess that we have no means of 
finding it. 

Mm. Now for your proof of Euc. I. 32. 

Nie. You will allow us a preliminary theorem ? 



62 COOLS Y. [ACT II. Sc. III. 

Min. As many as you like. 

Nie. Well, here is our Theorem n. c When two parallel 
straight lines AB, CD, are cut ly a third straight line EF, 
they make with it the alternate angles AGH, GRD, equal; 
and also the two internal angles at the same side BGH, &HD 
equal to two right angles. 



H\ 



For AGH and UGB are equal because vertically opposite, 
and JBGB is also equal to GHD (Definition) ; therefore J 

Min. There I must interrupt you. How do you know 
that EGB is equal to GHD? I grant you that, by the 
Definition, AB and CD make equal angles with a certain 
transversal : but have you any ground for saying that ~EF 
is the transversal in question ? 

Nie. We have not. We surrender at discretion. You 
will permit us to march out with the honours of war ? 

Mm. We grant it you of our royal grace. March him 
off the table, and bring on the next Hival. 



ACT II. 

SCENE IV. 



Treatment of Parallels by equidistances*. 



CUTHBERTSON. 

'Thou art so near, and yet so far.' 

Modern Song. 

Nie. I now lay before you 'Euclidian Geometry? by 
FRANCIS CUTHBERTSON, M.A., late Fellow of C. C. C. Cam 
bridge ; Head Mathematical Master of the City of London 
School ; published in 1874. 

Min. It will not be necessary to discuss with you all the 
innovations of Mr. Cuthbertson's book. The questions of 
the separation of Problems and Theorems, the use of super 
position, and the omission of the diagonals in Book II, are 
general questions which I have considered by themselves. 
The only points, which you and I need consider, are the 
methods adopted in treating Hight Lines, Angles, and 
Parallels, wherever those methods differ from Euclid's. 

The first subject, then, is the Eight Line. How do you 
define and test it ? 



64 CUTHBERTSON. [ACT II. 

Nie. As in Euclid. But we prove what Euclid has 
assumed as an axiom, namely, that two right Lines cannot 
have a common segment. 

Mm. I am glad to hear you assert that Euclid has 
assumed it c as an axiom/ for the interpolated and illogical 
corollary to Euc. I. n has caused many to overlook the 
fact that he has assumed it as early as Prop. 4, if 'not 
in Prop. I. What is your proof? 

NIEMAND reads. 
^ Two straight lines cannot have a common segment? 




A ^ 



'For if two straight lines AUC, ABE. could have a 
common segment AB ; then the straight line ABC might 
be turned about its extremity A, towards the side on which 
JBHis, so as to cut BH\ and thus two straight lines would 
enclose a space, which is impossible. 3 

Mm. You assume that, before C crosses BH, the portions 
coinciding along AB will diverge. But, if ABH is a 
right Line, this will not happen till C lua&joassed K 

Nie. But you would then have one portion of the re 
volving Line in motion, and another portion at rest. 

Mm. Well, why not ? 

Nie. We may assumS that to be impossible ; and that. 



Sc. IV.] PARALLELS. 65 

if a Line revolves about its extremity, it all moves at 
once. 

Min. Which, I take the liberty to think, is quite as 
great an assumption as Euclid's. I think the axiom quite 
plain enough without any proof. 

Your treatment of angles, and right angles, is the same 
as -Euclid's, I think ? 

Nie. Yes, except that we prove that c all right angles 
are equal.' 

Min. Well, it is capable of proof, and therefore had 
better not be retained as an axiom. 

I must now ask you to give me your proof of Euc. I. 

32. 

Nie. We prove as far as I. 28 as in Euclid. In order 
to prove I. 39, we first prove, as a Corollary to Euc. I. 20, 
that c the shortest distance between two points is a straight 
line.' 

Min. What is your next step ? 

Nie. A problem (Pr. F. p. 53) in which we prove the 
theorem that, of all right lines drawn from a point to a 
Line, the perpendicular is the least. 

Min. We will take that as proved. 

Nie. We then deduce that the perpendicular is the 
shortest path from a point to a Line. 

Next comes a Definition. c By the distance of a point 
from a straight line is meant the shortest path from the 
point to the line.' 

Min. Have you anywhere defined the distance of one 
point from another ? 

Nie. No. 



66 CUTHBERTSON. [AcT II. 

Min. We had better have that first. 

Nie. Very well. 'The distance of one point from 
another is the shortest path from one to the other/ 

Min. Might we not say ' is the length of the right line 
joining them ? ' 

Nie. Yes, that is the same thing. 

Min. And similarly we may modify the definition you 
gave just now. 

Nie. Certainly. c The distance of a point from a right 
Line is the length of the perpendicular let fall upon it from 
the given point. 3 

Min. What is your next step ? 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. 33. Bed. G. e lf points be taken along 1 one of the arms 
of an angle farther and farther from the vertex, their dis 
tances from the other arm will at length be greater than 
any given straight line.' 

In proving this we assume as an axiom that the lesser 
of two magnitudes of the same kind can be multiplied so 
as to exceed the greater. 

Mm. I accept the axiom and the proof . 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. 34. Ax. c If one right Line be drawn in the same 
plane as another, it cannot first recede from and then 
approach to the other, neither can it first approach to 
and then recede from the other on the same side of it. 5 

Min. Here., then, you assume, as axiomatic, one of the 
propositions of Table II. After this, you ought to have 



Sc. IV.] PARALLELS. 67 

no further difficulty in proving Euc. I. 33 and all other 
properties of parallels. How do you proceed ? 

Nie. We prove (p. 34. Lemma) that, if two Lines have 
a common perpendicular, each is equidistant from the 
other. 
. Mm. (aside) < st r f E.' (aloud) What then ? 

Nie. Next, that any Line intersecting one of these will 
intersect the other (p. 35). 

Mm. That, I think, depends on Deduction G } at p. 33 ? 

Nie. Yes. 

Min. A short, but not very easy, Theorem; and one 
containing a somewhat intricate diagram. However, it " 
proves the point. What is your next step ? 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. 34. Lemma. c Through a given point without a given 
straight line one and only one straight line can he drawn 
in the same plane with the former, which shall never meet 
it. Also all the points in each of these straight lines are 
equidistant from the other. 3 

Mm. I accept all that. 

Nie. We then introduce Euclid's definition of ' Parallels/ 
It is of course now obvious that parallel Lines are equi 
distant, and that equidistant Lines are parallel. 

Mm. Certainly. 

Nie. We can now, with the help of Euc. I. 27, prove 
I. 29, and thence I. 32. 

Mm. No doubt. We see, then, that you propose, as 
a substitute for Euclid's I2th Axiom, a new Definition, 
two new Axioms, and what virtually amounts to five 

F 2 



68 CUTHBERTSON. [ACT II. 

new Theorems. In point of c axiomaticity ' I do not think ' 
there is much to choose between the two methods. But 
in point of brevity, clearness, and suitability to a beginner, 
I give the preference altogether to Euclid's axiom. 

The next subject to consider is your practical test, if 
any, for two given Lines meeting when produced. 

Nie. One test is that one of the lines should meet a 
Line parallel to the other. 

Min. Certainly : and that will suffice in such a case as 
Euc. I. 44 (Pr. M. p. 60, in this book) though you omit 
to point out why the Lines may be assumed to meet. 
But what if the diagram does not contain a Line parallel 
to the other ' ? Look at Pr. (Ji) p. 69, where we are told to 
make, at the ends of a line, two angles which are together 
less than two right angles, and where it is assumed that the 
Lines, so drawn, will meet. That is, you assume the truth 
of Euclid's 1 3th axiom. And you do the same thing at 
pp. 70, 133, 143, and 185. 

Nie. Euclid's I2th axiom is easily proved from our 
theorems. 

Mm. No doubt: but you have not done it, and the omis 
sion makes a very serious hiatus in your argument. It is 
not a thing that beginners are at all likely to be able to 
supply for themselves. 

I have no adverse criticisms to make on the general 
style of the book, which seems clear and well written. 
Nor is it necessary to discuss the claims of the book to 
supersede Euclid, since the writer makes no such claim, 
but has been careful (as he states in his preface) to avoid 
any arrangement incompatible with Euclid's order. The 



Sc. IV.] SUMMARY. 69 

chief novelty in the book is the introduction of the 
principle of ' equidistance/ which does not seem to me a 
desirable feature in a book meant for beginners : otherwise 
it is little else than a modified version of Euclid. 



ACT II. 

SCENE V. 



Treatment of Parallels by direction. 



i. WILSON. 

* There Is moreover a logic besides that of mere reasoning.' 

WILSON, Prff. p. xiii. 

Nie. You have made but sliort work of four of the five 
methods of treating 1 Parallels. 

Min. We shall have all the more time to give to the 
somewhat intricate subject of Direction. 

Nie. I lay on the table 6 Elementary Geometry? by 
J. M. WILSON, M.A., late Fellow of St. John's College, 
Cambridge, late Mathematical Master of Rugby School, 
now Head Master of Clifton College. The second edition, 
1869. And I warn you to be careful how you criticise 
it, as it is already adopted in several schools. 

Mm, Tant _pis pour les ecoles. So you and your client 
deliberately propose to supersede Euclid as a test-book ? 



RIGHT LINES. 71 



Nie. f I am of opinion that the time is come for making 
an effort to supplant Euclid in our schools and universities/ 
(Pref. p. xiv.) 

Mr/i. It will be necessary, considering* how great a 
change you are advocating, to examine your book very 
minutely and critically. 

Nie. With all my heart. I hope you will show, in 
your review, 'the spirit without the prejudices of a geo 
metrician.' (Pref. p. xv.) 

Mm. We will begin with the Eight Line. And first, 
let me ask,, how do you define it ? 

Nie. As 'a Line which has "-the same direction at all 
parts of its length.' (p. 3.) 

Mm. You do not, I think, make any practical use of 
that as a test, any more than Euclid does of the property 
of lying evenly as to points on it ? 

Nie. No, we do not. 

Mm. You construct and test it as in Euclid, I believe ? 
And you have his axiom that ( two straight Lines cannot 
enclose a space ? ' 

Nie. Yes, but we extend it. Euclid asserts, in effect, 
that two Lines, which coincide in two points, coincide 
between those points : we say they e coincide wholly,' which 
includes coincidence leyoncL those points. 

Mm. Euclid tacitly assumes that. 

Nie. Yes, but he has not expressed it. 

Min. I think the addition a good one. Have you any 
other axioms about it ? 

Nie. Yes, 'that a straight Line marks the shortest 
distance between any two of its points.' (p. 5. Ax. i.) ' 



72 WILSON. [ACT II. 

Min. That I Lave already fully discussed in, reviewing 
M. Legendre's book (see p. 54). 

Nie. We have also c A Line may be conceived as trans 
ferred from any position to any other position, its magni 
tude being unaltered. 5 (p. 5. Ax. 3.) 

Mm. True of any geometrical magnitude : but hardly 
worth stating., I think. I have now to ask you how you 
define an Angle ? 

Nie. 'Two straight Lines that meet one another form 
an angle at the point where they meet.' (p. 5.) 

Min. Do you mean that they form it ( at the point ' and 
nowhere else ? 

Nie. I suppose so. 

Min. I fear you allow your angle no magnitude, if you 
limit its existence to so small a locality ! 

Nie. "Well, we don't mean ' nowhere else.' 

Min. (meditatively) You mean ' at the point and some- 
where else.' Where else, if you please ? 

Nie. We mean we don't quite know why we put in the 
words at all. Let us say * Two straight Lines that meet 
one another form an angle.' 

Mm. Very well. It hardly tells us what an angle is, 
and., so far, it is inferior to Euclid's definition : but it may 
pass. Do you put any limit to the size of an angle ? 

Nie. We have not named any, but the largest here 
treated of is what we call one revolution/ 

Min. You admit reentrant angles then ? 

Nie. Yes. 

Min. Then your definition only states half the truth : 
you should have said ' form two angles,' 



So. V. i.J ANGLES. 73 

Nie. That would be true, no doubt. 

Min. But this extension of limit will require several 
modifications in Euclid's language : for instance, what is 
your definition of an obtuse angle ? 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. 8. Def. 13. c An obtuse angle is one which is greater 
than a right angle.' 

Min. So you tumble headlong into the very first pitfall 
you come across ! Why, that includes such angles as 
1 80 and 360. You would teach your pupil, I suppose, 
that one portion of a straight Line makes an obtuse 
angle with the other, and that every straight Line has 
an obtuse angle at each end of it ! 

Nie. It is an oversight of course we ought to have 
added c but less than two right angles. 3 

Min. A very palpable oversight. I fear we shall find 
more as we go on. What axioms have you about angles ? 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. 5. Ax. 4. c An angle may be conceived as transferred 
to any other position, its magnitude being unaltered, 3 
Min. Hardly worth stating. Proceed. 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. 5. Ax. 5. 'Angles are equal when they could be 
placed on one another so that their vertices would coin 
cide in position, and their arms in direction/ 

Min. ' Placed on one another ' ! Did you ever see the 
child's game, where a pile of four hands is made on the 



74 WILSON. [ACT II. 

table, and each player tries to have a hand at the top 
of the pile ? 

Nie. I know the game. 

Min. Well, did you ever see both players succeed at 
once? 

Nie. No. 

Min. Whenever that feat is achieved, you may then 
expect to be able to place two angles c on one another ' ! 
You have hardly, I think, grasped the physical fact that, 
when one of two things is on the other, the second is 
underneath the first. But perhaps I am hypercritical. 
Let us try an example of your axiom : let us place an 
angle of 90 on one of 270. I think I could get 
the vertices and arms to coincide in the way you 
describe. 

Nie. But the one angle would not be on the other; 
one would extend round one-fourth of the circle, and the 
other round the remaining three-fourths. 

Min. Then, after all, the angle is a mysterious entity, 
which extends from one of the lines to the other ? That 
is much the same as Euclid's definition. Let us now take 
your definition of a Eight Angle. 

Nie. We first define c one revolution/ which is the angle 
described by a line revolving, about one extremity, round 
into its original position. 

Min. That is clear enough. 

Nie. We then say (p. 7. Def. 9) c When it coincides with 
what was initially its continuation, it has described half 
a revolution, and the angle it has then described is called 
a straight angle? 



So. Y. I.] ANGLES. 75 

Min. How do you know that it has described half 
a revolution*! 

Nie. Well, it is not difficult to prove. Let that portion 
of the plane, through which it has revolved, be rolled 
over, using as an axis the arm (in its initial position) and 
its continuation, until it falls upon the other portion of 
the plane. The two angular magnitudes will now together 
make up ( one revolution ' : therefore each is * half a revo 
lution.' 

Mm. A proof, I grant : but you are very sanguine if 
you expect beginners in the subject to supply it for 
themselves. 

Nie. It is an omission, we admit. 

Mm. And then c a straight angle 3 ! Straight 3 is neces 
sarily unbending : while e angle ' is from ay/co?, a bend 
or hook': so that your phrase is exactly equivalent to 
< an unbending bend ' ! In c the Bairnslea Foaks' Al 
manack ' I once read of c a mad chap * who spent six weeks 
{ a-trying to maak a straat hook ' : but he failed. He 
ought to have studied your book. Have you Euclid's 
axiom c all right angles are equal ' 1 

Nie. We deduce it from c all straight angles are equal ' : 
and that we prove by applying one straight angle to 
another. 

Min. That is all very well, though I cannot think 
'straight angles' a valuable contribution to the subject. 
I will now ask you to state your method of treating Pairs 
of Lines, as far as your proof of Euc. I. 32. 

Nie. To do that we shall of course require parallel 
Lines : and, as our definition of them is c Lines having 



76 WILSON. [ACT II. 

the same direction/ we must begin by discussing direc 
tion. 

Mm. Undoubtedly. How do you define direction? 

Nie. Well, we have not attempted that. The idea 
seemed to us to be too elementary for definition. But 
let me read you what we have said about it. 

Reads. 

P. 2. Def. 3. l A geometrical Line has position, and length, 
and at every point of it it has direction . . . .' 

P. 3. Def. 4. c A straight Line is a Line which has the 
same direction at all parts of its length. It has also the 
opposite direction .... A straight Line may be conceived 
as generated by a point moving always in the same direc 
tion. 5 

I will next quote what we have said about two Lines 
having ' the same direction 5 and ' different directions. 5 

Mm. We will take that presently : I have a good deal 
to say first as to what you have read. I gather that you 
consider direction to be a property of a geometrical entity, 
but not itself an entity ? 

Nie. Just so. 

Min. And you ascribe this property to a Line,, and also to 
the motion of a point ? 

Nie. We do. 

Min. For simplicity's sake, we will omit all notice of 
curved Lines, etc., and will confine ourselves to straight 
Lines and rectilinear motion, so that in future, when I use 
the word c Line,,' I shall mean ' straight Line. 5 Now may 
we not give a notion of ' direction ' by saying that a 



Sc. Y. I.] DIRECTION. 77 

moving point must move in a certain f direction ' that, 
if two points, starting from a state of coincidence, move 
along two equal straight Lines which do not coincide (so 
that their movements are alike in point of departure, 
and in magnitude), that quality of each movement, which 
makes it differ from, the other, is its ' direction '< and 
similarly that, if two equal straight Lines are terminated 
at the same point, but do not coincide, that quality of 
each which makes it differ from the other, is its e direc 
tion 5 from the common point ? 

Nie. It is all very true : but you are using c straight 
Line ' to help you in defining ' direction.' We, on the con 
trary, consider f direction 3 as the more elementary idea of 
the two, and use it in defining ' straight Line. 5 But we 
clearly agree as to the meanings of both expressions. 

Mm. I am satisfied with that admission. Now as to 
the phrase 'the same direction/ which you have used in 
reference to a single Line and the motion of a single 
point. May we not say that portions of the same Line 
have c the same direction ' as one another ? And that, if 
a point moves along a Line without turning back, its 
motion at one instant is in ( the same direction ' as its 
motion at another instant? 

Nie. Yes. That expresses our meaning in other lan 
guage. 

Min. I have altered the language in order to bring 
out clearly the fact that, in using the phrase c the same 
direction' we are really contemplating two Lines, or two 
motions. We have now got (considering c straight Line ' 
as an understood phrase) accurate geometrical definitions 



78 WILSON. [ACT II. 

of at least two uses of the phrase. And to these we may 
add a third, viz. that two coincident Lines have c the same 
direction. 5 

Nie. Certainly, for they are one and the same Line. 

Mm. And yon intend, I suppose^ to use the word { dif 
ferent ' as equivalent to * not-same. 5 

Nie. Yes. 

Min. So that if we have, for instance, two equal Lines 
terminated at the same point, but not coinciding, we say 
that they have c different directions ' ? 

Nie. Yes, with one exception. If they are portions of 
one and the same infinite Line, we say that they have 
c opposite directions.' Eemember that we said, of a Line, 
1 it has also the opposite direction.' 

Mm. You did so : but, since e same ' and e different ' 
are contradictory epithets, they must together comprise 
the whole genus of c pairs of directions.' Under which 
heading will you put c opposite directions ' ? 

Nie. No doubt, strictly speaking, c opposite directions' 
are a particular kind of 'different directions.' But we 
shall have endless confusion if we include them in that 
class. We wish to avoid the use of the word ' opposite ' 
altogether., and to mean, by f different directions/ all kinds 
of directions that are not the same, with the exception 
of 'opposite.' * 

Min. It is a most desirable arrangement : but you have 
not clearly stated it in your book. Tell me whether you 
agree in this statement of the matter. Every Line has a 
pair of directions, opposite to each other. And if two Lines 
be said to have ' the same direction/ we must understand 



Sc. Y. I.] DIRECTION, 79 

c the same paw of directions ' ; and if they be said to have 
c different directions/ we must understand c different pairs 
of directions/ And even this is not enough : for suppose 
I draw, on the map of England, a straight Line joining' 
London and York ; I may say c This Line has a pair of di 
rections, the first being " London-to-York" and the second 
" York-to -London." ' I will now place another Line upon 
this, and its pair of directions shall be, first tc York-to- 
London" and second "London- to -York/ 3 Then it has a 
different first-direction from the former Line, and also a 
different second -direction : that is, it has a c different pair 
of directions/ Clearly this is not intended : but, in order 
to exclude such a possibility, we must extend yet further 
the meaning of the phrase, and, if two Lines be said to 
have 'the same direction/ we must understand ' pairs of 
directions which can be arranged so as to be the same'; 
and if they be said to have c different directions/ we must 
understand 'pairs of directions which cannot be arranged 
so as to be the same/ 

Nie. Yes, that expresses our meaning. 

Min. You must admit, I think, that your theory of 
direction involves a good deal of obscurity at the very 
outset. However, we have cleared it up, and will not use 
the word e opposite' again. Tell me now whether you 
accept this as a correct definition of the phrases ' the same 
direction J and c different directions/ when used of a pair 
of infinite Lines which have a common point : 

If two infinite Lines, having a common point, coincide, 
they have the same direction '; if not, they have e different 
directions/ 



80 WILSON. [AcT II, 

Nie. We accept it. 

Min. And, since a finite Line has the same direction as 
the infinite Line of which it is a portion, we may gene 
ralise thus : e Coincidental Lines have the same direction. 
Non-coincidental Lines, which have a common point, have 
different directions.' (Tab. I. 14, 13.) 

But it must be carefully borne in mind that we have 
as yet no geometrical meaning for these phrases, unless 
when applied to two lines which have a common point. 

Nie. Allow me to remark that what you call c coinci 
dental "Lines ' we call e the same Line ' or parts of the 
same Line, 5 and that what you call c non-coincidental 
Lines' we call 'different Lines. 3 

Min. I understand you : but I cannot employ these terms, 
for two reasons : first, that your phrase e the same Line ' 
loses sight of a fact I wish to keep in view, that we are 
considering a jpair of Lines ; secondly, that your phrase 
c different Lines ' might be used, with strict truth, of two 
different portions of the same infinite Line, so that it is not 
definite enough for my purpose. 

Let us now proceed ' to consider the relations of two or 
more straight Lines in one plane in respect of direction.' 

And first let me ask which of the propositions of Table 
II you wish me to grant you as an axiom ? 

Nie. (proudly) Not one of them ! We have got a new 
patent process 3 the e direction ' theory, which will dispense 
with them all. 

Min. I am very curious to hear how you do it. 



Sc. V. I.] PAIRS OF LINES. 81 



reads. 

P. IT. Ax. 6. c Two different Lines may have either the 
same or different directions. 3 

Min. That contains two assertions, which we will con 
sider separately. First,, you say that c two different Lines 
(i. e. ' non-coincidental Lines,' or e Lines having a separate 
point ^ ' may have the same direction '? 

Nie. Just so. 

Min. That is, you assert e sD is real.' Now let us under 
stand each other quite clearly. We will take a fixed Line 
to begin with, and a certain point on it : there is no doubt 
that we can draw, through that point, a second Line coin 
ciding with the first : the direction of this Line will of 
course be ; the same ' as the direction of the first Line ; 
and it is equally obvious that if we draw the second Line 
in any other direction, so as not to coincide with the first, 
its direction will not be ' the same 9 as that of the first : 
that is, they will have < different ' directions. If we want 
a geometrical definition of the assertion that this second 
Line has c the same direction ' as the first Line, we may 
take the following : f having such a direction as will 
cause the Lines to be the same Line. 3 If we want a geo 
metrical construction for it, we may say 'take any other 
point on the fixed Line ; join the two points, and produce 
the Line, so drawn, at both ends ' : this construction we 
know will produce a Line which will be 'the same 3 as 
the first Line, and whose direction will therefore be 'the 
same ' as that of the first Line. If, in a certain diagram, 
whose geometrical history we know, we want to test 



82 - WILSON. [Acr II. 

whether two Lines, passing through a common point, have, 
or have not, ( the same direction/ we have simply to take 
any other point on one of the Lines, and observe whether 
the other Line does, or does not, pass through it. This 
relationship of direction, which you denote by the phrase 
6 having the same direction, 5 and I by the phrase e having 
coincident directions,' we may symbolise by the letter ' D.' 

Nie. All very true. My only puzzle is, why you have 
explained it at such enormous length : my meerschaum 
has gone out while I have been listening to you ! 

Min. Allow me to hand you a light. As to the ' enor 
mous length ' of my explanation, we are in troubled waters, 
my friend ! There are breakers ahead, and we cannot 
' heave the lead ' too often. 

Nie. It is c lead ' indeed ! 

Min. Let us now return to our fixed Line : and this 
time we will take a point not on it, and through this point 
we will draw a second Line. You say that we can, if we 
choose, draw it in the same direction ' as that of the first 
Line? . 

Nie. We do. 

Mm. In that case let me remind you of the warning 
I gave you a few minutes ago, that we have no geometrical 
meaning for the phrase f the same direction,' unless when 
med of Lines having a common point. What geometrical 
meaning do you attach to the phrase when used of other 
Lines ? 

Nie. (after a_pause) I fear we cannot give you a geome 
trical definition of it at present. 

fi#. No ? Can you construct such Lines ? 



So. V. I.] PAIRS OF LINES. 83 

Nie. No, but really that is not necessary. We allow of 
e hypothetical constructions 3 now-a-days. 

Min. Well then, can you test whether a given Pair of 
Lines have this property ? I mean, if I give you a certain 
diagram, and tell you its geometrical history, can you 
pronounce, on a certain Pair of finite Lines, which have 
no visible common point, as to whether they have this 
property ? 

Nie. We cannot undertake it. 

Min. You ask me, then, to believe in the reality of a 
class of c Pairs of Lines 3 possessing a property which you 
can neither define, nor construct, nor test ? 

Nie. We can do none of these things, we admit : but 
yet the class is not quite so indefinite as you think. We 
can give you a geometrical description of it. 

Mm. I shall be delighted to hear it. 

Nie. We have agreed that a Pair of coincidental finite 
Lines have a certain relationship of direction, which we 
call the same direction, 3 and which you allow to be an 
intelligible geometrical relation ? 

Min. Certainly. 

Nie. Well, all we assert of this new class is that their 
relationship of direction is identical with that which 
belongs to coincidental Lines, 

Min. It cannot be identical in all respects, for it cer 
tainly differs in this, that we cannot reach the conception 
of it by the same route. I can form a conception of f the 
same direction,' when the phrase is used of two Lines 
which have a common point, but it is only by considering 
that one 'falls on j the other that they have all other 

G 3 



84 WILSON. [ACT II. 

points common that they coincide. When you ask me 
to form a conception of this relationship of direction, 
when asserted of other Lines, you know that none of these 
considerations will help me, and you do not furnish me 
with any substitutes for them. To me the relationship 
does not seem to be identical : I should prefer saying that 
separational lines have * collateral, 5 or corresponding, 5 or 
c separational ' directions, to using the phrase ' the same 
direction ' over again. It is, of course, true that col 
lateral 5 directions produce the same results, as to angles 
made with a transversal, as 'coincidental 3 directions; but 
this seems to me to be a theorem, not an axiom. 

Nie. You say that the relationship does not seem to you 
to be identical. I should like to know where you think 
you perceive any difference ? 

Min. I will try to make my meaning clearer by an illus 
tration. 

Suppose that I and several companions are walking 
along a railway, which will take us to a place we wish to 
visit. Some amuse themselves by walking on one of the 
rails ; some on another ; others wander along the line, 
crossing and recrossing. Now as we are all bound for the 
same place, we may say, roughly speaking, that we are all 
moving ' in the same direction' : but that is speaking very 
roughly indeed. We make our language more exact, if 
we exclude the wanderers, and say that those who are 
walking along the rails are so moving. But it seems to 
me that our phrase becomes still more exact, if we limit it 
to those who are walking on one and the same rail. 

As a second illustration, suppose two forces, acting on a 



So. Y. I.] PAIRS OF LINES. 85 

certain body ; and let them be equal in amount and oppo 
site in direction. Now, if they are acting along the same 
line, we know that they neutralise each other, and that the 
body remains at rest. But if one be shifted ever so little 
to one side, so that they act along parallel lines, then, 
though still equal in amount and (according to the ' direc 
tion ' theory) opposite in direction, they no longer neutralise 
each other, but form a c couple/ 

As a third illustration, take two points on a certain 
plane. We may, first, draw a line through them and cause 
them to move along that line : they are then undoubtedly 
moving in the same direction. 3 We may, secondly, draw 
two lines through them, which meet or at least would meet 
if produced, and cause them to move along those lines : 
they are then undoubtedly moving fi in different directions. 3 
We may, thirdly, draw two parallel lines through them, 
and cause them to move along those lines. Surely this is 
a new relationship of motion,, not absolutely identical with 
either of the former two ? But if this new relationship be 
not absolutely identical with that named f in the same 
direction,' it must belong to the class named c in different 
directions. 5 

Still, though this new relationship of direction is not 
identical with the former in all respects, it is in some : 
only, to prove this, we must use some disputed axiom, as 
it will take us into Table II. For instance, they are 
identical as to angles made with transversals : this fact 
is embodied in Tab. II, 3, viz. ' sT m is real/ Would you 
like to adopt that, instead of { sD is real 5 ? 



86 WILSON. [ACT IT. 

Nie. No. We are trying to dispense with Table II 
altogether. 

Min. It is a vain attempt. 

There is another remark I wish to make, before con 
sidering your second assertion. In asserting that there is 
a real class of non-coincidental Lines that have e the same 
direction, 3 are you not also asserting that there is a real 
class of Lines that have no common point ? For, if they 
had a common point, they must have ' different directions/ 

Nie. I suppose we are. 

Mm. "We will then, if you please, credit you with an 
^xiom you have not expressed, viz. < Lines may have no 
common point/ And here I must express an opinion that 
this ought to be proved, not assumed. Euclid has proved 
it in I. 37, which rests on no disputed axiom ; and I think 
it may be recorded as a distinct defect in your treatise, 
that you have assumed, as axiomatic, a truth which Euclid 
has proved. 

My conclusion, as to this first assertion of yours, is 
that it is most decidedly not axiomatic. 

Let us now consider your second assertion, that some 
non-coincidental Lines have c different directions.' Here 
I must ask, as before, are you speaking of Lines which 
have a common point ? If so, I am quite ready to grant 
the assertion. 

Nie. Not exactly. It is rather a difficult matter to 
explain. The Lines we refer to would, as a matter of fact, 
meet if produced, and yet we do not suppose that fact 
known in speaking of them. What we ask you to believe 
is that there is a real class of non-coincidental finite Lines, 



Sc. Y. I.] PAIRS OF LINES. 87 

which we do not yet know to have a common point, but 
which have 'different directions.' We shall assert pre 
sently, in another axiom, that such Lines will meet if 
produced; hut we ask you to believe their reality inde 
pendently of that fact. 

Min. But the only geometrical meaning I know of, as 
yet ; for the phrase c different directions/ refers to Lines 
known to have a common point. What geometrical mean 
ing do you attach to the phrase when used of other Lines ? 

Nie. We cannot define it. 

Min. Nor construct it ? Nor test it ? 

Nie. No. 

Mm. You ask me, then, to believe in the reality of two 
classes of 'pairs of Lines/ each possessing a property that 
you can neither define, nor construct, nor test ? 

Nie. That is true. But surely you admit the reality of 
the second class ? Why, intersectional Lines are a case in 
point. 

Min. Certainly. And so much I am willing to grant 
you. I allow that some non-coincidental Lines, viz. inter- 
sectional Lines, have f different directions. 5 But as to ' the 
same direction/ you have given me no reason whatever for 
believing that there are any non-coincidental Lines which 
possess that property. 

Nie. But surely there are two real distinct classes of 
non-coincidental Lines, 'intersectional' and 'separationaF? 

Mm. Yes. Thanks to my interpolated axiom, you may 
now assume the reality of both. 

Nie. And you will hardly assert that the relationship of 
direction, which belongs to a Pair of intersectional Lines, is 



WILSON. [ACT II. 



identical with that which belongs to a Pair of separational 
Lines ? 

Min. I do not assert it. 

Nie. And you allow that intersectional Lines have c dif 
ferent directions ' ? 

Min. Yes. Are you going to argue, from that, that 
separational Lines must have ' the same direction ' ? Why 
may I not say that intersectional Lines have one kind 
of c different directions ' and that separational Lines have 
anotJier kind ? 

Nie. But do you say it ? 

Min. Certainly not. There is no evidence, at present, 
one way or the other. For anything we know, separa 
tional Lines may all have 'the same direction/ or they 
may all have e different directions/ or there may be some 
of each kind. I fear I must decline to grant the first 
part of your axiom altogether, and the second part in 
the sense of referring to Lines not known to have a 
common point. k You may now proceed. 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. n. Ax. 7, 'Two different straight Lines which meet 
one another have different directions/ 

Min. That I grant you, heartily. It is, in fact, a 
definition for 'different directions/ when used of Lines 
which have a common point. 

NIEMAKD reads. 

P. ii. Ax, 8. 'Two straight Lines which have different 
directions would meet if prolonged indefinitely. 3 



So. V. I.] PAIRS OF LINES. 89 

Min. Am I to understand that, if we have before us a 
Pair of finite Lines which' are not known to have a 
common point, but of which we do know that they have 
different directions, you ask me to believe that they will 
meet if produced ? 

Nie. That is our meaning. 

Mm. We had better heave the lead once more, and 
return to our fixed Line, and a point not on it, through 
which we wish to draw a second Line. You ask me to 
grant that, if it be drawn so as to have a direction 
4 different' from that of the first Line, it will meet it if 
prolonged indefinitely? 

Nie. That is our humble petition. 

Mm. Will you be satisfied if I grant you that some 
Lines, so drawn, will meet the first Line ? That I would 
grant you with pleasure. I could draw millions of Lines 
which would fulfil the conditions, by simply taking points 
at random on the given Line, and joining them to the 
given point. Every Line, so constructed, would have a 
direction 'different 3 from that of the given Line, and 
would also meet it. 

Nie. We will not be satisfied, even with millions ! We 
ask you to grant that every Line, drawn through the 
given point with a direction ' different 5 from that of the 
given Line, will meet the given Line : and we ask you 
to grant this independently of, and antecedently to, any 
other information about the Lines except the fact that 
they have 'different 3 directions. 

Min. But what meaning am I to attach to the phrase 



90 WILSON. [ACT II. 

Different directions/ independently of, and antecedently 
to, the fact that they have a common point? 

Nie. (after a long silence) I fear we can suggest none. 

Min. Then I must decline to accept the axiom. 

Nle. And yet this axiom is the converse of the preced 
ing, which you granted so readily. 

Min. The technical converse, my good sir ; not the 
logical ! I will not suspect you of so gross a logical blunder 
as the attempt to convert a universal affirmative simpliciter 
instead of per accidens. The only converse, as you are no 
doubt aware, to which you have any logical right, is 
e Some Lines which have " different directions " would 
meet if produced *; and that I grant you. It is true of 
intersectional Lines, and I would limit the proposition to 
such Lines, so that it would be equivalent to c Lines 
which would meet if produced would meet if produced ' 
an indisputable truth, but not remarkable for novelty ! 
You may proceed. 

Nie. I beg to hand in this diagram, and will read you 
our explanation of it : 



A 
B 



i Thus A and B in the figure have the same direction ; 
and C and J), which meet, have different directions ; and E 
and F 3 which have different directions, would meet if pro 
duced far enough.' 

Min. I grant the assertion about C and D ; but I am 
wholly unable to guess on what grounds you expect me 



So. V. i.] SO-CALLED 'PARALLELS! 91 

to grant that A and IB 'have the same direction/ and 
that E and F e have different directions. 5 Do you expect 
me to judge by eye ? How if the lines were several yards 
apart ? Is this what Geometry is coming to ? Proceed. 

NIEMAND reads. 

Def. 19. 'Straight Lines which are not parts of the same 
straight Line, but have the same direction, are called 
parallels? 

Min. A definition is of course unobjectionable, since it 
does not assert the existence of the thing defined : in fact, 
it asserts nothing except the meaning which you intend to 
attach to the word ' parallel.' But, as this word is used 
in different senses, I will thank you to substitute for it, 
in what you have yet to say about this matter, the phrase 
. c s_Z)'-related. J 

But, before you read any more, let us get a clear idea 
of your definition. We know of two real classes of Pairs 
of Lines, 'coincidental' and c intersectional 3 ; and to these 
we may (if we credit you with that unexpressed axiom, 
' Lines may have no common point') add a third class, 
which we may call fi separational.' 

We also know that if a Pair of Lines has a common 
point, and no separate point, it belongs to the first class ; 
if a common point, and a separate point, to the second. 
Hence all Pairs of Lines, having a common point, must 
belong to one or other of these classes. And since a Pair, 
which has no common point, belongs to the third class, 
we see that every conceivable Pair of Lines must belong 
to one of these three classes. 



92 WILSON. [ACT II. 

This classification (by dichotomy) may be tabulated 

thus : A Pair of Lines 

, c ' // is Coincidental. 
( <<?' and< , j.- i 

which is-] I '*,'.. Intersections!. 

( < c'l Separational. 

We also know that 

Nie. (sighing deeply) You are heaving the lead again ! 

Min. I am : but we shall be in calmer water soon. 

We also know that the ; Coincidental 5 class possesses two 
properties ( C' and { J9'; and that the ' IntersectionaF 
class also possesses two properties X' and 'D'J 

Now if you choose to frame a definition by denying 
one property of each of these two classes, any Pair of 
Lines, so defined, is excluded from both of these classes, 
and must, if it exists at all, belong to the c Separational ' 
class. E/emember, however, that you may have so framed 
your definition as to exclude your Pair of Lines from 
existence. For instance, if you choose to deny ~both the 
conditions of direction, and to say that Lines, which are 
* DD V are to be called so-and-so, you are simply describ 
ing a nonentity. 

Nie. That is all quite clear. 

Min. Your definition, then, amounts to this : Lines, 
which are not coincidental, but which have the same 
direction, are said to be ' sD '-related. 

Nie. It does. 

Min. Well, here is another definition, which will answer 
your purpose just as well : Lines, which are not inter- 
sectional, but which have different directions, are said to 
be 'KIT '-related, 



So. Y. I.J SO-CALLED 'PARALLELS? 93 

Nie. But I think I can prove to you that you have 
now done the very thing you cautioned me against: 
you have annihilated your Pair of Lines. 

Mm. That is a matter which we need not consider at 
present. Proceed. 



reads. 

P. ii. 'From this definition, and the axioms above 
given, the following results are immediately deduced : 

(1) That parallel I beg your pardon that c s.5 '-related 
Lines would not meet however far they were produced. 
For if they met - 3 

Min. You need not trouble yourself to prove it. I 
grant that, if such Lines existed, they would not meet. 
Your assertion is simply the contranominal of Ax. 7, and 
therefore is necessarily true if the subject is real. 

But remember that, though I have credited you with 
the axiom that, if we are given a Line and a point not 
on it, we can draw, through the point, a Line separationai 
from the given Line, we do not yet know that it is the 
only such Line. That would take us into Table II. 
.With our present knowledge, we must allow for the 
possibility of drawing any number of Lines through the 
given point; all separationai from the given Line: and 
all I grant you is, that your ideal c sD '-related Line will, 
if it exist at all, be t one of this group. 

NIEMAND reads. 

(2) 'That Lines which' are ' sD '-related to the same Line 
are c sD '-related to each other. For - ' 



94 WILSON. [AcT II. 



Fin. Wait a moment. I observe that you say that such 
Lines are < sD '-related to each other. Might they not be 
'^'-related? 

Nie. Certainly they might: but we do not wish to 
include that case in our predicate. 

Min t Then you must limit your subject, and say 'Dif 
ferent Lines. 3 

Nie. Very well. 

Reads. 

'That different Lines, which are ' sJD '-related to the 
same Line, are ' sD '-related to each other. For they 
each have the same direction as that Line, and therefore 
the same direction as the other. 3 

Mm. I am willing to grant you, without any proof, 
that, if such Lines existed, they would have the same 
direction with regard to each other. But you seem to 
have added a proof. Surely the second clause of the 
sentence is merely the first over again? 

Nie. It does look like it, I admit. 

Mm. Then why insert 'for' and 'therefore/ as if it 
were a logical proof for the preceding clause ? 

Nie. Now I come to look at it, it is not a proof. 

Mm. But it professes to be one : I fear I must record it 
as an instance of c Petitio principii? And then c they each 
have ' ! Is that good English ? 

Nie. We cannot defend it. 

Mm. As queer a specimen of logic, and of English 
composition, as I have seen for some time. You may 
proceed. 



So. V. I.] PAIRS OF LINES. 95 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. 12. Ax. 9. g An angle maybe conceived as transferred 
from one position to another, the direction of its arms 
remaining 1 the same. 3 

Mm. Let us first consider the right arm by itself. You 
assert that it may be transferred to a new position, its 
direction remaining the same ? 

Nie, We do. 

Mm. You might, in 'fact, have here inserted an axiom 
' A Line may be conceived as transferred from one position 
to another, its direction remaining the same ' ? 

Nie. That would express our meaning. 

Mm. And this is virtually identical with your axiom 
c Two different Lines may have the same direction 3 ? 

Nie. Certainly. They embody the same truth. But 
the one contemplates a single Line in two positions, and 
the other contemplates two Lines : the difference is very 
slight. 

Mm. Exactly so. Now let me ask you, do you mean, 
by the word e angle, 5 a constant or a variable angle ? 

Nie. I do not quite understand your question. 

Mm. I will put it more fully. Do you mean that the 
arms of the angle are rigidly connected, so that it cannot 
change its magnitude, or that they are merely hinged 
loosely together, as it were, so that it depends entirely 
on the relative motions of the two arms whether the 
angle changes its magnitude or not? 

Nie. Why are we bound to settle the question at all ? 

Min. I will tell you why. Suppose we say that the 



96 WILSON. [ACT II. 

arms are merely hinged together : in that case all you 
assert is that each arm may be transferred, its direction 
remaining the same; that is, you merely assert your 6th 
axiom twice over, once for the right arm and once for the 
left arm ; and you do %ot assert that the angle will retain 
its magnitude. Eut in the theorem which follows,, you 
clearly regard it as a constant angle, for you say s the 
angle AOD would coincide with the angle EKH. There 
fore the angle AOD=EKH.' But the < therefore' has 
no force if AOD could change its magnitude. Thus 
you would he deducing, from an axiom where c angle ' 
is used in a peculiar sense, a conclusion in which it bears 
its ordinary sense. You have heard of the fallacy c A dicto 
secundum Quid ad dictum Simpliciter 3 ? 

Nie. (hastily) We are not going to commit ourselves to 
that. You may assume that we mean, by * angle,' a rigid 
angle, which cannot change its magnitude. 

Mm. In that case you assert that, when a pair of Lines, 
terminated at a point, is transferred so that its vertex has 
a new position, these three conditions can be simulta 
neously fulfilled : 

(i) the right arm has c the same direction ' as before ; 

(3) the left arm has e the same direction ' as before ; 

(3) the magnitude of the angle is unchanged. 

Me. We do not dispute it. 

Mm. But any two of these conditions are sufficient, 
without the third, to determine the new state of things. 
For instance, taking (i) and (3), if we fix the position 
of the right arm, by giving it e the same direction' as 
before, and also keep the magnitude of the angle un- 



Sc. Y. I.] PAIRS OF LINES. 97 

changed, is not that enough to fix the position of the left 
arm, without mentioning (2) ? 

Nie. It certainly is. 

Min. Your axiom asserts, then, that any two of these 
conditions lead to the third as -a necessary result ? 

Nie. It does. 

Min. Your axiom then contains two distinct assertions : 
the data of the first being (i) and (3) [or (2) and (3), which 
lead to a similar result], the data of the second being (i) 
and (2). These I will state as two separate axioms : 

9 (a). If a Pair of Lines, terminated at a point,, be 
transferred to a new position, so that the direction of one 
of the Lines, and the magnitude of the included angle, 
remain the same; the direction of the other Line will 
remain the same. 

9 (/3). If a Pair of Lines, terminated at a point, be trans 
ferred to a new position, so that their directions remain 
the same; the magnitude of the included angle will 
remain the same. 

Have I represented your meaning correctly ? 

Nie. We have no objection to make. 

Min. We will return to this subject directly. I must 
now ask you to read the enunciation of Th. 4, omitting, 
for simplicity's sake, all about supplementary angles, and 
assuming the Lines to be taken ' the same way.' 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. 12, Th. 4. < If two Lines are respectively <$D '-related 
to two other Lines, the angle made by the first Pair will 
be equal to the angle made by the second Pair/ 

H 



98 WILSON. [ACT II, 

Min. The ' s 9 is of course superfluous, for if the Lines 
are ' cD\ it is equally true. May I re- word it thus ? 

' If two Pairs of Lines, each terminated at a point, be 
such that the directions of one Pair are respectively the 
same as those of the other ; the included angles are 
equal'. 

Nie. Yes, if you like, 

Min. But surely the only difference,, between Ax. 9 (/3) 
and this, is that in the axiom we contemplated a single 
Pair of Lines transferred, while here we contemplate two 
Pairs ? 

Nie. That is the only difference, we admit. 
Min. Then I must say that it is anything but good 
logic to take two propositions, distinguished only by a 
trivial difference in form, and to call one an axiom, and 
the other a theorem deduced from it ! A very gross case 
of c Petitio principal I fear 1 

Nie. (after a long pause) Well ! We admit that it is 
not exactly a theorem : it is only a new form of the axiom. 
Min. Quite so : and as it is a more convenient form for 
my purpose, I will with your permission adopt it as a sub 
stitute for the axiom. Now as to the corollary of this 
theorem : thaf^ I think, is merely a particular case of 
Ax. 9 (/3), one of the arms being slid along the infinite 
Line of which it forms a part, and thus of course having 
{ the same direction ' as before ? 
Nie. It is so. 

Min. And, as this is a more convenient form still, 
I will restate your assertions, limiting them to this par 
ticular case : 



Sc. Y. I.] PAIRS OF LINES. 99 

As. 9 (a). Lines, which make equal corresponding angles 
with a certain, transversal, have the same direction. 

Ax. 9 (/3). Lines, which have the same direction, make 
equal corresponding angles with any transversal. 

Am I right in saying that these two assertions are 
virtually involved in your axiom ? 

Nie. We cannot deny it. 

Min. Now in 9 (a) you ask me to "believe that Lines 
possessing a certain geometrical property, which can be 
defined, constructed, and tested, possess also a property 
which, in the case of different Lines, we can neither define, 
nor construct^ nor test. There is nothing axiomatic in 
this. It is much more like a definition of ' D' when 
asserted of different Lines, for which we have as yet 
no definition at all. Will you not permit me to insert 
it, as a definition, before Ax. 6? We might word it 
thus : 

* If two different Lines make equal angles with a cer 
tain transversal, they are said to have the same direction : 
if unequal, different directions.' 

This interpolation would have the advantage of making 
Ax. 6 (which I have hitherto declined to grant) indis- 
putahly true. 

Nie. (after a pause) No. We cannot adopt it as a defini 
tion so early in the subject. 

Mm. You are right. You probably saw the pitfall 
which I had ready for you, that this same definition 
would make your 8th axiom exactly equivalent to Euclid's 
1 2th ! Prom this catastrophe you have hitherto been saved 
solely by the absence of geometrical meaning in your 



100 WILSON. [ACT II. 

phrase 'the same direction, 3 when applied to different 
Lines. Once define it, and you are lost ! 

Nie. We are aware of that^ and prefer all the incon 
venience which results from the absence of a definition. 

Min. The inconvenience, 5 so far, has consisted of the 
ruin of Ax. 6 and Ax. 8. Let us now return to Ax. 9. 

As to 9 (/3), it is of course obviously true with regard 
to coincidental Lines : with regard to different ' Lines, 
which have the same direction/ I grant you that, if such 
Lines existed, they would make equal corresponding angles 
with any transversal ; for they would then have a relation 
ship of direction identical with that which belongs to coin 
cidental Lines. But all this rests on an e if if they 
existed. 

Now let us combine 9 (/3) with Axiom 6, and see what 
it is you ask me to grant. It is as follows : 

' There can be a Pair of different Lines that make equal 
angles with any transversal. 5 

I am not misrepresenting you, I think, if I s.ay that 
you propound this as axiomatic truth which, I need 
hardly remark, lands us in Table II, being the proposi 
tion c sT m is real. 3 

Nie. We accept the responsibility of the two axioms 
separately, but not of a logical deduction from the two. 

Mm. There are certainly some logical deductions from 
axioms (contranominals for instance) that are not so 
axiomatic as the axioms from which, they come : but 
surely if you tell me 'it is axiomatic that X is Y' and 
( it is axiomatic that T is Z? it is muck the same as saying 
' it is axiomatic that X is Z* ? 



So. V. i.] PAIRS OF LINES. 101 

Nie, It is very like it, we admit, 

Mm. Now take one more combination. Take 9 (a) and 
9 (/3). We thus eliminate the mysterious property alto 
gether, and get a proposition whose subject and predicate 
are perfectly definite geometrical conceptions a proposi 
tion which you assert to be, if not perfectly axiomatic,, yet 
so nearly so as to be easily deducible from two axioms 
a proposition which again lands us in Table II, and which, 
I will venture to say, is less axiomatic than any axiom 
that has ever yet been suggested for the acceptance of the 
human race. We get this : 

4 Lines which make equal corresponding angles with 
a certain transversal do so with any transversal/ which 
is Tab. II. 4. <<TP2y 

Here we have,, condensed into one appalling sentence, 
the whole substance of Euclid I. 27, 28, and 29 (for the 
fact that the lines are c separational 3 is merely used by 
him as a go-between). Here we have the whole difficulty 
of Parallels swallowed at one gulp. Why, Euclid's much- 
abused 1 2th axiom is nothing to it ! If we had (what 
I fear has yet to be discovered) a unit of ' axiomaticrty/ 
I should expect to find that Euclid's 13th axiom (which 
you call in your Preface, at p. xiii, c not axiomatic 5 ) was * 
twenty or thirty times as axiomatic as this ! I need not 
ask you for any further proof of Eue. I. 32. This won 
drous axiom, or quasi-axiom, is quite sufficient machinery 
for your purpose, along with Euc. I. 13, which of course 
we grant you. Have you thought it necessary to provide 
any other machinery ? 

Nie. No. 



102 WILSON. [ACT II. 

Min. Euclid requires, besides I, 13, the following ma 
chinery : Props. 4, 15, 16, 27, 38, Ax. is, and Prop. 39. 
And for all this you offer, as a sufficient substitute, one 
single axiom! 

Nie. Two, if you please. You are forgetting Ax. 6. 

Min. No, I repeat it one single axiom. Ax. 6 is con 
tained in Ax. 9 (a) : when the subject is known to be real, 
the proposition necessarily asserts the reality of the pre 
dicate. 

Nie. That we must admit to be true. 

Min. I need hardly say that I must decline to grant 
this so-called ' Axiom,' even though its collapse should 
involve that of your entire system of ' Parallels. 9 And 
now that we have fully discussed the subject of direction, 
I wish to ask you one question which will, I think, sum 
up the whole difficulty in a few words. It is, in fact, the 
crucial test as to whether ' direction ' is, or is not, a logical 
method of proving the properties of parallels. 

You assert, as axiomatic; that different Lines exist, whose 
relationship of direction is identical with that which exists 
between coincidental Lines. 

Nie. Yes. 

Min. Now, does the phrase c the same direction/ when 
used of two Lines not known to have a common point, 
convey to your mind a clear geometrical conception ? 

Nie. Yes, we can form a clear idea of it, though we 
cannot define it. 

Min. And is that idea (this is the crucial question) in 
dependent of all subsequent knowledge of the properties of 
Parallels ? 



103 



So. V. i.J SO- CALLED 'PARALLELS? 

Nie. We believe so. 

Mm. Let us make sure that there is no self-deception in 
this. You feel certain you are not unconsciously picturing 
the Lines to yourself as being equidistant, for instance ? 

Nie. No, they suggest no such idea to us. We introduce 
the idea of equidistance later on in the book, but we do not 
feel that our first conception of < the same direction ' in 
cludes it at all. 

Mm. I think you are right, though Mr. Cuthbertson, in 
his 'Euclidian Geometry/ says (Pref. p. vi.) 'the concep 
tion of a parallelogram is not that of a figure whose oppo 
site sides will never meet , but rather that of a figure 

whose opposite sides are equidistant.' But do you feel 
equally certain that you are not unconsciously using your 
subsequent knowledge that Lines exist which make equal 
angles with all transversals ? 

Nie. We are not so clear about that. It is, of course, 
extremely difficult to divest one's mind of all later know 
ledge, and to place oneself in the mental attitude of one 
who is totally ignorant of the subject. 

Min. Very difficult, no doubt, but absolutely essential, if 
you mean to write a book adapted to the use of beginners. 
My own belief as to the course of thought needed to grasp 
the theory of < direction ' is this : first you grasp the idea 
of f the -same direction 5 as regards Lines which have a 
common point ; next, you convince yourself, by some other 
means, that different Lines exist which make equal angles 
with all transversals; thirdly, you go back, armed with 
this new piece of knowledge, and use it unconsciously, 
in forming an idea of < the same direction ' as regards 



104 WILSON. [AcT II. 

different Lines. And I believe that the course of thought 
in the mind of a beginner is simply this : he grasps, 
easily enough, the idea of the same direction ' as regards 
Lines which have a common point; but when you put 
before him the idea of different Lines, and ask him to 
realise the meaning of the phrase, when applied to such 
Lines, he, finding that the former geometrical conception 
of e coincidence * is not applicable in this case, and know 
ing nothing of the idea, which is latent in your mind, 
of Lines which make equal angles with all transversals, 
simply fails to attach any idea at all to the phrase, and 
accepts it blindly., from faith in his teacher, and is from 
that moment, until he reaches the theorem about trans 
versals, walking in the dark. 

Nie. If this is true, of course the theory of ' direction, 3 
however beautiful in itself, is not adapted for purposes of 
teaching. 

Mm. That is iny own firm conviction. But I fear I 
may have wearied you by discussing this matter at such 
great length. Let us turn to another subject. What is 
your practical test for knowing whether two finite Lines 
will meet if produced ? 

Nie. You have already heard our 8th Axiom (p. n). 
c Two straight lines which have different directions would 
meet if produced.' 

Min. But, even if that were axiomatic (which I deny), it 
would be no practical test, for you have admitted that you 
have no means of knowing whether two Lines, not known 
to have a common point, have or have not different direc 
tions. 



Sc. V. I.] TEST OF MEETING LINES. 105 

Nie. We must refer you to p. 14. Th. 5. Cor. 3, where we 
prove that Lines, which make equal angles with a certain 
transversal, have the same direction. 

Min. Which you had already asserted, if you remember, 
in Ax. 9. 

Nie. Well then, we refer you to As. 9 as containing the 
same truth. 

Min. And having got that truth, whether lawfully or 
not, what do you do with it ? 

Nie. Why, surely it is almost the same as saying that, 
if they make w^equal angles, they have different directions. 

Min. And what then ? 

Nie. Then, combining this with the axiom you re 
fused to grant, namely, that Lines having different direc 
tions will meet, we get a practical test, such as you were 
asking for. 

Min. (dreamily) I see ! You get rid of the different 
directions ' altogether, and the result is that c Lines, which 
make unequal angles with, a certain transversal, will meet 
if produced,' which is Tab. II. 2 (a). st m > f X.' And this 
you assert as axiomatic truth ? 

Nie. (uneasily) Yes. 

Min. Surely I have read something like it before? Could 
it have been Euclid's latn Axiom ? And have I not some 
where read words like these : c Euclid's treatment of paral 
lels distinctly breaks down in Logic. It rests on an axiom 
which is not axiomatic ' ? 

Nie. We have nowhere stated this axiom which, you put 
into our mouth. 

tin. No ? Then how, may I ask, do you prove that 



106 WILSON. [ACT II, 

particular Lines will meet ? You must have to prove it 
sometimes, you know. 

Nie. We have not had to prove it anywhere, that we 
are aware of. 

Min. Then there must be some gaps in your arguments. 
Let us see. Please to turn to p. 46, Prob. 7. Here you 
make, at the ends of a Line CD, angles equal to two given 
angles (which, as you tell us below ; e must be together less 
than two right angles '), and you then say c let their sides 
meet in 0. ! How do you know that they will meet ? 

Nie. You have found one hiatus, we grant. Can you 
point out another in the whole book ? 

Min. I can. At p. 70 I find the words e Join QG, and 
produce it to meet FH produced in $.' And again at 
p. 88. Hence the centre must be at 0, the point of inter 
section of these perpendiculars. 3 In both these cases I 
would ask, as before, how do you know that the Lines in 
question will meet ? 

Nie. We had not observed the omissions before, and we 
must admit that they constitute a serious hiatus. 

Min. A most serious one. A student, who had been 
taught such proofs as these, would be almost sure to try 
the plan in cases where the Lines would not really meet, 
and his assumption would lead him to results more remark 
able for novelty than truth. 

Let us now take a general survey of your book. And 
First, as to the propositions of Euclid which you omit 

Nie. You are alluding to Prop. 7, 1 suppose. Surely its 
only use is to prove Prop. 8, which we have done very well 
without it. 



Sc. V. I.] OMISSIONS. 107 

Min. That is quite a venial omission. The others that 
I miss are 27, 28, 39, 30, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 
and 43 : rather a formidable list. 

JVJe. You are much mistaken ! Nearly all of those are 
in our book, or could be deduced in a moment from theorems 
in it. 

Min. Let us take I. 34 as an instance. 

Nie. That we give you, almost in the words of Euclid, 
at p. 37. 

Heads. 

Th. 2,2. 'The opposite angles and sides of a parallelo 
gram will be equal, and the diagonal, or the Line which 
joins its opposite angles, will bisect it. 3 

Min. Well, but your parallelogram is not what Euclid 
contemplates. He means by the word that the opposite 
sides are separational a property whose reality he has 
demonstrated in I. 27 ; whereas you mean that they have 
"the same direction a property whose reality, when as 
serted of different Lines, has nowhere been satisfactorily 
proved. 

Nie. We have proved it at p. 14. Th. 5. Cor. 3. 

Mm. Which, if traced back, will be seen to depend 
ultimately on your 6th Axiom, where you assume the 
reality of such Lines. But, even if your Theorem had 
been shown to refer to a real figure, how would that 
prove Euc. I. 34 ? 

Nie. You only need the link that separational Lines 
have the same direction. 

Min. Have you supplied that link ? 



108 WILSON. [ACT II. 

Nie. No : but the reader can easily make it for himself. 
It is the ' eontranominal ' (as you call it) of our 8th Axiom, 
c two straight Lines which have different directions would 
meet if prolonged indefinitely. 3 

Mln. Your pupils must be remarkably clever at drawing 
deductions and filling up gaps in an argument, if they 
usually supply that link, as well as the proof that separa- 
tional Lines exist at all, for themselves. But, as you do 
not supply these things, it seems fair to say that your book 
omits all the propositions which I have enumerated. 

I will now take a general survey of your book, and select 
a few points which seem to call for remark. 

At p. 9, we have a deduction, from a Definition and an 
Axiom, which involves the Fallacy c Illicit process of tlie 
Minor? The passage is as follows : 

Def. ii. c A straight line is said to be perpendicular to 
another straight Line when it makes a right angle with it. 
Hence there can be only one perpendicular to a given Line 
at a given point, on one side of that Line, because only one 
Line can make a right angle with the given Line at that 
point.' 

Thrown into syllogistic form, the argument may be 
stated thus : 

C A11 Lines drawn at right angles to a given Line at 
a given point, on one side of it, are coincident ; 

all Lines drawn at right angles to a given Line &c. are 
perpendiculars to that Line &c. ; 

therefore, all perpendiculars to a given Line &c. are co 
incident.' That is, fi All X is J; all X is Z\ therefore all 

Y: 



So. V. i.] A FALSE COROLLARY. 109 

Or we may simply exhibit the fallacy by parodying the 
argument in other subject-matter. 

C A Line is said to be acutely inclined to the sides of a 
triangle when it bisects the vertical angle. Hence there 
can be only one Line acutely inclined to the sides of 
a triangle, because only one Line can bisect the vertical 
angle.' You cannot deny, I think, that this argument is, 
inform, as valid as yours ? 

Nie. We cannot deny it. 

MINOS reads. 

P. 14. Th. 5, Cor. i. ' Hence if two straight Lines which 
are not parallel are intersected by a third, the alternate 
angles will be not equal, and the interior angles on the 
same side of the intersecting Line will be not supplemen 
tary/ Excuse the apparent incivility of the remark, but 
this Corollary is false. 

Nie. You amaze me ! 

Min. You have simply to take, as an instance, a Pair of 
coincidental Lines, which most certainly answer to your 
description of c not parallel. 3 

Nie. It is an oversight. 

Mm. So I suppose : it is a species of literary pheno 
menon in which your Manual is rich. 

Your proof of Cor. 3. is a delicious collection of nega 
tives. 

Reads. 

c Cor. 2. Hence also if the corresponding angles are equal, 
or the alternate angles equal, or the interior angles supple 
mentary > the Lines will be parallel. 



1 1 WILSON. [ACT II. 

c For they o&&not be not parallel, for then the cor 
responding and alternate angles would be unequal by 
Cor. i.' 

Should I be justified in calling this a somewhat knotty 
passage ? 

Nie. You have no right to make such a remark. It is 
a mere jest ! 

Min. Well, we will be serious again. 

At p. 9, you stated more than the data authorised : we 
now come to a set-off against this, since we shall find 
you asserting less than you ought to do. I will read the 
passage : 

P. 2,6, Th. 15. 'If two triangles are equiangular to one 
another and have a side of the one equal to the correspond 
ing side of the other, the triangles will be equal in all 
respects. 5 

This contains a superfluous datum : it would have been 
enough to say if two triangles have two angles of the one 
equal to two angles of the other &c.* 

Nie. Well, it is at worst a superfluity : the enunciation 
is really identical with Euclid's. 

Min. By no means. The logical effect of a superfluous 
datum is to limit the extent of a proposition : and, if the 
proposition be ' universal, 3 it reduces it to ' particular ' ; 
i. e. it changes < all A is B 3 into c some A is J3.' For 
suppose we take the proposition 'all A is jB, } and sub 
stitute for it ' all that is both A and X is B* we may be 
accidentally making an assertion of the same extent as 
before, for it may happen that the whole class 'A* pos 
sesses the property f Z J ; but, so far as logical form is 



oC. V. i.] A CUMBROUS PROOF. Ill 

concerned^ we have reduced the proposition to ' some things 
that are A (viz. those which are also X) are J?. 3 

I turn now to p. 27, where I observe a new proof for 
Euc. I. 34. 

Nie. New and, we hope, neat and short. 

Mm. Charmingly neat and short, as it stands : hut this 
method really requires the discussion of five cases, each 
with its own figure. 

Nie. How do you make that out ? 

Min. The five cases are : 

(1) Vertical angles together less than two right angles, 
and adjacent base angles acute (the case you give). 

(2) Adjacent base-angles right. 

(3) Adjacent base-angles obtuse. 

These two cases are proved along with the first, 

(4) Vertical angles together equal to two right angles. 
This requires a new proof, as we must substitute for the 

words 'the bisector of the angle FAC? the words 'the 
perpendicular to FC drawn through A. 9 

(5) Vertical angles together greater than two right 
angles. 

This also requires a new proof, as we must insert, after 
the words < the bisector of the angle FAG? the words 
'produced through A? and must then prove (by your 
Th. i) that the angles OAC, OAF, are equal. 

On the whole, I take this to be the most cumbrous proof 
yet suggested for this theorem. 

We now come to what is probably the most extra 
ordinary Corollary ever yet propounded in a geometrical 
treatise. Turn to pages 30 and 31. 



112 WILSON. [ACT II 

Th. 30. 'If two triangles have two sides of the one 
equal to two sides of the other, and the angle opposite 
that which is not the less of the two sides of the one 
equal to the corresponding angle of the other, the triangles 
shall be equal in all respects. 

' Cor. I . If the side opposite the given angle were less 
than the side adjacent; there would be two triangles, as in 
the figure ; and the proof given above is inapplicable. 

' This is called the ambiguous case. 3 

The whole proposition is a grand specimen of obscure 
writing and bad English, e is ' and ' are/ ' could/ and 
c would/ alternating throughout with the most charming 
impartiality : but what impresses me most is the probable 
effect of this wondrous Corollary on the brain of a simple 
reader,, coming breathless and exhausted from a death- 
struggle with the preceding theorem. I can imagine him 
saying wildly to himself ' If two triangles fulfil such and 
such conditions, such and such things follow : but, if one 
of the conditions were to fail, there would le two triangles I 
I must be dreaming ! Let me dip my head in cold water, 
and read it all again. If two triangles . . . there would be 
two triangles. Oh, my poor brains ! ' 

Nle. You are pleased to be satirical : it is rather obscure 
writing, we confess. 

Min. It is indeed ! You do well in calling it the am- 
Uguous case. 

At p. 33, I see the heading 'Theorems of equality': 
but you only give two of them, the second being 'the 
bisectors of the three angles of a triangle meet in one 
point/ which, as a specimen of 'theorems of equality/ 



So. V. I.] A BOLD ASSUMPTION. 113 

is probably unique in the literature of Geometry. I 
cannot wonder at your not attempting to extend the 
collection. 

At p. 40 I read, c It is assumed here that if a circle 
has one point inside another circle, the circumferences 
will intersect one another. 5 This I believe to be the 
boldest assumption yet made in Modern Geometry. 

At pp. 40, 42 you assume a length ' greater than half 5 
a given Line, without having shewn how to bisect Lines. 
Two cases of c Petitio PrincijpiiS (See p. 58,) 

P. 69. Here we have a problem (which you call 'the 
quadrature of a rectilineal area'') occupying three pages 
and a half. It is c approached ' by four c stages, which is 
a euphemism for saying that this fearful proposition con 
tains four of Euclid's problems, viz. I. 42, 44, 45, and 
II. 14. 

P. 73. 3. c Find a point equally distant from three given 
straight lines. 3 Is it fair to give this without any limita 
tion ? What if the given lines were parallel ? 

P. 84. 'If A, 13, C . . .as conditions involve D as a 
result, and the failure of C involves a failure of D ; then 
A, ,... as conditions involve C as a result. 3 If not-C 
proves not- J, then D proves C. A and S are irrelevant 
and obscure the statement. I observe, in passing, the 
subtle distinction which you suggest between c the failure 
of C" and ' a failure of D.' D is a habitual bankrupt, who 
has often passed through the court, and is well used to 
failures: but, when C fails, his collapse is final, and 
1 leaves not a wrack behind' ! 

P. 90. ' Given a curve, to ascertain whether it is an arc 



114 WILSON. [ACT II. 

of a circle or not.' What does c given a curve ' mean ? If 
it means a line drawn with ink on paper, we may safely 
say at once 'it is not a circle. 5 

P. 96. Def. 15. ' When one of the points in which a 
secant cuts a circle is made to move up to, and ultimately 
coincide with, the other, the ultimate position of the 
secant is called the tangent at that point.' (The idea of 
the position of a Line being itself a Line is queer enough : 
I suppose you would say ' the ultimate position of Whitting- 
ton was the Lord Mayor of London.' But this is by the 
way : of course you mean c the secant in its ultimate 
position.') Now let us take three points on a circle, the 
middle one fixed, the others movable; and through the 
middle one let us draw two secants, each passing through 
one of the other points; and then let us make the other 
points 'move up to, and ultimately coincide with,' the 
middle one. We have no ground for saying that these 
two secants, in their ultimate positions, will coincide. 
Hence the phrase c the tangent ' assumes, without proof, 
Th. 7. Cor. i, viz. there can be only one tangent to 
a circle at a given point.' This is a ( Petitio principii. 9 

P. 97. Th. 6. The secant consists of two portions,, each 
terminated at the fixed point. All that you prove here 
is that the portion which has hitherto cut the circle is 
ultimately outside : and you jump, without a shadow of 
proof, to the conclusion that the same thing is true of the 
other portion ! Why should not the second portion begin 
to cut the circle at the precise moment when the first 
ceases to do so? This is another 'Petitio 'Principii. ,' 

P. 139, line 3 from end. < Abstract quantities are the 



Sc. Y. I.] SUMMING-UP. 115 

means that we use to express the concrete.' Excluding 
such physical means ' as pen and ink or the human voice 
(to which you do not seem to allude), I presume that the 
c means ' referred to in this mysterious sentence are ' pure 
numbers.' At any rate the only instances given are seven, 
five, three.' Now take P. 130, 1. 5, * Abstract quantities 
and ratios are precisely the same things. 3 Hence all ratios 
are numbers. But in the middle of the same page we 
read that 'all numbers are ratios, but all ratios are not 
numbers.' I leave this without further remark. 

I will now sum up the conclusions I have come to with 
respect to your Manual. 

(i) As to 'straight Lines' you suggest a useful ex 
tension of Euclid's axiom. 

(3) As to angles and right angles, your extension of 
the limit of size is, in my opinion, objectionable. In 
other respects your language, though hazy, agrees on the 
whole with Euclid. 

(3) As to parallels/ there is a good deal to be said, and 
that not very flattering, I fear. 

In Ax. 6, you assert the reality of different Lines 
having the same direction a property you can neither 
define, nor construct, nor test. 

You also assert (by implication) the reality of separa- 
tional Lines, which Euclid proves. 

You also assert the reality of Lines, not known to have 



116 WILSON. [ACT II. 

a common pointy but having different directions a pro 
perty you can neither define, nor construct, nor test. 

In Ax. 8, you assert that the undefined Lines last men 
tioned would meet if produced. 

These axioms, therefore, are not axiomatic. 

In proving result (2), you are guilty of the fallacy 
' Petltio jprincym* 

In Ax. 9 and Th. 4 taken together, if the word c angle ' 
in Ax. 9 means : variable angle/ you are guilty of the 
fallacy e A dlcto secunclum Quid ad dictum simpliciter ' ; if 
4 constant angle,' of the fallacy 'Petitio Priticipii.' 

In Ax. 9 (a) ; you assert that Lines possessing a certain 
real geometrical property, viz. making equal angles with 
a certain transversal, possess also the before-mentioned 
undefined property. This is not axiomatic. 

In Ax. 9 (/3) combined with Ax. 6, you assert the reality 
of Lines which make equal angles with all transversals. 
This is not more axiomatic than Euc. Ax. i z. 

In Ax. 9 (a) combined with Ax. 9 (j3), you assert that 
Lines, which make equal angles with a certain transversal, 
do so with all transversals. This I believe to be the most 
unaxiomatic axiom ever yet proposed. 

(4) You furnish no practical test for the meeting of 
finite Lines, and consequently you never prove (however 
necessary for the matter in hand) that any particular 
Lines will meet. And when we come to examine what 
practical test can possibly be extracted from your axioms, 
the only result is an imperfect edition of Euclid's lath 
axiom ! 



So. Y. I.] REJECTION OF MANUAL. 117 

The sum total of the chief defects which I have noticed 
is as follows : 

fourteen of Euclid's Theorems in Book I. omitted ; 

seven unaxiomatic axioms ; 

six instances of l Petitio Principii ' ; 

one instance of ' Illicit Process of the Minor? 

The abundant specimens of logical inaccuracy, and of 
loose writing generally, which I have here collected would., 
I feel sure, in a mere popular treatise be discreditable 
in a scientific treatise, however modestly put forth, de 
plorable but in a treatise avowedly put forth as a model 
of logical precision, and intended to supersede Euclid^ they 
are simply monstrous. 

My ultimate conclusion on your Manual is that it has 
no claim whatever to be adopted as t7ie Manual for pur 
poses of teaching and examination. 



ACT II. 

SCENE V. 
2. PIERCE, 

'dum brevis esse laboro, 
Obscurus fio.' 

Nie. I lay before you * An Elementary Treatise on Plane 
and Solid Geometry' by BENJAMIN PIERCE, A.M., Perkins 
Professor of Astronomy and Mathematics in Harvard 
University, published in 1872. 

Mm. As I have already considered, at great length,, the 
subject of direction as treated by Mr. Wilson, I need not 
trouble you as to any matters where Mr. Pierce's treat 
ment does not materially differ from his. Is there any 
material difference in the treatment of a straight line ? 

Me. He has a definition of direction which will, I think, 
be new to you : 

Reads. 

P. 5, ii, Def. The Direction of a Line in any part is 
the direction of a point at that part from the next pre 
ceding point of the line.' 



so- CALLED i PARALLELS! 1 1 9 

Min. That sounds mysterious. Which way along a line 
are f preceding ' points to be found ? 

Nie. Both ways. He adds, directly afterwards,, c a Line 
has two different directions, 5 etc. 

Min. So your Definition needs a postscript? That is 
rather clumsy writing. But there is yet another diffi 
culty. How far from a point is the 6 next ' point ? 

Nie. At an infinitely small distance, of course. You 
will find the matter fully discussed in any work on the 
Infinitesimal Calculus. 

Min. A most satisfactory answer for a teacher to make 
to a pupil just beginning Geometry ! I see nothing else 
to remark on in your treatment of the Line, except that 
you state, as an axiom, that c a straight Line is the shortest 
way from one point to another. 5 I have already given, 
in my review of M. Legendre, my reasons for think 
ing that this is not a fair axiom, and ought to be a 
theorem (see p. 55). 

There is nothing particular to notice in your treat 
ment of angles and right angles. Let us go on to Paral 
lels. How do you prove Euc. I. 33 ? 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. 9, 27, Def. 'Parallell^mes are straight Lines which 
have the same Direction.' 

Min. I presume you do not mean to include coinci 
dental Lines? 

Nie. Certainly not. We see the omission. Allow us to 
insert the word ' different. 3 

Min. Very well. Then your definition combines the two 



120 PIERCE. [ACT II. 

properties 'different' and ' having the same direction.' 
Bear in mind that you have yet to prove the reality of 
such Limes. And may I request you in future to call 
such Lines ' $D '-related? But if you wish to assert any 
thing of them which is also true of coincidental Lines, 
you had better drop the '-?,' and simply call them 
'Lines which have the same direction/ so as to include 
Loth classes. 
Nle. Very well. 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. 9. 28. Th. ' si) '-related Lines cannot meet, how 
ever far they are produced.' 

Mm. Or rather ' could not meet, if they existed/ Pro 
ceed. 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. 9. 29. Th. c Two angles are equal, when their sides 
have the same direction.' 

Min. How do you define 'same direction' for different 
Lines ? 

Nle. We cannot define it. 

Mm. Then I cannot admit that such Lines exist. But 
even if I did admit their reality, why should the angles 
be equal ? 

Nie. Because 'the difference of direction 3 is the same 
in each case. 

Mm. But how would that prove the angles equal? 
Do you define 'angle' as the 'difference of direction' of 
two lines ? 

Nie. Not exactly. We have stated (p. 6, 19) 'The 



Sc. V. 2.] SO-CALLED 'PARALLELS: 121 

magnitude of the angle depends solely upon the difference 
of direction of its sides at the vertex. 3 

Min. But the difference of direction also possesses c mag 
nitude.' Is that magnitude a wholly ^dependent entity ? 
Or does it, in its turn, depend to some extent upon the 
angle ? Seriously., all these suhtleties must be very trying 
to a beginner. JBut we had better proceed to the next 
theorem. I am anxious to see where, in this sj^stem, 
these creatures of the imagination, these e sD '-related 
Lines, are to appear as actually existent. 

Nie. We next prove (p. 9. 30) that Lines, which 
have the same direction, make equal angles with all 
transversals. 

Min. That is merely a particular case of your last 
theorem. 

Nie. And then that two Lines, which make equal angles 
with a transversal, have the same direction. 

Min. Ah, that would bring them into existence at once ! 
Let us hear the proof of that. 

Nie. The proof is that if, through the point where the 
first Line is cut by the transversal, a Line be drawn 
having the same direction as the second, it makes equal 
angles with the transversal, and therefore coincides with 
the first Line. 

Min. You assume, then, that a Line can be drawn through 
that point, having the same direction as the second Line ? 

Nie. Yes. 

Min. That is, you assume, without proof, that different 
Lines can have the same direction. On the whole, then, 
though Mr. Pierce's system differs slightly from Mr. 



122 PIERCE, [ACT II. So. V. 2. 

Wilson's, both rest on the same vicious axiom, that 
different Lines can exist, which possess a property called 
'the same direction* a phrase which is intelligible enough 
when used of two Lines which have a common point, 
but which, when applied to two Lines not known to have 
a common point, can neither be defined, nor constructed. 
We need not pursue the subject further. Have you 
provided any test for knowing whether two given finite 
Lines will meet if produced ? 

Nie. We have not thought it necessary. 

JIht. Then the only other remark I have to make on 
this singularly compendious treatise is that, of the 35 
theorems which Euclid gives us in his First Book, it 
reproduces just sixteen: the omissions being 16, 17, 25, 
26 (2), 27 and 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 
41, 43, 47, and 48. . 

Nie. Most of those are in the book. For example, 30 
answers to Euc. I. 29. 

Mln. Only by proving* that separational Lines have 
the same direction : which you have not done. 

Nie. At any rate we have Euc. I. 47 in our 256. 

Min. Oh, no doubt ! Long after going through ratios, 
which necessarily include incommensurables ; and long 
after the axiom ( 99) 'Infinitely small quantities may 
be neglected ' ! No, no : so far as beginners are concerned, 
there is no Euc. I. 47 in this book ! 

My conclusion is that, however useful this Manual 
may be to an advanced student, it is not adapted to the 
wants of a beginner. 



ACT II. 

SCENE V. 

3. WlLLOCK. 

* This work .... no doubt, has its faults.' 

WILLOCK, Pref. p. i. 

Nie. I lay before you e The Mementary Geometry of 
the Eight Line and Circle' by W. A. WILLOCK, D.D., 
formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, published in 



in. I have gone through the subject of c direction ' so 
minutely in reviewing Mr. Wilson's book, that I need 
not discuss with you any points in which your client 
essentially agrees with him. We may, I think, pass over 
the subject of the Right Line altogether? 

Nie. Yes. 

Min. And as to Angles and Right Angles, I see no 
novelty in Dr. Willoek's book, except that he defines an 
Angle as 'the divergence of two directions, 5 which is 
virtually the same as Euclid's definition. 

Nie. That I think is all. 



124 WILLOCK. [ACT II. 

Min. Then we can proceed at once to the subject of 
Parallels. Will you kindly give me your proof of Euc. 
I. 33 from the beginning ? 



reads. 

P. 10, Th. i. c Two Directives can intersect in only one 
point? 

Min. By e Directive J you mean an { infinite Line ' ? 

Nle. Yes. 

Min. Well, I need hardly trouble you to prove it as 
a theorem, being quite willing to grant it as an axiom. 
What is the next theorem ? 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. II, Th. 5. c Parallel Directives cannot meet? 

Min. We will call them ' sD '-related,, if you please, 
I grant it, provisionally. If such Lines exist, they cannot 
meet. 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. n, Th. 7. c Only one Line, c sD* -related to a Direc 
tive, can be drawn through a point? 

Min. Does that assert that one can be drawn? Or 
does it simply deny the possibility of drawing two ? 

Nie. The proof only applies to the denial: but the 
assertion is certainly involved in the enunciation. At 
all events, if not assumed here, it is assumed later on. 

Min. Then I will at this point credit you with one un 
warrantable axiom, namely, that different Lines can have 
the same direction. The theorem itself I grant. 



Sc. Y, 3-] SO-CALLED ' PARALLELS' 125 



NIEMAND reads. 

P. 1 2, Th. 8. ' The angles of intersection of a Transversal 
with tioo c sD* -related Directives are equal? 

Min. Do you prove tliat by Mr. Wilson's method ? 

Nie. Not quite. He does it by transferring 1 an angle : 
we do it by divergence of directions. 

Min. I prefer your method. All it needs to make it 
complete is the proof of the reality of such Lines : but 
that is unattainable, and its absence is fatal to the whole 
system. Nay, more: the fact, that the reality of such 
Lines leads by a logical necessity to the reality of Lines 
which make equal angles with any transversal, reacts upon 
that unfortunate axiom, and destroys the little hope it 
ever had of being granted without proof. In point of 
fact, in asking to have the axiom granted, you were 
virtually asking to have this other reality granted as 
axiomatic but all this I have already explained (p. 100). 

NIEMAND reads. 

P. 13, Th. 10. 'If a Transversal cut two Directives and 
make the angles of intersection with them eqiial^ the Directives 
are ' sD * -related? 

Min. The subject of your proposition is indisputably 
real. If then you can prove this theorem, you will thereby 
prove the reality of ' sD '-related Lines. But I fear you 
have assumed it already in Th. 7. There is still, how 
ever, a gleam of hope : perhaps you do not need Th. 7 in 
proving this? 



126 WILLOCK. [ACT II. 

Nie. We do not : but I fear tliat will not mend matters, 
as we assume, in the course of this theorem, that a Line 
can be drawn through a given point,, so as to have the 
same direction as a given Line. 

Min. Then we need not examine it further : it must 
perish with the faulty axiom on which it rests. What 
is your next theorem ? 

Nie. It answers to Euc. I. 16, 17, and is proved by the 
theorem you have just rejected. 

Min. Then I must reject its proof ^ but I will grant you 
the theorem itself, if you like, as we know it can be proved 
from undisputed axioms. What comes next ? 



reads. 

P. 14, Th. 13. ' If 'a Transversal meet two Directives, and 
make angles with them, the External greater tJian the Internal, 
or the sum of the two Internal angles less than two right 
angles, the two directives must meet? 

Min. A proof for Euclid's Axiom ? That is interesting. 

NIEMAND reads. 

c For, suppose they do not meet. Then, they should be 
< sD '-related - 3 

Min. (interrupting) 'Should be : s D '-related'? Does that 
mean that they are c sD '-related ? 

Nie. Yes, I think so. 

Min. That is, you assume that separational Lines have 
the same direction? 

Nie. We do. 

Min. A fearful assumption ! (A long silence) Well ? 



So. V. 3.] GENERAL SURVEY. 127 

Nie. I am waiting to know whether you grant it. 

Mm. Unquestionably not! I must mark it against 
you as an axiom of the most monstrous character ! Mr. 
Wilson himself does not assume this, though he does 
assume its contranominal, that Lines haying different 
directions will meet (see p. 88). And what I said then 
I say now unaxiomatic ! But supposing it granted, how 
would you prove the theorem ? 



reads. 

'Then, they should be ' sD '-related ; and the external 
angle should be equal (Th. 8) to the internal ; which is 
contrary to the supposition.' 

Min. Quite so. But Th. 8, which you quote, itself 
depends on the reality of ' si) '-related Lines. Your 
theorem rests on two legs, and 6ot&, I fear, are rotten ! 

Nie. The next theorem is equivalent to Euc. I. 32. Do 
you wish to hear it? 

Min. It is unnecessary : it follows easily from Th. 8. 

And I need not ask you what practical test you provide 
for the meeting of two Lines, seeing that you have Euclid's 
1 2th Axiom itself. 

Nie. Proved as a Theorem. 

Min. Attempted, to be proved as a Theorem. I will now 
take a hasty general survey of your client's book. 

The first point calling for remark is the arrangement. 
You begin by dragging the unfortunate beginner straight 
into the most difficult part of the subject. Your first 
chapter positively bristles with difficulties about c direction.' 
Then comes a long chapter on circles, including some very 



128 WILLOCK. [ACT II. 

complicated figures, and a theory of tangents which de 
pends upon moving lines and vanishing chords all most 
disheartening to a beginner. What do you suppose he 
is likely to make of such a sentence as ' the direction of 
the motion of the generating point of any curve is that 
of the tangent to the curve at .that point'? (p. 29.) Or 
this again, 'it is also evident that, the circle being a 
simple curve., there can be only one tangent to it at any 
point ' ? (p. 29.) What is ' a simple curve ' ? 

Nie. I do not know. 

Mi /i. Then comes a chapter of problems, and then 
when your pupil has succeeded in mastering thirty-four 
pages of your book, and has become tolerably familiar 
with tangents and segments, with diametral lines and 
reentrant angles, with 'oval forms'' and 'forms semi- 
convex, semi-concave, 3 you at last confront him with 
that abstruse and much dreaded theorem, Euc. I. 4 ! 
True, he has the Asses 5 Bridge ' to help him in proving 
it, that in its turn being proved, apparently, by properties 
of the circle ; but, even with all these assistances, it is an 
arduous task ! 

Nie. You are hard on my client. 

Min. Well, jesting apart, let me say in all seriousness 
that I think it would require very great ingenuity to 
make a worse arrangement of the subject of Geometry, 
for purposes of teaching, than is to be found in this little 
book. 

I do not think it necessary to criticise the book through 
out : but I will mention one or two passages which have 
caught my eye in glancing through it. 



So. Y. 3.] 'DOUBLE CONVERSION: 129 

Here, for instance, is something about c Directives/ 
which seem to be a curious kind of Lociquite different 
from Eight Lines, I should say. 

Nie. Oh no ! They are exactly the same thing ! 

Min. Well, I find., at p. 4, c Directives are either diver 
gent or parallel 5 : and again, at p. 1 1, ' Parallel Directives 
cannot meet. 3 Clearly, then, Directives can never by any 
possibility coincide : but ordinary Right Lines occasionally 
do so, do they not ? 

Nie. It is a curious lapsus pennae. 

Min. At p. 7, 1 observe an article headed ' The principle 
of double conversion/ which I will quote entire. 

Reads. 

c If four magnitudes, a, b, A 3 B } are so related, that when 
a is greater than b, A is greater than _Z? ; and when a is 
equal to I, A is equal to JB : then, conversely, when A is 
greater than .5, a is greater than b ; and, when A is equal 
to _Z?, a is equal to b. 

' The truth of this principle, which extends to every 
kind of magnitude, is thus made evident: If, when A 
is greater than J?, a is not greater than I, it must be either 
less than or equal to b. But it cannot be less ; for, if it 
were, A should, by the antecedent part of the proposition, 
be less than B> which is contrary to the supposition made. 
Nor can it be equal to b ; for, in that ease, A should be 
equal to J5, also contrary to supposition. Since, therefore, 
a is neither less than nor equal to b, it remains that it must 
be greater than b.' 

Now let a and A be variables and represent the ordinates 



130 



WILLOCK. 



[ACT II. 



to two curves, mnr and MNR, for the same abscissa ; and 
let I and B be constants and represent their intercepts on 
the I -axis; i.e. let On I, and ON = B. 




Does not this diagram fairly represent the data of the 
proposition ? You see, when we take a negative abscissa, 
so as to make a greater than #, we are on the left-hand 
branch of the curve, and A is also greater than S ; and 
again, when a is equal to b, we are crossing the I r -axis, 
where A is also equal to B. 

Nie. It seems fair enough. 

Min. But the conclusion does not follow ? With a posi 
tive abscissa, A is greater than B> but a less than b. 

Nie. We cannot deny it. 

Min. What then do you suppose would be the effect 
on a simple-minded student who should wrestle with this 
terrible theorem, firm in the conviction that, being in a 
printed book, it must some&ow be true ? 

Nie. (gravely) Insomnia, certainly; followed by acute 
CepJialalgia, ; and, in all probability, Epistaosis. 

Mm. Ah, those terrible names ! Who would suppose 



So. V. 3.] INCOMMENSURABLES. 131 

that a man could have all those three maladies, and sur 
vive ? And yet the thing 1 is possible ! 

Let me now read you a statement (at p. 112) about 
ineommensurables : 

* When one of the magnitudes can be represented only 
by an interminable decimal, while the other is a finite 
whole number, or finite decimal, no finite common sub- 
multiple can exist ; for, though a unit be selected in the 
last place of the whole number or finite decimal, yet the 
decimal represented by all the figures which follow the 
corresponding place in the interminable decimal, being 
less than that unit in that place and unknown in quantity, 
cannot be a common measure of the two magnitudes, and 
is only a remainder. 3 

Now can you lay your hand upon your heart and declare, 
on the word of an honest man, that you understand this 
sentence beginning at the words ' yet the decimal ' ? 

Nie. (vehemently) I cannot! 

Mm. Of the two reasons which are mentioned., to ex 
plain why it e cannot be a common measure of the two 
magnitudes, 3 does the first that it is ' less than that unit 
in that place ' carry conviction to your mind ? And 
does the second that it is unknown in magnitude ' 
ripen that conviction into certainty ? 

Nie. (wildly) Not in the least ! 

Min. Well, I will not 'slay the slain* any longer. 
You may consider Dr. Willock 3 s book as rejected. And 
I think we may say that the whole theory of i direction ' 
has collapsed under our examination. 

Nie. I greatly fear so. 

K 2, 



ACT III 

SCENE I. 

I. THE OTHER MODEEN RlVALS. 

' But mice, and rats, and such small deer, 
Have been Tom's food for seven long year.' 

Min. I consider the question, as to whether Euclid's 
system and numeration should be abandoned or retained, 
to be now set at rest : the subject of Parallels being dis 
posed of, no minor points of difference 'can possibly justify 
the abandonment of our old friend in favour of any Modern 
Rival. Still it will be worth while to examine the other 
writers, whose works you have brought with you, as they 
may furnish some valuable suggestions for the improve 
ment of Euclid's Manual. 

Nie. The other writers are CHAUVENET, LOOMIS, MOKELL, 
REYNOLDS, and WEIGHT. 

Hin. There are a few matters, as to which we may con 
sider them all at once. How do they define a straight 
Line? 

Nie. All but Mr. Reynolds define it as the shortest dis 
tance between two points, or more accurately, to use the 



OTHER MODERN RIVALS. 133 

words of Mr. Chauvenet, c a line of which every portion is 
the shortest line hetween the points limiting that portion. 

Mm. We discussed that definition in M. Legendre's 
book. How does Mr. Reynolds define it ? 

Nie. Not at all. 

Mm. Very cautious. What of angles ? 

Nie. Some of them allow larger limits than Euclid does. 
Mr. Wright talks about c angles of continuation ' and 
'angles of rotation.' 

Min. Good for Trigonometry: not so suitable to early 
Geometry. How do they define Parallels ? 

Nie. As in Euclid, all of them. 

Min. And which proposition of Tab. II. do they assume? 

Nie. Play fair's, or else its equivalent, 'only one Line can 
be drawn, parallel to a given Line, through a given point 
outside it.' 

Min. Now let us take them one by one. 



ACT III. 

SCENE I. 

2. CHAUVENET. 

' Where Wrt-hin^fon hath left 
His awful memory 
A light for after times ! ' 

Xie. I lay before you 1 A Treatise on Elementary Geometry* 
by W. CiLiuvENET, LL.D., Professor of Mathematics and 
Astronomy in Washington University, published in 1876. 

Mm. I read in the Preface (p. 4) ' I have endeavoured 
to set forth the elements with all the rigour and complete 
ness demanded by the present state of the general science, 
without seriously departing from the established order of the 
propositions.' So there would be little difficulty, I fancy, 
in introducing into Euclid's own Manual all the improve 
ments which Mr. Chauvenet can suggest. 

P. 14. Pr. I, and p. 18. Pr. v, taken together, tell us 
that only one perpendicular can be drawn to a Line from a 
point. And various additions, about obliques, are made in 
subsequent propositions. All these may well be embodied 
in a new proposition, which we might interpolate as Euc. I. 
12, B. 



CHAUVENET. 135 



P. 2,6. Pr. xv, asserts tlie equidistance of Parallels. This 
might be interpolated as Euc. I. 34. B. 

Another new theorem, that angles whose sides are 
parallel, each to each, are equal (which I observe is a great 
favourite with the Modern Rivals), seems to me a rather 
clumsy and uninteresting extension of Euc. I. 29. 

I see several propositions which might well be inserted 
as exercises on Euclid (e.g. Pr. xxxix, 'Every point in 
the bisector of an angle is equally distant from the sides '), 
but which are hardly of sufficient importance to be in 
cluded as propositions : and others (e. g. Pr. XL, fi The bi 
sectors of the three angles of a triangle meet in the same 
point) which seem to belong more properly to Euc. Ill or 
IV. I have no other remarks to make on this book, which 
seems well and clearly written. 



ACT III. 

SCENE I. 
3. LOOMIS. 

* Like but oh ! how different ! ' 

yie. I lay before you 'Elements of Geometry* by ELIAS 
LoOMiSj LL.D., Professor of Natural Philosophy and 
Astronomy in Yale College, a revised edition, 1876. 

Mhi. I read in the Preface (p. 10) 'The present volume 
follows substantially the order of Blanchet's Legendre, 
while the form of the demonstrations is modeled after 
the more logical method of Euclid/ He has not, however, 
adopted the method of infinite series, which constitutes 
the crucial distinction between that writer and Euclid. 

The propositions are pretty nearly in Euclid's order : 
with a few changes in order and numeration, the book 
would be a modernised Euclid, the only important differ 
ences being the adoption of Playfair's Axiom and the 
omission of the diagonals in Euc. II. I have no hostile 
criticisms to offer. Our American cousins set us an ex 
cellent example in the art of brief, and yet lucid, mathe 
matical writing. 



ACT III 

SCENE I. 

4. MORELL. 

* Quis custodiet ipsos custodes ? 
Q,uis inspieiet ipsos Lnspectores ? ' 

Nie. I lay before you 6 Euclid Simplified, compiled 

from tJie most important French works, approved ly the 

University of Paris and the Minister of Public Instruction? 

by Mr. J. R. MOEELL, formerly H. M. Inspector of Schools, 

published in 1875. 

Mm. "What have you about Lines, to begin with ? 

Nie. Here is a definition. The place where two sur 
faces meet is called a Line. 3 

Min. Really ! Let us take two touching spheres, for 
instance ? 

Nie. Ahem ! We abandon the definition. 

Mm. Perhaps we shall be more fortunate with the defi 
nition of a straight Line. 

Nie. It is c an indefinite Line, which is the shortest 
between any two of its points.' 



138 MORELL. [ACT III. 

J//w. An ^indtfjliilte' Line! What in the world do you 
mean? Is a curved Line more definite than a straight 
Line ? 

jMe. I don't know. 

J///;. Nor I. The rest of the sentence is slightly ellip 
tical. Of course you mean 'the shortest which can be 
drawn'? 

Nit?, (wtf/erfy) Yes_, yes ! 

J//. A Veil, we have discussed that matter already. Go on. 

A7#. Xext we have an axiom, ' that from one point to 
another only one straight Line can be drawn, and that 
if two portions of a straight Line coincide, these Lines 
coincide throughout their whole extent. 3 

J///?. You bewilder me. How can one portion of a 
straight Line coincide with another? 

yie. {after a pause) It can't, of course, in situ : but why 
not take up one portion and lay it on another ? 

Mtti. By all means, if you like. Let us take a certain 
straight Line, cut out an inch of it, and lay it along 
another inch of the Line. What follows ? 

Nie. Then ' these Lines coincide throughout their whole 
extent. 5 

Mi a. Do they indeed ? And pray who are these Lines '? 
The two inches ? 

Nie. (gloomily) I suppose so. 

Min. Then the axiom is simple tautology. 

Nie. Well then, we mean the whole straight Line and 
and 

Min. And what else? You can't talk of 'one straight 
Line ' as c these Lines/ you know. 



So. I. 4.] PARALLELS. 139 

Nie. We abandon the axiom. 

Min. Better luck nest time ! Try another definition. 

Nie. c A broken Line is a Line composed of straight 
Lines. 5 

Min. But a straight Line also is c a Line composed of 
straight Lines, 5 isn't it? 

Nie. Well, we abandon the definition. 

Min. This is quite a new process in our navigation. 
Instead of heaving the lead, we seem to be throwing over 
board the whole of our cargo! Let us hear something 
about Angles. 

Nie. 'The figure formed by two Lines that intersect 
is called an Angle.' 

Min. What do you mean by ( figure'? Do you define 
it anywhere ? 

Nie. Yes. 'The name of figure is given to volumes,, 
surfaces, and lines.' 

Min. Under which category do you put ' Angle '? 

Nie. I don't know. 

Min. Anything new about the definition, or equality, 
of right angles ? 

Nie. No, except that we prove that all right angles are 
equal. 

Min. That we have discussed already (see p. 56). Let 
us go on to Pairs of Lines,, and your proof of Eue. I. 
29, 33. 

NIEMAND reads. 

'Th. 19. Two Lines perpendicular to the same Line are 
parallel.' 



HO M OK ELL. [ACT III 

3Iiii. Do you mean c separational' ? 

Nk. Yes. 

Wit. Have you defined 'parallel' anywhere? 

Alf. (<tffor a wrrelt] I can't find it. 

J/i'yf. A careless omission. However, jour assertion is 
tlmt / r ?57 That isn't always true. Suppose your two 
Lines were drawn from the same point? 

A/V. We beg to correct the sentence. 'Two different 
Lines.' 

J/T/7. Very well. Then you assert '4. ?/S" (Tab. I. 5). 
I grant it. 

NIEIIAND reads. 

4 Th. 20. Through a point situated outside a straight 
Line a parallel, and only one, can be drawn to that 
Line. 5 

Mln. 'A parallel, 3 I grant at once : it is e sS real ' (Tab. 
I. 9). But 'only one'l That takes us into Table II. 
What axiom do you assume ? 

Nie. ' It may be admitted that only one parallel can be 
drawn to it. 3 

Min. That is ' sS unique ' a contranominal of Playfair's 
Axiom. Tery well. We need not pursue the subject : all 
is easy after that. Now hand me the book, if you please : 
I wish to make a general survey of style, &c. 

At p. 4 I read : ' Two theorems are reciprocal when the 
hypothesis and the conclusion of one are the conclusion 
and the hypothesis of the other. 3 (They are usually called 
1 converse ' the technical, not the logical, converse, as was 
mentioned some time ago (p. 46); but let that pass.) 



Sc. I. 4.] GENERAL SURVEY. 141 

'Thus the theorem if two Bangles are right angles^ they are 
equal lias for its reciprocal if two angles are equal ', they 
are right angles' 

(This, by the way, is a capital instance of the distinction 
between ' technical ' and ' logical.' Here the technical con 
verse is wild nonsense, while the logical converse is of 
course as true as the theorem itself : it is c some cases of 
two angles 'being equal are cases of their being right.'') 

'All propositions are direct, reciprocal, or contrary all 
so closely connected that either of the two latter' (I 
presume he means ' the latter two 3 ) ' is a consequence of 
the other two.' 

A ' consequence ' ! Can he mean a logical consequence ? 
Would he let us make a syllogism of the three, using 
the 'direct' and 'reciprocal' (for instance) as premisses, 
and the 'contrary' as the conclusion? 

However, let us first see what he means by a ' con 
trary' proposition. 

'It is a direct proposition to prove that all points in 
a circle enjoy a certain property, e.g. the same distance 
from the centre.' 

(This notion of sentient points, by the way, is very 
charming. I like to think of all the points in a circle 
really feeling a placid satisfaction in the thought that 
they are equidistant from the centre ! They are infinite 
in number, and so can well afford to despise the arrogance 
of a point within, and to ignore the envious murmurs of 
a point without !) 

'The contrary proposition shows that all points taken 
outside or inside the figure do not enjoy this property,' 



1 12 MORELL. [ACT III. 

So then this is his trio : 

i. Direct. 4 All X are 17 

a. Reciprocal. 'All Fare X 9 

3. Contrary. c All not- X are not -IV 

Here of course No. 2 and No. 3, being contranominals, 
are logically deducible from each other, No. I having no 
logical connection with either of them. 

And yet he calls the three 'so closely connected that 
either of the two latter is a consequence of the other two s ! 
Shade of Aldrich ! Have we come to this ? You say 
nothing, mem Herr? 

JV)V. I say that, if you grant what you call the ( pre 
misses/ you cannot deny the conclusion. 

Miti. True. It reminds me of an answer given some 
years ago in the Schools at Oxford, when the Examiner 
asked for an example of a syllogism. After much patient 
thought, the candidate handed in 

' All men are dogs ; ' 
All dogs are men : 
Therefore^ All ruen are dogs.' 

This certainly has the form of a syllogism. Also it 
avoids, with marked success, the dangerous fallacy of ' four 
terms/ And it has the great merit of Mr. Morell's syllo 
gism, that, if you grant the premisses, you cannot deny 
the conclusion. Nevertheless I feel bound to add that 
it was not commended by the Examiner. 

Nie. I can well believe it. 

Mm. I proceed. ' The direct and the reciprocal proofs 
are generally the simpler, and do not require a fresh con 
struction.' Why c fresh ' ? The { direct ' comes jirst^ ap- 



So. I. 4.] A FALSE ASSERTION. 143 

patently; so that, if it requires a construction at all, it 
must be a e fresh ' one. 

Nie. Ee not hypercritical. 

Min. Well, it is rather c small deer, 3 I confess : let us 
change the subject. 

Here is a pretty proof in Th. 4. 

e Then m -f c? = ?# -f a?. 
But 7& = m. 
Therefore o = a?.' 

Isn't that s but m = m' a delightfully cautious paren 
thesis ? Your client seems to be nearly as much at home 
in Algebra as in Logic, which is saying a great deal ! 

At p. 9, I read The base of an isosceles triangle is the 
unequal side.' 

c The unequal side ' ! Is an equilateral triangle isosceles, 
or is it not ? Answer, mein Herr ! 

Nie. Proceed. 

Mm. At p. 17, I read 'From one and the same point 
three equal straight Lines cannot be drawn to another 
straight Line ; for if that were the case, there would le on 
the same side of a perpendicular two equal obliques, which 
is impossible.' 

Kindly prove the italicised assertion on this diagram, 
in which I assume FD, FC, FJE, to be equal lines, and 




144 JIIORELL. [ACT III 

have made the middle one of the three a perpendicular to 
the ( other straight Line. 3 

Nie. {furiously) I will not ! 

Min. Look at p. 36. ' A circumference is generally 
described in language hy one of its radii.' Let us hope 
that the language is complimentary at least if the cir 
cumference is within hearing ! Can't you imagine the 
radius gracefully rising to his feet, rubbing his lips with 
his table-napkin ? Gentlemen ! The toast I have the 
honour to propose is &c. &c. Gentlemen, I give you the 
Circumference \ ' And then the chorus of excited Lines., 
' For he's a jolly good felloe ! ' 

Nie. (raptv roudjj) Ha ; ha! (checking himself} You are 
insulting my client. 

Min. Only filling in his suggestive outlines. Try p. 48. 
'Th. 13. If two circumferences are interior,' &c. Can 
your imagination, or mine, grasp the idea of two cir 
cumferences, each of them inside the other ? No ! We 
are mere prosaic mortals : it is beyond us ! 

In p. 49 I see some strange remarks about ratios. First 
look at Def. 44. * When a magnitude is contained an 
exact number of times in two magnitudes of its kind, it is 
said to be their common measure.' (The wording is awkward, 
and suggests the idea of their having only one ( common 
measure'' ; but let that pass.) The ratio of two magnitudes 
of the same kind is the number which would express the 
measure of the first, if the second were taken as unity. 3 

e The measure of the first "* ! Do you understand that ? 
Is it a c measure "* such as you have just defined ? or some 
other kind ? 



So. I. 4.] COMMON MEASURES. 145 

Nie. Some other kind,, I think. But there is a slight 
obscurity somewhere. 

Mm. Perhaps this next enunciation will clear it up. ' If 
two magnitudes of the same kind, A and JB, are mutually 
commensurable 3 (by the way, 'mutually"' is tautology), 
e their ratio is a whole or fractional number, which is 
obtained by dividing the two numbers one by the other, 
and which expresses how many times these magnitudes 
contain their common measure M. } Do you understand 
that*! 

Nie. Well, no ! 

Mm. Let us take an instance ^3 and los. A shilling 
is a common measure of these two sums : will you accept it 
as c their common measure ' ? 

Nie. We will do it, provisionally. 

Min. Now the number * obtained by dividing the two 
numbers' (I presume you mean 'the two magnitudes 3 ) 
< one by the other 3 is c 6,' is it not ? 

Nie. It would seem so. 

Min. Well, does this number ' express how many times 
these magnitudes contain their common measure, 3 viz. a 
shilling ? 

Nie. Hardly. 

Min. Did you ever meet with any one number that could 
c express 3 two distinct facts ? 

Nie. We would rather change the subject. 

Min. Very well, though there is plenty more about it, 
and the obscurity deepens as you go on. We will vary 
the verse ' with a little bit of classical criticism. Look 
at p. 81. ' Homologous, from the Greek ojicotos, like or 

L 



14G MORELL. [ ACT III. 

tdmilar, Aoyoy, word or reason.' Do you think this school- 
inspector ever heard of the great Church, controversy, 
where all turned on the difference between o^o? and O/JCCHOS? 

Nie. (imeattHi/) I think not. But this is not a mathe 
matical silp, you know. 

Min. You are right, Sevenons a nos moutons. Turn to 
p. 145, art. 65. * To measure areas, it is usual to take a 
square as unity.' To me, who have always been accus 
tomed to regard * a square y as a concrete magnitude and 
* unity' as a pure number, the assertion comes rather as 
a shock. But I acquit the author of any intentional rough 
ness. Nothing could surpass- the delicacy of the next few 
words : ' It has been already stated that surfaces are 
measured indirectly' ! Lines, of course, may be measured 
anyhow : they have no sensibilities to wound : but there is 
an open-handedness a breadth of feeling about a surface, 
which tells of noble birth every (square) inch a King ! ' 
and so we measure it with averted eyes, and whisper its 
area with bated breath ! 

Nie. Keturn to other muttons. 

MM. Well, take p. 156. Here is a 'scholium' on a 
theorem about the area of a sector of a circle. The 
c scholium ' begins thus : < If a is the number of degrees 
in the arc of a sector, we shall have to find the length 

of this arc .* I pause to ask f If fi were the number, 

should we have to find it then ? ' 

Nie. (solemnly) We should ! 

Min. ' For the two Lines which are multiplied in all 
rules for the measuring of areas must be referred to the 
same linear unity.' That, I take it, is fairly obscure : but 



Sc. I. 4.] A LOGICAL FIASCO. 147 

it is luminous when compared with the note which follows 
it. c If the linear unit and angular unit are left arbitrary, 
any angle has for measure the ratio of the numbers of 
linear units contained in the arcs which the angle in ques 
tion and the irregular unit intercept in any circumference 
described from their summit as common centres.' Is not 
that a useful note ? ( The irregukr unit ' ! Linear, or 
angular, I wonder ? And then c common centres y I How 
many centres does a circumference usually require ? I will 
only trouble you with one more extract, as a lonne louche 
to wind up with. 

c Th. 9. (P. 136.) Every convex closed Line ABCD enve 
loped ty any oilier closed Line PQEST is less than it. 




< All the infinite Lines ABCD, PQST, &c.' by the 

way, these are curious instances of infinite Lines ''? 

Nie. (hastily) We mean 'infinite' in number, not in 
length. 

Min. Well, you express yourself oddly, at any rate. 

* which enclose the plane surface ABCD, cannot be 

equal. For drawing the straight Line MD, which does 
not cut ABCD, MD will be less than MPQD ; and adding 



148 MORELL. [ACT III. So. I. 4. 

to both members the part MTSRQD, the result will be 
MDQRSTM less than HPQRSTM.* Is that result proved? 

Nie. No. 

Mui. Is it true? 

Nie. Not necessarily so. 

Mi ft. Perhaps it is a lapsus jpennte. Try to amend it. 




Nie. If we add to MJ) the part HTSRQD, we do get 
MDQRSTM, it is true : but, if we add it to MPQD, we 
get QD twice over; that is, we get MPQR8TM together 
with twice QD. 

Mm. How does that addition suit the rest of the proof? 

Nie. It ruins it : all depends on our proving the peri 
meter MDQRSTM less than the perimeter MPQRSTM, 
which this method has failed to do as of course all 
methods must, the thing not being capable of proof. 

Mm. Then the whole proposition breaks down abso 
lutely ? 

Me. We cannot deny it. 

Min. Let us turn to the next author. 



ACT III. 

SCENE I. 
5. REYNOLDS. 

Though this be madness, yet there 's method in 't.' 

Nie. I lay before yon 'Modern Methods in Elementary 
Geometry] by E. M. REYNOLDS, M.A., Mathematical Master 
in Clifton College, Modern Side ; published in 1868. 

Min. The first remark I have to make on it is, that the 
Definitions and Axioms are scattered through the book, 
instead of being placed together at the beginning, and that 
there is no index to them, so that the reader only comes on 
them by chance : it is quite impossible to refer to them. 

Nie. I cannot defend the innovation. 

Mm. In Th. i (p. 3), I read ' the angles CD A, CDS 
are together equal to two right angles. For they fill ex 
actly the same space' Do you mean finite or infinite space ? 
If ' finite,' we increase the angle by lengthening its sides : 
if c infinite, 5 the idea is unsuited for elementary teaching. 
You had better abandon the idea of an angle 'filling 
space, 3 which is no improvement on Euclid's method. 



150 REYNOLDS. [ACT III. Sc. I. 5. 

P. 61. Th. IT (of Book III) it is stated that paral 
lelograms, on equal bases and between the same parallels, 
c may always be placed so that their equal bases coincide/ 
and it is clearly assumed that they will still be c between 
the same parallels.' And again, in p. 63, the altitude of a 
parallelogram is defined as 'the perpendicular distance of 
the opposite side from the base,' clearly assuming that 
there is only one such dfstance. In both these passages 
the theorem is assumed Parallels are equidistant from each 
other/ of which no proof has been given, though of course 
it might have been easily deduced from Th. xvi (p. 19). 

The theorems in Euc. II are here proved algebraically, 
which I hold to be emphatically a change for the worse, 
chiefly because it brings in the difficult subject of incom 
mensurable magnitudes, which should certainly be avoided 
in a book meant for beginners. 

I have little else to remark on in this book. Several of 
the new theorems in it seem to me to be premature, e. g. 
Th. xix, &e. on c Loci ' : but the sins of omission are more 
serious. He actually leaves out Euc. I. 7, 17, 31 (2nd 
part), 24, 25, 26 (2nd part), 48, and II. I, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10, 12, 
13. Moreover he separates Problems and Theorems, which 
I hold to be a mistake. I will not trouble you with any 
further remarks. 



ACT III 

SCENE I. 
6. WEIGHT. 

'Defects of execution unquestionably exist.' 

WRIGHT, Pref. p. 10. 

Nie. I lay before you e The Elements of Plane Geometry' 
by R. P. WEIGHT, Teacher of Mathematics in University 
College School, London; the second edition, 1871. 

Min. Some of the changes in Euclid's method,, made in 
this book, are defended in the Preface. 

First, he claims credit for having more Axioms than 
Euclid, whom he blames for having demonstrated c much 
that is obvious.' I need hardly pause to remind you that 
c obviousness * is not an invariable property : to a perfect 
intellect the whole of Euclid, to the end of Book XII, 
would be c obvious 5 as soon as the Definitions had been 
mastered : but Geometricians must write for imperfect in 
tellects, and it cannot be settled on general principles where 
axioms should end and theorems begin. Let us look at 
a few of these new axioms. In p. viii of the Preface, I 



152 WRIGHT. [ACT III. 

read 'with the conception of straightness in a line we 
naturally associate that of the utmost possible shortness 
of path between any two of its points ; allow this to be 
assumed, &c. 5 This I consider a most objectionable axiom, 
obliging us, as it does, to contemplate the lengths of curved 
lines. This matter I have already discussed with M. 
Legendre (p. 55). 

Secondly, for the host of new axioms with which we 
are threatened in the Preface, I have searched the book in 
vain : possibly I have overlooked some, as he never uses 
the heading Axiom/ but really I can only find one new 
one, at p. 5. ' Every angle has one, and only one bisector/ 
which is hardly worth stating. Perhaps the writer means 
that his proofs are not so full as those in Euclid, but take 
more for granted. I do not think this any improvement 
in a book meant for beginners. 

Another change, claimed in the Preface as an improve 
ment, is the more constant use of superposition. I have 
considered that point already (p. 46) and have come to the 
conclusion that Euclid's method of constructing a new 
figure has all the advantages, without the obscurity, of the 
method of superposition. 

I see little to remark on in the general style of the book. 
At p. 21 I read ' the straight line ^/satisfies the four fol 
lowing conditions : it passes through the vertex A, through 
the middle point 7 of the base, is a perpendicular on that 
base, and is the bisector of the vertical angle. Now, two 
of these four conditions suffice to determine the straight 
line AI, . . . Hence a straight line fulfilling any two of these 
four conditions necessarily fulfils the other two. 5 All this is 



Sc. I. 6.] GENERAL SURVEY. 153 

strangely inaccurate : the fourth condition is sufficient by 
itself to determine the line AL 

At p. 40 I notice the startling announcement that the 
simplest of all polygons is the triangle ' ! This is surely a 
new use for ' many J ? I wonder if the writer is prepared 
to accept the statement that many people have swum across 
the Bosphorus ' on the strength of Byron's 

'As once (a feat on which ourselves we prided) 
Leander, Mr. Ekenhead, and I did.* 

As a specimen of the wordy and unscientific style of the 
writer, take the following : 

''From any point 0, one, and only one ', perpendicular can le 
drawn to a given straight line AB. 



c Let (7 be the point on which would fall if, the paper 
being folded along AJB, the upper portion of the figure were 
turned down upon the lower portion. If from the points 
0, (7 straight lines be drawn to any point whatever I on 
the line AS, the adjacent angles OIB, fflS will be equal ; 
for folding the paper again along AS and turning the 
upper portion down upon the lower, falls on (7, 1 remains 
fixed, and the angle GIB exactly coincides with (JIB. 
Now in order that the line 01 may be perpendicular to 
AB, or, in other words, that OIS may be a right angle. 



154 WRIGHT. [ACT III. Sc. I. 6. 

the sum of the two adjacent angles OIJB, (?IB must be 
equal to two right angles, and consequently their sides 
10, 1(J in the same straight line. But since we can always 
draw one, and only one, straight line between two points 

and (7, it follows that from a point we can always 
draw one, and only one, perpendicular to the line AB? 

Do you think you could make a more awkward or more 
obscure proof of this almost axiomatic theorem ? 

Nie. (t'CLittioiisly) I would not undertake it. 

31 hi. All that about folding and re-folding the paper is 
more like a child's book of puzzles than a scientific treatise. 

1 should be very sorry to be the school-boy who is expected 
to learn this precious demonstration ! In such a case^ I 
could not better express my feelings than by quoting three 
words of this very theorem : e l remains fixed* ! 

In conclusion, I may say as to all five of these authors, 
that they do not seem to me to contain any desirable 
novelty which could not easily be Introduced into an 
amended edition of Euclid. 

Nie. It is a position I cannot dispute. 



ACT III. 

SCEKE II. 

i. SYLLABUS OT THE ASSOCIATION FOE THE 
IMPROVEMENT OP GEOMETRICAL TEACHING. 1878. 

4 Nos numerus sumus/ 

Nie. The last book to be examined is Mr. Wilson's new 
Manual, founded on the Syllabus of the Geometrical Asso 
ciation. 

Mn. We had better begin by examining 1 the Syllabus 
itself. I own that I could have wished to do this in the 
presence of some member of the Committee, who might 
have supplied a few details for what is at present little 
more than a skeleton, but that I fear is out of the 
question. 

Nie. Nay, you shall not have far to seek. I am a mem 
ber of the Committee. 

Min. (astonished) You ! A German professor ! No such 
member is included in the final list of the Committee, which 
a friend showed me the other day. 



156 SYLLABUS. [ACT HE. 

Nle. The final list, was it ? Well, ask your friend whe 
ther, since the drawing up of that list, any addition has 
been made : he will say ' Nobody has been added. 3 

Min. Quite so. 

NIB. You do not understand. Nobody Niemand see 
you not ? 

Mi'n. What ? You mean 

A7V. (solemnly) I do, my friend. I have been added 
to it! 

Mln. (loicmg) The Committee are highly honoured, I 
am sure. 

Nie. So they ought to be, considering that I am a more 
distinguished mathematician than Newton himself, and 
that my Manual is better known than Euclid's ! Excuse 
my self-glorification, but any moralist will tell you that 
I I alone among men ought to praise myself. 

Mm. (thoughtfully) True, true. But all this is word- 
juggling a most misleading analogy. However, as you 
now appear in a new character, you must at least have 
a new name ! 

Nie. (jprouclJi/) Call me Nostradamus ! 

[Even as he utters the mystic name, the air grows dense 
around him, and gradually crystallizes into living forms. 
Enter a -pliant asmic procession., grouped about a banner > on 
which is emblazoned in letters of gold the title f ASSOCIATION 
FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF THINGS IN GENERAL.' Foremost 
in the line marches NERO, carrying his unfinished ' Scheme for 
the Amelioration of Rome'; while among the croivd which 
follow him may de noticed GUY FAWKES, President of the 
4 Association for raising the position of Members of Parlia- 



So, II. I.] TREATMENT OF LINE. 157 

went 9 THE MARCHIONESS DE BRINVILLIEES, Foundress of 
the c Association for the Amendment of the Digestive Faculty 3 
and THE REV. F. GUSTRELL (the being who cut down SJtak- 
speare's mulberry-tree), leader of the *- Association for the 
Refinement of Literary Taste' Afterwards enter, on the other 
side, Sir Isaac Newton's little dog ' DIAMOND/ carrying in 
his mouth a half-burnt roll of manuscript. He pointedly 
avoids the procession and the banner, and marches past alone, 
serene in the consciousness that he, single-pawed, conceived- 
and carried out his great ' Scheme for the Advancement of 
Mathematical Research* without the aid of any Association 
whatever^ 

Mm. Nostra, the plural of nostrum, 'a quack remedy'; 
and damns, e we give. 3 It is a suggestive name. 

jffos. And, trust me, it is a suggestive book that I now 
lay before you. ( Syllabus '. 

Min. (interrupting] You mean e a Syllabus \ or *the 
Syllabus 3 ? 

Nos. No, no ! In this railroad-age, we have no time 
for superfluous words ! ' Syllabus of Plane Geometry, pre 
pared ly the Association for the Improvement of Geometrical 
Teaching? Fourth Edition, 1877. 

Min. How do you define a Right Line ? 

NOSTRADAMUS reads. 

P. 7. Def. 5. e A straight line is such that any part -will, 
however placed, lie wholly on any other part, if its ex 
tremities are made to fall on that other part.' 

Min. That looks more like a property of a Right Line 
than its essence. Euclid makes an axiom of that property. 
Of course you omit his axiom ? 



158 SYLLABUS. [ACT III. 

Nos. No. We have the axiom (p. 10, Ax. a) 'Two 
straight lines that have two points in common lie wholly 
in the same straight line. 5 

Min. Well! That is certainly the strangest axiom I 
ever heard of! The idea of asserting, as an axiom, that 
Right Lines answer to their definition ! 

Nos, (lashfuHy) Well, you see there were several of us 
at work drawing up this Syllabus : and we 've got it a 
little mixed : we don't quite know which are definitions 
and which are axioms. 

Mln. So it appears : not that it matters much : the 
practical test is the only thing of importance. Do you 
adopt Euc. I. 14? 

Nos. Yes. 

jllin. Then we may go on to the next subject. Be good 
enough to define 6 Angle/ 

NOSTRADAMUS reads. 

P. 8. Def. n. s When two straight lines are drawn from 
the same point, they are said to contain, or to make with 
each other, a plane angle? 

Mln. Humph I You are very particular about drawing 
them from a point. Suppose they were drawn to the same 
point, what would they make then ? 

Nos. An angle, undoubtedly. 

Mm. Then why omit that case ? However, it matters 
little. You say { a plane angle/ I observe. You limit an 
angle, then, to a magnitude less than, the sum of two 
right angles. 

Not. No, I can't say we do. A little further down we 



Sc. II. I.] TREATMENT OF ANGLE. 159 

assert that two angles are formed by two straight lines 
drawn from a point.' 

Mm. Why, these are like Falstaff's c rogues in buckram 
suits ' ! Are there more coming ? 

Nos. No, we do not go beyond the sum of four right 
angles. These two we call conjugate angles. c The greater 
of the two is called the major conjugate^ and the smaller the 
minor conjugate, angle. 3 

Min. These definitions are wondrous ! This is the first 
time I ever heard ' major ' and ' minor' defined. One feels 
inclined to say, like that Judge in the story, when a 
certain barrister, talking against time, insisted on quoting 
authorities for the most elementary principles of law, 
( Really, brother, there are some things the Court may be 
assumed to know ! * Any more definitions ? 

Nos. We define e a straight angle.' 

Min. That I have discussed already (see p. 75). 

Nos. But tMs 3 I think, is new : 

Reads. 

P. 9. Def. 12. 'When three straight lines are drawn 
from, a point, if one of them be regarded as lying between 
the other two, the angles which this one (the mean) makes 
with the other two (the extremes) are said to be adjacent 
angles.' 

That is new indeed. Let us try a figure : 
A 

/B 



o 



160 



SYLLABUS. [ACT IH. 



Now let us regard OA as lying between the other two. 3 
Which are 'the angles which it makes with the other two 3 ? 
For this line OA (which you rightly call the mean ' 
lying is always mean) makes, be pleased to observe, four 
angles altogether two with OB, and two with 00. 

Nos. I cannot answer your question. You confuse me. 

Mm. I need not have troubled you. I see that I can 
obtain an answer from the Syllabus itself. It says (at 
the end of Def. 11} 'when the angle contained ly two lines 
is spoken of without qualification, the minor conjugate angle 
is to be understood.' Here we have a case in point, as 
these angles are spoken of ' without qualification.' So that 
the angles alluded to are both of them ' minor conjugate ' 
angles and lie on the same side of OA. And these we are 

o ' 

told to call e adjacent' angles ! 

How do you define a Eight Angle ? 

Nos. As in Euclid. 

Min. Let me hear it, if you please. You know Euclid 
has no major or minor conjugate angles. 

NOSTRADAMUS reads. 

P. 9. Def. 14. 'When one straight line stands upon 
another straight line and makes the adjacent angles equal, 
each of the angles is called a right angle? 

Min. Allow me to present you with a figure, as I see the 
Syllabus does not supply one. 



Here AS e stands upon ' BC and makes the adjacent angles 
equal. How do you like these e right angles ' ? 



Sc. II. I.] PARALLELS. 161 

Nos. Not at all. 

Mm. These same ' conjugate angles ' will get you into 
many difficulties. 

Have you Euclid's axiom e all right angles are equal 5 ? 

Nos. YeSj only we- propose to prove it as a theorem. 

Min. I have no objection to that : nor do I think that 
your treatment of angles, as a whole, is actually illogical. 
What I chiefly object to is the general c slipshoddity ' (if I 
may coin a word) of the language of your Syllabus. 

Does your proof of Euc. I. 32 differ from his? 

Nos. No, except that we propose Playfair's axiom., two 
straight Lines that intersect one another cannot both be 
parallel to the same straight Line/ as a substitute for 
Euc. Ax. 12. 

Min. Is this your only test for the meeting of two Lines, 
or do you provide any other ? 

Nos. This is the only one. 

Min. But there are cases where this is of no use. For 
instance, if you wish to make a triangle, having, as data, 
a side and the two adjacent angles. Have you such a 
problem ? 

Nos. Yes, it is Pr. 10, at p. 19. 

Mm. And how do you prove that the Lines will meet ? 

Nos. (smiling) We don't. prove it: that is the reader's 
business : we only provide enunciations. 

Min. You are like the gourmand who would eat so many 
oysters at supper that at last his friend could not help 
saying c They are sure to disagree with you in the night/ 
'That is their affair/ the other gaily replied. C I shall be 
asleep ! ' 



102 



SYLLABUS. 



[ACT IU. 



Your Syllabus has the same hiatus as the other writers 
who have rejected Euclid's iath Axiom. If you will not 
have it as an axiom, you ought to prove 
it as a theorem. Your treatise is incom 
plete without it. 

The Theorems contained in the first 36 
Propositions of Euclid are thus rearranged 
in the Syllabus. The only advantage that 
I can see in the new arrangement is that 
it places first the three which relate to 
Lines, thus getting all those which relate 
to Triangles into a consecutive series. All 
the other changes seem to be for the worse, 
and specially the separation of Theorems 
from their converses, e.g. Props. 5, 6, and 



4,5 
26 a 

6 
16 

1834 
8 

25 

26 j3 



The third part of Prop. 29 is put after Prop. 32 : and 
Props. 33, 34 are transposed. I can see no reason for 
either change. 

Prop. 47 is put next before Prop. 13 in Book II. This 
would be a good arrangement (if it were ever proved to 
be worth while to abandon Euclid's order), as the Theorems 
are so similar; and the placing Prop. 48 next after II. 13 
is a necessary result. 

In Book II, Props. 9, 10 are placed after Props. 12, 13. 
I see no reason for it. 

It does not appear to me that the new arrangements, 
for the sake of which it is proposed to abandon the numer 
ation of Euclid, have anything worth mentioning to offer 
as an advantage. 



Sc. II. I.] RULE OF CONVERSION. 163 

I will now go through a few pages of c this many-headed 
monster, 5 and make some general remarks on its style. 

P. 4. <A Theorem is the formal statement of a proposi 
tion that may be demonstrated from known propositions. 
These known propositions may themselves be Theorems or 
Axioms. 3 

This is a truly delightful jumble. Clearly, a propo 
sition that may be demonstrated from known propositions ' 
is itself a Theorem. Hence a Theorem is c the formal 
statement ' of a Theorem. The question now arises of 
itself, or of some other Theorem ? That a Theorem 
should be e the formal statement ' of itself, has a com 
fortable domestic sound, something like e every man his 
own washerwoman/ but at the same, time it involves a 
fearful metaphysical subtlety. That one Theorem should 
be 'the formal statement' of another Theorem, is, I think, 
degrading to the former, unless the second will consent to 
act on the c claw me, claw thee ? principle, and to be the 
formal statement ' of the first. 

Nos. (wildly) Say no more ! My brain reels ! 

Mm. I spare you. Let us go on to p. 5, where I find 
the following : 

'Rule of Conversion. If of the hypotheses of a group 
of demonstrated Theorems it can be Said that one must 
be true, and of the conclusions that no two can be true 
at the same time, then the converse of every Theorem of 
the group will necessarily be true.' 
Let us take an instance : 

If 5 > 4, then 5 > 3. 
If 5 < 3, then 5< 3. 

M 3 



10 i SYLLABUS. [ACT III. 

Those will do for c demonstrated Theorems,' I suppose? 

XIM. I suppose so. 

Mm. And the e hypothesis ' of the first c must be true/ 
simply "because it is true* 

JVSytf. It would seem so. 

Min. And it is quite clear that e of the conclusions no 
two can be true at the same time/ for they contradict each 
other. 

yos. Clearly. 

Mtti. Then it ought to follow that the converse of 
every Theorem of the group will necessarily be true.' Take 
the converge of the second, i. e. 

If 5 < 3, then 5<2. 

Is this 'necessarily true 5 ? Is every thing- which is less 
than 3 necessarily less than 2 ? 

A'os. Certainly not. I think you have misinterpreted 
the phrase c it can be said that one must be true/ when 
used of the hypotheses. It does not mean c it can be said, 
from a knowledge of the subject-matter of some one 
hypothesis, that it is, and therefore must be, true/ but 
'it can be said, from a knowledge of the mutual logical 
relation of all the hypotheses, as a question of form alone, 
and without any knowledge of their subject-matter, that 
one must be true, though we do not know which it is/ 

Mm. Your power of uttering long sentences is one that 
ddes equal honour to your head and your lungs. And 
most sincerely do I pity the unfortunate learner who has 
to make out all that for himself ! Let us proceed. 

P. 9. Def. 13. 'The bisector of an angle is the straight 
Line that divides it into two equal angles/ 



Sc. II. I.] MISCELLANEOUS. 165 

This assumes that c an angle has one and only one 
bisector," which appears as As. 4, at the foot of p. 10. 

P, 10. Def. 21. e The opposite angles made by two straight 
Lines that intersect &c.' 

This seems to imply that c two Lines that intersect ' 
always do make c opposite angles.' 

Nos. Surely they do ? 

Hin. By no means. Look at p. 12, Def. 32, where, in 
speaking of a triangle, you say c the intersection of the 
other two sides is called the vertex.' 

Nos. A slip, I confess. 

Mm. One of many. 

P. 12, Def. 31. 'All other triangles are called acute- 
angled triangles.' What? If a triangle had two right 
angles, for instance? 

Nos. But there is no such triangle. 

Min. That is a point you do not prove till we come to 
Th. 1 8, Cor. 1^ two pages further on. The same remark 
applies to your Def. 33, in the same page. * The side . . . 
which is opposite to the right angle/ where you clearly 
assume that it cannot have more than one. 

P. 12, Def. 32. 'When two of the sides have been men 
tioned, the remaining side is often called the base/ Well, 
but how if two of the sides have not been mentioned ? 

Nos. In that case we do not use the word. 

Min. Do you not? Turn to p. 22, Th. 2, Cor. i, 'Tri 
angles on the same or equal bases and of equal altitude are 
equal.' 

Nos. We abandon the point. 

Min. You had better abandon the definition. 



SYLLABUS. [ACT III. 



P. 12, Def. 34. Is not 'identically equal" 7 tautology? 
Things that are c identical ' must surely be c equal * also. 
Again, * every part of one being equal,' &c. What do you 
mean by ' every part ' of a rectilineal figure ? 

Nos. Its sides and angles, of course. 

inn. Then \vhat do you mean by Ax (1} in p. 3. 'The 
whole is equal to the sum of its parts ' ? This time, I 
think I need not c pause for a reply 5 ! 

P. 15, Def. 38. c When a straight Line intersects two 
other straight Lines it makes with them eight angles etc/ 



-B 
-D 



Let us count the angles at G. They are, the c major } 
and c minor 5 angles which bear the name UGA; do. for 
EGB\ do. for AGH\ and do. for BGH. That is, eight 
angles at G alone. There are sixteen altogether. 

P. 17, Th. 30. : If a quadrilateral has two opposite sides 
equal and parallel, it is a parallelogram. 3 

This re-asserts part of its own data. 

P. 17, Th. 31. { Straight Lines that are equal and parallel 
have equal projections on any other straight Line ; con 
versely, parallel straight Lines that have equal projections 
on another straight Line are equal. 5 



Sc. II I.] SUMMING-UP. 167 

The first clause omits the case of Lines that are equal 
and in one and the same straight Line. The second clause 



is not true : if the parallel Lines are at right angles to 
the other Line, their projections are equal, both being 
zero, whether the Lines are equal or not. 

P. 18, Th. 32. If there are three parallel straight Lines, 
and the intercepts made by them on any straight Line that 
cuts them are equal, then etc. 5 

The subject of this proposition is inconceivable : there 
are three intercepts, and by no possibility can these three 
be equal. 

P. 2,5, Prob. 5. c To construct a rectilineal figure equal 
to a given rectilineal figure and having the number of its 
sides one less than that of the given figure.' 

May I ask you to furnish me with the solution of this 
problem, taking, as your * given rectilineal figure/ a 
triangle ? 

Nos. (indignantly) I decline to attempt it ! 

Min. I will now sum up the conclusions I have come to 
with respect to your Syllabus. 

In the subjects of Lines, Angles, and Parallels, the 
changes you propose are as follows : 

You give a very unsatisfactory definition of a 'Eight 
Line/ and then most illogically re-state it as an axiom. 

You extend the definition of Angle a most disastrous 
innovation. 



168 SYLLABUS. [ACT III. So. II. r. 

Your definition of Bight Angle 5 is a failure. 

You substitute Playfair's axiom for Euclid's isth. 

All these things are very poor compensation indeed 
for the vital changes you propose the separation of 
Problems and Theorems, and the abandonment of Euclid's 
order and numeration. Restore the Problems (which are 
also Theorems) to their proper places, keep to Euclid's 
numbering (interpolating your new Propositions where 
you please), and your Syllabus may yet prove to be a 
valuable addition to the literature of Elementary Geometry. 



ACT III. 

SCENE II. 



2. WILSON'S SYLLABUS '-MANUAL. 



' No followers allowed.' 

TIMES' ADVKKTISEaiENT-SHKET, paSSim. 

Nie. I lay before you 'Elementary Geometry, following the 
Syllabus prepared ly the Geometrical Association] by J. M. 
WILSON, M.A., 1878.' 

Min. In what respects is this book a f Rival ' of Euclid ? 

Nie. Well, it separates Problems from Theorems 

Mm. Already discussed (see p. 18). 

Nie. It adopts Playfair's Axiom 

Min. Discussed (see p. 42). 

Nie. It abandons diagonals in Book II 

Mm. Discussed (see p. 49). 

Nie. And it adopts a new sequence and numeration. 

Min, That, of course, prevents us from taking it as 
merely a new edition of Euclid. It will need very strong 
evidence indeed to justify its claim to set aside the 



170 WILSON'S ' SYLLABUS* -MANUAL. [ACT III. 

sequence and numeration of our old friend. We must 
now examine the book seriatim. When we come to 
matters that have been already condemned, either in 
Mr. Wilson's book, or in the c Syllabus,' I shall simply 
note the fact. We need have no new discussion, except 
as to new matter, 

Nie. Quite so. 

Mm. In the 'Introduction/ at p. 2, I read 'A Theorem 
is the for mil statement of a Proposition* &c. Discussed 
at p. 163. 

At p. 3 we have the ' Rule of Conversion,' which I have 
already endeavoured to understand (see p. 163), 

At p. 6 is a really remarkable assertion. 5 Every Theorem 
may le shewn to lie a means of indirectly measuring some 
way nit nile? Kindly illustrate this on Euc. I. 14. 

Nie. (hastily) Oh, if you pick out one single accidental 
escep 

Min. Well, then, take 16, if you like: or 17, or 18 

Nie. Enough, enough ! 

Min. (raising his voice) or 19, or 20, or 21, or 24, or 25, 
or 27; or 28, or 30 ! 

Nie. We abandon ( every. ' 

Min. Good. At p. 8 we have the definitions of c major 
conjugate* and 'minor conjugate' (discussed at p. 159). 

At p. 9 is our old friend the ' straight angle* (see p. 75). 

In the same page we have that wonderful triad of Lines, 
one of which is ' "regarded as lying between the other two' (see 
p. 159). 

And also the extraordinary result that follows when one 
straight Line 'stands upon another' (see p. 160). 



Sc. II. 2.] ITS O.VE GREAT MERIT. 171 

At p. 27, Theorem 14, is a new proof of Euc. I. 24, 
apparently an amended version of Mr. Wilson's five-case 
proof, which I discussed at p. 111. He has now reduced 
it to three cases, but I still think the ' lisedor of tlie angle ' 
a superfluity. 

At p. 37 we have those curious specimens of 'Theorems 
of Equality? which I discussed at p. 112. 

At p. 53 is the Theorem which asserts, in its conclusion, 
part of its own data (see p. 166). 

At p. 54 we are told that 'parallel lines, icMcJi have 
equal projections on another line, are equaV (see p. 167). 

At p. 55 we have the inconceivable triad of 'equal 
intercepts* made by a Line cutting three Parallels (see 
p. 167). 

At p. 161 I am surprised to see him fall into a trap 
in which I have often seen unwary students caught, while 
trying to say Euc. III. 30 ('To bisect a given arc'). 
After proving two chords equal, they at once conclude 
that certain arcs, cut off by them, are equal; forgetting 
to prove that the arcs in question are both, minor arcs. 

But I must go no further : I have already wandered 
beyond the limits of Euc. I, II. The one great merit of 
this book 

Nie. You have mentioned all $c& faults ^ then ? 

Min. By no means. You are too impatient. The one 
great merit, as I was saying, of Mr. Wilson's new book 
(and a most blessed change it is !) is that it ignores the 
whole theory of ' direction.' That he has finally abandoned 
that night-mare of Elementary Geometry, I dare not 
hope: so all I have said about it had better stand, lest 



172 U'lLSOtfS 'SYLLABUS' -MANUAL. [ACT III. 

in some future fit of inspiration he should bring out a 
jet more agonising version of it. 

But it lias the usual hiatus of a system which replaces 
Euclid's Axiom by Playfair's : it provides no means of 
proving that particular finite Lines will meet if produced. 
(This I have discussed at p. 161.) 

Its proposed changes in the sequence of Euclid I have 
discussed at p. 162. 

It has a few other faults, which I have already discussed 
in Mr. Wilson's own book, and a few peculiar to the 
Syllabus; but I spare you such minute criticisms. 

But what I have now to ask you is simply this. "What 
possible pretext have you left for suggesting that Euclid's 
Manual, and specially his sequence and numeration, should 
be abandoned in favour of this far from satisfactory infant? 

Nie. There are some new Theorems 

Min. Those constitute no reason : you migbt easily inter 
polate them. 

Nie. I fear there are no other grounds to urge. But 
I should like to consult the doppelg finger of the Asso 
ciation before I throw up my brief. 

Min. By all means. 

[For a minute or two there is heard a rustling and a 
whispering, as of ghosts. Then NIEMAND speaks again,] 

Nie. They think that, considering that this book is 
but just published, and that it is definitely put forward 
as the Manual to supersede Euclid, it ought to be ex 
amined more in detail, with reference to what is new in 



Sc. II. 2.] DISCUSSED IN DETAIL. 173 

it tli at is, new proofs of Euclid's propositions, and new 
propositions. 

Mm. (with a weary sigh) Yery well. It will perhaps 
be more satisfactory to do this ; if only to ascertain exactly 
how much this new Manual contains that is really new 
and really worthy of adoption. But I shall limit my 
examination to the subject-matter of Euc. I, II. 

Nie. That is all we ask. 

Mm. We begin, then, at p. 12. 

Theorem i. ' All rigJit angles are equal? This is proved 
by their being halves of a f straight angle/ a phrase which 
I have already criticised. There is a rather important 
omission in the proof, no distinction being drawn between 
the c straight angle* on one side of a Line, and the other 
(of course named by the same letters) which lies on the 
other side and completes the four right angles. This 
Theorem, if proved without straight angles, 3 might be 
worth adding to a new edition of Euclid. 

Th. z (p. 13) is Euc. I. 133 proved as in Euclid. 

Th. 3 (p. 14) is Euc. I. 14, where, unfortunately, a new 
proof is attempted, which involves a fallacy. It is deduced 
from an c Observation ' in p. 9, that ' a straight line makes 
with its continuation at any point an angle of two right 
angles/ which deduction can be effected only by the pro 
cess of converting a universal affirmative simjpliciter y in 
stead of * per accidens? 

Th. 4 (p. 14) is Euc. I. 15, proved as in Euclid. 

At p. 17 I find a 'Question. 3 'State the fact that "all 
geese have two legs " in the form of a theorem? This I would 
not mind attempting; but, when I read the additional 



i r 4 WILSON'S ' s YLLABUS '-MANUAL. [ACT III. 

request, to * write <hicn Us converse Uteoretn^ it is so power 
fully borne in upon me that the writer of the Question 
is probably himself a biped, that I feel I must,, however 
reluctantly, decline the task. 

Th. 5 (p. 1 8) is Euc. I. 4, proved as in Euclid. 

Th. 6 (p. 20) is Euc. I. 5, proved by supposing the 
vertical angle to be bisected, thus introducing a 'hypo 
thetical construction ; (see p. 19). 

Th. 7 ip. 21) is Euc. I. 26 (ist part), proved by super 
position. Euclid's proof, by making a new triangle, is 
quite as good, I think. The areas are here proved to be 
equal, a point omitted by Euclid : I think it a desirable 
addition to the theorem. 

Th. 8 (p. 22) is Euc. I. 6, proved by reversing the 
triangle and then placing it on if self (OT on the trace it 
has left behind), a most objectionable method (see p. 46). 

Theorems 9 to 13 (pp. 22 to 26) are Euc. I. 16,, 18, 19, 
20, 21, with Euclid's proofs. 

Th. 14 (p. 27) is Euc. I. 24, proved by supposing an 
angle to be bisected : another ' hypothetical construction. 5 

Th. 15 (p. 28) is Euc. I. 8, for which two proofs are 
oflered : one by Eue, I. 24 (which seems to be reversing 
the natural order) the other by an application of Euc. 
I. 5, a method involving three eases, of which only one 
is given. All this is to save the introduction of Euc. 
I. 7, a theorem which I think should by no means be 
omitted. (See p. 194.) Here, as in Th. 7, the equality 
of the areas is, I think, a desirable addition to Euclid's 
theorem. 

Th. 16 (p, 29) is Euc. I. 25, with old proof. 



So. II. 2.] DISCUSSED IN DETAIL. 175 

Th. 17 (p. 30) is Euc. I. 26 (2nd part) proved by super 
position instead of Euclid's method (which I prefer) of 
constructing a new triangle. 

Th. 1 8 (p. 32) is Euc. I. 17, with old proof. 

Th. 19 (p. 33) is new. e Of all the straight lines that 
can le drawn from a given point to Meet a given straight 
line, the perpendicular is the shortest; and of the others, 
those making equal angles with the perpendicular are equal ; 
and thai which makes a greater angle with the perpendicular 
is greater than that which makes a less." This I think 
deserves to be interpolated. 

Th. 20 (p. 34) is new. c If two triangles have two sides 
of the one equal to two sides of the other, each to each, and 
the angles opposite to two equal sides equal, the angles oppo 
site to the other two equal sides are either equal or supple 
mentary, and in the former case the triangles are equal in 
all respects.' I do not think it worth while to trouble 
a beginner with this rather obscure theorem, which is of 
no practical use till he enters on Trigonometry. 

Th. 21 (p. 43) is Euc. I. 27 : old proof. 

Th. 22 (p. 44) is Euc. I. 29 (ist part), proved by Eue. I. 
27 and Playfair's Axiom (see p. 42). 

Th. 23 (p. 45) is new. ' If a straight line intersects tivo 
other straight lines and makes either a pair of alternate 
angles equal, or a pair of corresponding angles equal, or a 
pair of interior angles on the same side supplementary ; 
then, in each case, the two flairs of alternate angles are 
equal, and the four pairs of corresponding angles are equal, 
and the two pairs of interior angles on the same side are 
supplementary? This most formidable enunciation melts 



176 IWLSOJN'S ' SYLLABUS'-MANUAL. [ACT III. 

down into the mildest proportions when superfluities are 
omitted, and only so much of it proved as is really neces 
sary to include the whole. Euclid proves all that is 
valuable in it in the course of I. 29, and I do not see 
any sufficient reason for stating and proving it as a sepa 
rate Theorem. 

Th. 23, Cor. (p. 46) is the rest of Euc. I. 29 : old proof. 

Th. 24 (p. 46) is Euc. I. 30, proved as a contranominal 
of Playfair's Axiom. 

Th. 25, 26, and Cor. (pp. 47, 48) are Euc. I. 32 and 
Corollaries : old proof. 

Th. 27, ist part (p. 50), is a needless repetition of part 
of the Corollary to Th. 33. 

Th. 27, 2nd part (p. 50), is part of Euc. I. 34: old proof. 

Th. 28 (p. 51) is the rest of Euc. I. 34, proved as in 
Euclid. 

Th. 29 (p. 52) is new. ' If two parallelograms have two 
adjacent titles of the one respectively equal to two adjacent 
sides of the other^ and likewise an angle of the one equal 
to an angle of the other ; the parallelograms are identically 
equal. 3 This might be a useful exercise to set ; but really 
it does not seem of sufficient importance to be selected 
for a Manual. 

Th. 30 (p. 53) is Euc. I. 33 : old proof. 

Th. 31 (p. 54) is new. 'Straight lines which are egual 
and parallel have equal projections on any other straight 
line; conversely, parallel straight lines which have equal 
on another straight line are equal; and equal 
lines, which have equal projections on another straight 
an tgmlfy inclined to that line! The first and third 



So. II. 2] DISCUSSED IN DETAIL. 177 

clauses might be interpolated, though I think their value 
doubtful. The second is false. (See p. 167.) 

Th. 33 (p. 55) is new. 'If there are three parallel 
straight lines, and the intercepts made by them on any straight 
line that cuts them are equal, then the intercepts on any other 
straight line that cuts them are equal? This is awkwardly 
worded (in fact, as it stands, its subject, as I pointed out 
in p. 167, is inconceivable), and does not seem at all worth 
stating as a Theorem. 

At p. 57 I see an ' Exercise' (No. 5). c Skew that the 
angles of an equiangular triangle are equal to two-thirds 
of a right angle? In this attempt I feel sure I should 
fail. In early life I was taught to believe them equal 
to two right angles an antiquated prejudice., no doubt; 
but it is difficult to eradicate these childish instincts. 

Problem I (p. 61) is Euc. I. 9 : old proof. It provides no 
means of finding a radius ' greater than half ABJ which 
would seem to require the previous bisection of AS. Thus 
the proof involves the fallacy ^Petitio Principii? 

Pr. 2 (p. 63) is Euc. I. ii, proved nearly as in Euclid. 

Pr. 3 (p. 62) is Euc. I. J3, proved nearly as in Euclid. 
It omits to say how a c sufficient radius ' can be secured, 
a point not neglected by Euclid. 

Pr. 4 (p. 63) is Euc. I. 10, proved nearly as in Euclid. 
This also, like Pr. I, involves the fallacy 'Petitio Principii? 

Pr. 5 (p. 64) is Euc. I. 32, proved nearly as in Euclid, 
but claims to use compasses to transfer distances, a Postu 
late which Euclid has (properly, I think) treated as a Pro 
blem. (Seep. 186.) 

Pr. 6, 7 (pp. 65, 66) are Euc. I. 33 31 : old proofs. 



178 WILSON'S l SYLLABUS* -MANUAL. [ACT III. 

Problems 8 to 1 1 (pp. 66 to 69) are new. Their object 
is to construct triangles with various data : viz. A^ JB, and 
c ; A f jB, and a; a, b, and (7; a, 4, and ^f. They are 
good exercises, I think, but hardly worth interpolating as 
Theorems. The first of them is remarkable as one of the 
instances where Mr. Wilson assumes Euc. Ax. 12, without 
giving, or even suggesting, any proof. If he intends to 
assume it as an Axiom, he makes Playfair's Axiom super 
fluous. No Manual ought to assume bath of them. 

Theorem i (p. 82) is Euc. I. 35, proved as in Euclid, but 
incompletely, as it only treats of one out of three possible 
cases. 

Th. 2 (p. 83) is new. * The area of a triangle is half the 
area (fa rectangle whose base and altitude are equal to those 
of the triangle? This is merely a particular case of Euc. I. 
41, and may fairly be reserved till we enter on Trigono 
metry, where it first begins to have any practical value. 

Th. 2, Cor. i (p. 84) is Euc. I. 37, 38 : old proofs. 

Th. 2, Cor. 2 (p. 84) is new. * Equal triangles on the 
mme or equal bases have equal altitudes. 3 No proof is 
offered. It is an easy deduction, of questionable value. 

TIi. 2, Cor. 3 (p. 84) is Euc. I. 39, 40. No proof given. 

Th. 3 (p. 84) is new. ' The area of a trapezium [by 
which Mr. Wilson means ' a quadrilateral that has only one 
jpair of opposite sides parallel '] is equal to the area of a 
r&cta&gU whose base is half the sum of the two parallel sides, 
mnd wk&se altitude is the perpendicular distance between them! 
I !tar?0 no hesitation in pronouncing this to be a mere 
* proposition, of no practical value whatever. 
4 (p. 86} is BBC, I, 43 : old proof. 



Sc. II. 2.] DISCUSSED IN DETAIL. 170 

Th. 5 (p. 87) is Euc, II. i : old proof. 

Th. 6, 7, 8 (p. 88, &c.) are Euc. II, 4, 7, 5. The 
sequence of Euc. II, 5, and its Corollary,, is here inverted. 
Also the diagonals are omitted, and nearly every detail 

is left unproved, thus attaining a charming brevity of 

appearance. 

Th. 9 (p. 91) is Euc. I 47 : old proof. 

Th. 10, ji (pp. 94, 95) are Euc. 12, 13 ; old proof. 

Th. 13 (p. 95) is new. The sum of the squares on two 
sides of a triangle is double the sum of the squares on half 
the base and on the line joining the vertex to the middle point 
of the base' This, Mr. Wilson tells us, is ( Apollonius' 
Theorem 5 : but, even with tnat mighty name to recom 
mend it, I cannot help thinking it rather more curious 
than useful. 

Th. 13 (p. 96) is Euc. II. 9, 10. Proved algebraically, 
and thus degraded from the position of a (fairly useful) 
geometrical Theorem to a mere addition-sum, of no more 
value than millions of others like it. 

In the next proposition we suddenly transfer our alle 
giance, for no obvious reason, from Arabic to Latin 
numerals. 

Problem I (p. 99) is Euc. I. 42 : old proof. 

Pr. ii. (p. 100) i& Euc. I. 44: proved nearly as in 
Euclid, but labours under the same defect as Pr. 8 (p. 66) 
in that it assumes, without proof, Euc. Ax. 13. 

Pr. in (p. 100) is Euc. I. 45 : old proof. 

Pr. iv (p. 101) is Euc. II. 14 : old proof. 

Pr. v (p. 103) is new. c To construct a rectilineal fyure 
equal to a given rectilineal figure and having the number 



ido misotfs < SYLLABUS* -MANUAL. [ACT III. 

ofifa side* one less than that of the given figure ; and thence 
fa construct a triangle equal to a given rectilineal figure? 
This I have already noticed (see p. 167). It really is not 
worth interpolating as a new Proposition. And its con 
cluding clause is, if I may venture on so harsh an expres 
sion, childish : it reminds me of nothing so much as the 
Irish patent process for making cheap shoes by taking 
boots and cutting off the tops ! 

Pr. vj (p. 103) is ' To divide a straight llne> either inter- 
or extt'rttuUy^ info tiro segment* such I hat the rectangle 
ly (he given line and one of the segments may le 
equal to the square on the other segment? The case of 
infernal section is Eue. II. n, with the old proof. The 
other case is new, and worth interpolating. 

I have now discussed, with as much care and patience 
as the lateness of the hour will permit, so much of this 
new Manual as corresponds to Euc. I, II 3 and I hope 
your friends are satisfied. 

[A gentle cooing > as of satisfied ghosts^ is heard in the airl\ 

I will now give you in a few words the net result of 
it all, and will show you how miserably small is the basis 
on which Mr. Wilson and his coadjutors of the < Asso 
ciation' rest their claim to supersede the Manual of 
Eoclid. 



tmgry moaning, as of ghosts suffering from neuralgia, 
f&nnd l&e mm, till it dm away in the chimney, ,] 



Re. II. 2.] SUMMARY OF RESULTS. 181 

By breaking up certain of the Propositions of Eue. I, II, 
and including some of the Corollaries, we get 73 Proposi 
tions in all 57 Theorems and 16 Problems. Of these 73, 
this Manual omits 14 (10 Theorems and 4 Problems); 
it proves 43 (32 Theorems and n Problems) by methods 
almost identical with Euclid's ; for 10 of them (9 Theorems 
and a Problem) it offers new proofs, against which I have 
recorded my protest, one being illogical, 2 (needlessly) 
employing ( superposition,' 2, deserting Geometry for 
Algebra, and the remaining 4 omitting the diagonals in 
Euc. II ; and finally it offers 6 new proofs, which I 
think may fairly be introduced as alternatives for those 
of Euclid. 

In all this, and in all the matters previously discussed, 
I fail to see one atom of reason for abandoning Euclid. 
Have you any yet-unconsidered objections to urge against 
my proposal ' that the sequence and numeration of Euclid 
be kept unaltered ' ? 

[Dead silence is the only reply."] 

Carried, nemine contragemente I And now, Prisoner at 
the Bar (I beg your pardon. I should say 'Professor on 
the Sofa s ), have you, and your attendant phantoms, any 
other reasons to urge for regarding this Manual as in 
any sense a substitute for Euclid's as in any sense any 
thing else than a revised edition of Euclid? 

Nie. We have nothing more to say. 

Min. Then I can but repeat with regard to this new 
born s follower ' of the Syllabus, what I said of the 



182 WJLSOtf'S 'SYLLABUS' -MANUAL. [AcTlILSc.IIL2. 

Syllabus itself. Hestore the Problems (which are also 
Theorems) to their proper places ; keep to Euclid's num 
bering (interpolating 1 your new Propositions where you 
please) ; and your new book may yet prove a valuable 
addition to the literature of Elementary Geometry. 

[^ tremulous movement h seen amid the ghostly throng * 
They waver fitfully to and fro \ and finally drift off in the 
direction of one corner of the ceiling. When the procession 
has f/of well initler wetyli, NIEMA.ND himself Incomes hazy, 
and Jloat* off to join them,. The whole procession gradually 
meltx away Into vacancy ^ DIAMOND going last, milling at 
Hit: h&'tfi if NERO, for icklc/i a }wlr of gorgeous Roman 
sandals seem to afford but scanty protection?^ 



ACT IV. 

*01d friends are best.* 

\Seene as before. Time, the early dawn. MINOS slum 
bering uneasily ', having fallen forwards wjocm the table, hh 
forehead resting on the inhtand. To him enter EUCLID on 
tip-toe, followed by the phmtamis of ARCHIMEDES, PYTHA 
GORAS, ARISTOTLE, PLATO, <?., who have come to see fair 
play.] 

i. Treatment of Pairs of Lines. 

JSuc. Are all gone ? 

Min. ' Be cheerful, sir : 

Our revels now are ended : these our actors, 
As I foretold you, were all spirits, and 
Are melted into air, into thin air ! ' 
Euc. Good. Let us to business. And first, have you 
found any method of treating Parallels to supersede mine ? 
Min. No ! A thousand times, no ! The infinitesimal 
method, so gracefully employed by M Legendre, is un- 
suited to beginners ; the method by transversals has not 
yet been offered in a logical form: the c equidistan^ s 
method is too cumbrous : and as for the method of ' direc- 



184 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT IV. 

tion/ It is simply a rope of sand it breaks to pieces 
wherever you touch it ! 

Euc. We may take it as a settled thing, then, that you 
have found no sufficient cause for abandoning either my 
sequence of propositions or their numbering, and that all 
that now remains to be considered is whether any im 
portant modifications of my Manual are desirable ? 

Min. Most certainly. 

Euc. Have you met with any striking novelty on the 
subject of a practical test for the meeting of Lines ? 

21 in. There is one rival to your isth Axiom which is 
formidable on account of the number of its advocates 
the one usually called 'Playfair's Axiom.' 

Euc. We have discussed that matter already (p. 42). 

Min. But what have you to say to those who reject 
Playfair's axiom as well as yours? 

Euc. I simply ask them what practical test, as to the 
meeting of two given finite Lines, they propose to employ. 
Not only will they find it necessary to prove,, in certain 
theorems, that two given finite Lines will meet if pro 
duced, but they will even find themselves sometimes 
obliged to prove it of two Lines, of which the only geo 
metrical fact known is that they possess the very property 
which forms the subject of my axiom. I ask them, in 
short, this question: 'Given two Lines making, with 
a certain transversal, two interior angles together less 
than two right angles, how do you propose to prove,, 
without my axiom, that they will meet if produced ? ' 

Min. The advocates of the c direction * theory would of 
Bourse reply, c We can prove, from the given property. 



T.] PAIRS OF LINES. 185 

that they have different directions : and then we bring 1 
in the axiom that Lines having 1 different directions will 
meet if produced.' 

Hue. All that you have satisfactorily disposed of in your 
review of Mr. Wilson's Manual. 

Min. The only other substitute, that I know of, belongs 
to the ' equidistant ' theory, which, replaces your axiom by 
three or four new axioms and six new theorems. That 
substitute, also, I have seen reason to reject. 

My general conclusion is that your method of treat 
ment of all these subjects is the best that has yet been 
suggested. 

Euc. Any noticeable innovations in the treatment of 
Right Lines and Angles? 

Min. Those subjects I should be glad to talk over with 
you. 

Euc. "With all my heart. And now Low do you pro 
pose to conduct this our final interview ? 

Min. I should wish, in the first place, to lay before you 
the general charges which have been brought against you : 
then to discuss your treatment of Lines and Angles, as 
contrasted with that of your e Rivals * ; and lastly the 
omissions, alterations, and additions proposed by them. 

TJUC. Good. Let us begin. 

Min. I will take the general charges under three head 
ings : Construction, Demonstration, and Style. And first 
as to Construction : 



180 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT IV. 



2. Euclid's Constructions. 

I atn told that you indulge too much in 'arbitrary 
restrictions.' Mr. Reynolds says (Pref. p. vi.) ' The arbi 
trary restrictions of Euclid involve him in various incon 
sistencies, and exclude his constructions from use. When, 
for instance, in order to mark off a length upon a straight 
line, he requires us to describe five circles,, an equilateral 
triangle, one straight line of limited; and two of unlimited 
length^ he condemns his system to a divorce from practice 
at once and from sound reason.' 

~Eu(\ Mr. Eeynolds has misunderstood me : I do not 
require all that construction in Prop. 3. To explain my 
meaning I must go back to Prop. 3, and I must ask your 
patience while I make a few general remarks on construc 
tion. The machinery I allow consists of a pencil, a ruler, 
and a pair of compasses to be used for drawing a circle 
about a given centre &nd passing through a given point (that 
is what I mean by at any distance '), but not to be used 
for transferring distances from one part of a diagram to 
another until it has been shown that suck transference can be 
effected by the machinery already allowed. 

Min. But why not allow such transference without 
proving that possibility ? 

Mm. Because it would be introducing as a postulate what 
is really a problem. And I go on the general principle of 
teever putting a problem among my postulates, nor a 
theorem among my axioms. 



2.] CONSTRUCTIONS. 187 

Min. I heartily agree in your general principle, though 
I need scarcely remind you that it has heen frequently 
charged against you, as & faulty that you state as an axiom 
what is really a theorem. 

Hue. That charge has been met (see p. 42). To return 
to my subject. I merely prove, once for all, in Prop. 1, 
that a line can be drawn, from a given point, and equal to 
a given line, by the original machinery alone, and without 
transferring distances. After that, my reader is welcome 
to transfer a distance by any method that comes handy, 
such as a bit of string &c. : and of course he may now 
transfer his compasses to a new centre. And this is all 
I expect him to do in Prop. 3. 

Mm. Then you don't expect these five circles &e. to be 
drawn whenever we have to cut off, from one Line,, a part 
equal to another ? 

Euc. Pas si Mte^ mon ami. 

Min. Some of your Modern Rivals are, however, a little 
discontented with the very scanty machinery you allow. 

Ewe. e A bad workman always quarrels with his tools/ 

Min. Their charge against^ you is 'the exclusion of 
hypothetical constructions.' Mr. Wilson says (Pref. p. i.) 
{ The exclusion of hypothetical constructions may be men 
tioned as a self-imposed restriction which has made the 
confused order of his first book necessary, without any 
compensating advantage.' 

Euc. In reply, I cannot do better than refer you to 
Mr. Todhunter's Essay on Elementary Geometry (p. 186). 
c Confused order is rather a contradictory expression, 5 &e. 
(see p. 216). 



18S MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT IV. 

Mia,. Your reply is satisfactory. Mr. "Wilson himself is 
an instance of the danger of such a method. Three times 
at least (pp. 46, 70, 88) he produces Lines to meet without 
attempting to prove that they will meet. 

I 3. Euclid's Demonstrations. 

Mln. The next heading* is 'Demonstration.' You are 
charged with an c invariably syllogistic form of reasoning.' 
(Wilson, Pref. p. i.) 

Eire. Do you know, I am vain enough to think that 
a merit rather than a defect? Let me quote what Mr. 
Cuthbertson says on this point (Pref. p. vii.). 6 Euclid's 
mode of demonstration, in which the conclusion of each 
step is preceded by reasoning expressed with all the exact 
ness of the minor premiss of a syllogism, of which some 
previous proposition is the major premiss, has been adopted 
as offering a good logical training, and also as being 
peculiarly adapted for teaching large classes, rendering 
it possible for the teacher to call first upon one, then 
upon another, and so on, to take up any link in the 
chain of argument. 5 Perhaps even Mr. Wilson's own 
book would not be the worse if the reasoning were a 
trifle more e syllogistic ' ! 

Min. A fair retort. You are also charged with 'too 
great length of demonstration.' Mr. Wilson says (Pref. 
p, i.) ( The real objections to Euclid as a text-book are ... 
the length of his demonstrations.' And Mr. Cooley says 
{Pref. p. i.) 'The important and fertile theorems, which 
the heights in this field of knowledge, are here 



3-] DEMONSTRATIONS. 189 

all retained, and those only are omitted which seem to 
be but the steps of a needlessly protracted ascent. The 
short road thus opened will be found perfectly solid in 
construction, and at the same time far less tedious and 
fatiguing than the circuitous one hitherto in vogue/ 

Hue. I think Mr. Wilson's Th. 17 (p. 27), with its five 
figures (all necessary, though he only draws one), and still 
more his marvellous problem, c approached by four stages/ 
which fills pages 69 to 73, are pretty good instances of 
lengthy demonstration. And Mr. Cooley's c short and 
solid road ' contains, if I remember right, a rather break 
neck crevasse I 

Mm. The nest charge against you is c too great Irevlty 
of demonstration.' Mr. Leslie (a writer whom I have not 
thought it necessary to review as a c Modern Rival,' as his 
book is nearly seventy years old) says (Pref. p. vi.) e ln adapt 
ing it ' (the Elements of Euclid) c to the actual state of the 
science, I have . . . sought to enlarge the basis . . . The 
numerous additions which, are incorporated in the text, 
so far from retarding will rather facilitate progress, by 
rendering more continuous the chain of demonstration. 
To multiply the steps of ascent, is in general the most 
expeditious mode of gaining a summit.' 

Sue. I think you had better refer him to Mr. Wilson 
and Mr. Cooley : they will answer &im, and he in his turn 
will confute them \ 

Min* The last charge relating to demonstration is, in 
Mr. Wilson's words (Pref. p. viii.) ' the constant reference 
to general axioms and general propositions, which are no 
clearer in the general statement than they are in the 



190 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT IV. 

particular instance,' which practice, he says, makes the 
study of Geometry * unnecessarily stiff, obscure, tedious 
and barren.' 

Euc. One advantage of making a general statement, and 
afterwards referring to it instead of repeating it, is that 
you have to go through the mental process of affirming or 
proving the truth once for all : apparently Mr. Wilson 
would have you begin tie noi'o and think out the truth 
every time you need it ! But the great reason for always 
referring back to your universal, instead of affirming the 
particular (Mr. Wilson is merely starting the old logical 
hare * Is the syllogism a pditio principii ? '), is that the 
truth of the particular does not rest on any data peculiar 
to itself, but on general principles applicable to all similar 
cases ; and that, unless those general principles prove the 
conclusion for all cases, they cannot be warranted to prove 
it for any one selected case. If, for instance, I see a 
hundred men, and am told that some assertion is true 
of ninety-nine of them, but am not told that it is true 
of all y I am not justified in affirming it of any selected 
man ; for he might chance to be the excepted one. Now 
the assertion, that the truth of the particular case under 
notice depends on general principles, and not on peculiar 
circumstances, is neither more nor less than the assertion 
of the universal affirmative which Mr. Wilson deprecates. 

I 4. Euclid's Style. 

Jft, Quite satisfactory. I will now take the third 
heading, namely * Style.* 



5-] LINES AND ANGLES. 101 

You are charged with Artificiality, Unsuggestiveness, 
and Want of Simplicity. Mr. Wilson says (Pref. p. i.) 
' The real objections to Euclid as a text-hook are his 
artificiality . . . and his unsuggestiveness,' and again, * he 
has sacrificed, to a great extent, simplicity and naturalness 
in his demonstrations, without any corresponding gain in 
grasp or cogency.' 

Euc. Well, really I cannot deal with general charges 
like these. I prefer to abide by the verdict of my readers 
during ^these two thousand years. As to unsuggestive- 
ness/ that is a charge which cannot, I admit, he retorted 
on Mr. Wilson : his book is very suggestive of remarks 
which, perhaps, would not be ickolly ' music to his ear ' 1 



I 5. Euclid's treatment of Lines and Angles. 

Min. Let us now take the subjects of Eight Lines 
and Angles ; and first, the { Right Line. 5 

I see, by reference to the original, that you define it 
as a line c which lies evenly as to points on it.' That 
of course is only an attempt to give the mind a grasp of 
the idea. It leads to no geometrical results, I think ? 

Euc. No : nor does any definition of it, that I hav& yet 



seen. 



Min. I have no rival definitions to propose. Mr. Wil 
son's c which has the same direction at all parts of its 
length' has perished in the collapse of the ' direction 5 
theory : and M. Legendre's * the shortest course from one 
point to another ' is not adapted for the use of a beginner. 



192 MINOS AND EUCLID. [ACT IV. 

And I (lo not know that any change has been suggested 
In your test of a right Line in Prop. 14. 
The next subject is f Angles.' 

Your definition would perhaps be improved, if for c in 
clination to' we were to read e declination from,' for, the 
greater the angle the greater the /fcelination, and the less 
(as it seems to me) the z/zclination, 
Eye. I agree with you. 

Nin. The next point is that you limit the size of an 
angle to something less than the sum of two right angles. 

fin?. What advantage is claimed for the extension of the 
definition ? 

Mln. It is a prospective rather than an immediate one. 
It must be granted you that the larger angles are not 
needed in the first four Books 
~Enc. In the first BIX Books. 

Mm. Nay, surely you need them in the Sixth Book? 
Eue. Where? 

Min. In Prop. 33, where you treat of * any equimultiples 
whatever ' of an angle, of an are, and of a sector. You 
cannot possibly assume the multiple angle to be always 
less than two right angles. 

Hue. You think, then, that a multiple of an angle must 
itself be an angle ? 
Min. Surely. 

Euc. Then a multiple of a man must itself be a man. 
If I contemplate a man as multiplied by the number ten 
thousand, I must realise the idea of a man ten thousand 
times the size of the first ? 

Jfti, No, you need not do that* 



5-] LINES AND ANGLES. 193 

Sue. Thanks : it is rather a strain on the imaginative 
faculty. 

Mm. You mean, then, that the multiple of an angle 
may be conceived of as so many separate angles, not in 
contact, nor added together into one ? 

Sue. Certainly. 

Min. But you have to contemplate the case where two 
such angular magnitudes are equal, and to infer from that, 
by III. 2 6, that the subtending arcs are equal. How can 
you infer this when your angular magnitude is not one 
angle but many ? 

Hue. Why, the sum total of the first set of angles is 
equal to the sum total of the second set. Hence the 
second set can clearly be broken up and put together 
again in such amounts as to make a set equal, each to 
each, to the first set : and then the sum total of the arcs, 
and likewise of the sectors, will evidently "be equal also. 

But if you contemplate the multiples of the angles as 
single angular magnitudes, I do not see how you prove 
the equality of the subtending arcs : for my proof applies 
only to cases where the angle is less than the sum of two 
right angles. 

Min. That is very true, and you have quite convinced 
me that we ought to observe that limit, and not con 
template c angles of rotation * till we enter on the subject 
of Trigonometry. 

As to right angles, it has been suggested that your axiom 
'all right angles are equal to one another' is capable of 
proof as a theorem. 

Hue. I do not object to the interpolation of such a 

o 



194: MINOS AND EUCLID. [ ACT IV. 

theorem, though there is very little to distinguish so 
simple a theorem from an axiom. 

Min. Let us now consider the omissions, alterations, and 
additions, which have been proposed by your Modem 
Rivals. 

6, Omissions, alterations, and additions, 
suggested by Modern Rivals. 

Euc. Which of my Theorems have my Modern Rivals 
proposed to omit ? 

Min. Without dwelling on such extreme cases as that of 
Mr. Pierce, who omits no less than 19 of the 35 Theorems 
in your First Book, I may say that the only two, as to 
which I have found anything like unanimity, are I. 7 and 
II. 8. 

Euc. As to I. 7, I have several reasons to urge in favour 
of retaining it. 

First, it is useful in proving I. 8, which, without it, is 
necessarily much lengthened, as it then has to include three 
"cases: so that its omission effects little or no saving of 
space. 

Secondly, the modern method of proving I. 8 inde 
pendently leaves I. 7 still unproved. 

Min. That reason has no weight unless you can prove 
I. 7 to be valuable for itself. 

J3w. True, but I think I can prove it ; for, thirdly, it 
stows that, of all plane figures that can be made by 
Hngdng rods together, the ^r<s<?-sided ones (and these 
mly) are rigid (which is another way of stating the fact 



6.] OMISSIONS SUGGESTED. 195 

that there cannot be two such figures on the same base). 
This is analogous to the fact, in relation to solids con 
tained by plane surfaces hinged together, that any such 
solid is rigid, there being no maximum number of sides. 

And fourthly, there is a close analogy between I. 7, 8 
and III. 33, 34. These analogies give to Geometry much 
of its beauty, and I think that they ought not to be lost 
sight of. 

Hin. You have made out a good case. Allow me to 
contribute a 'fifthly.' It is one of the very few proposi 
tions that have a direct bearing on practical science. I 
have often found pupils much interested in learning that 
the principle of the rigidity of triangles is of constant use 
in architecture, and even in so homely a matter as the 
making of a gate. 

The other Theorem which I mentioned, II. 8, is now 
so constantly ignored in examinations that it is- very 
often omitted, as a matter of course, by students. It is 
believed to be extremely difficult and entirely useless. 

Euc. Its difficulty has, I think, been exaggerated. Have 
you tried to teach it ? 

Min. I have occasionally found pupils amiable enough to 
listen to what they felt sure would be of no service in 
examinations. My experience has been wholly among 
undergraduates, any one of whom, if of average ability, 
would, I think, master it in from five to ten minutes. 

Uuc. No very exorbitant demand on your pupil's time. 
As to its being e entirely useless/ I grant you it is of no 
immediate service, but you will find it eminently useful 
when you come to treat the Parabola geometrically. 

03 



196 M11VOS AND EUCLID. [ACT 3T. 

Min. That is true. 

Euc. Let us now consider the new methods of proof sug 
gested by my Rivals. 

Mm. Prop. 5 has been much attacked I may say tram 
pled on by your Modern Rivals. 

Euc. Good. So that is why you call it 'The Asses' 
Bridge ' ? Well, how many new methods do they suggest 
for crossing it ? 

Mln. One is 'hypothetical construction,' M. Legendre 
bisecting the base, and Mr. Pierce the vertical angle, but 
without any proof that the thing can be done. 

Euc. So long as we agree that beginners in Geometry 
shall be limited to the use of Lines and Circles, so long 
will it be unsafe to assume a point as found, or a Line as 
drawn, merely because we are sure it exists. For example, 
it is axiomatic, of course, that every angle has a bisector : 
but it is equally obvious that it has two trisectors : and if 
I may assume the one as drawn, why not the others also ? 
However we have discussed this matter already (p. 19). 

Mm. A second method is 'superposition/ adopted by 
Mr. Wilson and Mr. Cuthbertson a method which here 
involves the reversing of the triangle, before applying it to 
its former position. 

Euc. That also we have discussed (p. 46). What is the 
method adopted in the new Manual founded on the 
Syllabus of the Association ? 

Mm. The same as Mr. Pierce's. Mr. Reynolds has a 
eorious method: he treats the sides as obliques 'equally 
Demote from the perpendicular/ 
c* Curiom, indeed. 



6.] ALTERATIONS SUGGESTED. 197 

Min. But perhaps the most curious of all is Mr. Willock's 
method : he treats the sides as radii of a circle, and the base 
as a chord. 

Euc. He had better have made them asymptotes of a 
hyperbola at once ! (Jest magmfique^ mau ce n'estgas la 
Geometric. 

Min. Two of your Rivals prove Prop, 8 from Prop. 34. 

Euc. * Putting the cart before the horse,' in my humble 
opinion. 

Min. For a brief proof of Prop. 13, let me commend to 
your notice Mr. Reynolds 3 consisting of the seven words 
* For they fill exactly the same space.' 

Euc. "Why so lengthy? The word 'exactly' is super 
fluous. 

Min. Instead of your chain of Theorems, 18, 19, so, 
several writers suggest so, 19, 18, making so axiomatic. 

Euc. That has been discussed already (p. 55). 

Min. Mr. Cuthbertson's proof of Prop. 34 is, if I may 
venture to say so, more complete than yours. He con 
structs his figure without considering the relative lengths 
of the sides, and then proves the 3 possible cases separately. 

Euc. I think it an improvement. 

Min. There are no other noticeable innovations, that have 
not been already discussed, except that Mr. Cuthbertson 
proves a good deal of Book II by a quasi-algebraical 
method, without exhibiting to the eye the actual squares 
and rectangle : while Mr. Reynolds does it by pure 
algebra. 

Euc. I think the actual squares, &c. most useful for be- 
ginnerSj making the theorems more easy to understand and 



198 MINOS AND EUCLID. [AcT IV. 

to remember. Algebraical proofs of course introduce the 
difficulty of incommensurables.' 

Min. We will now take the new propositions, &c. which 
have been suggested. 

Here is an Axiom : c Two lines cannot have a common 
segment? 

Hue. Good. I have tacitly assumed it, but it may as 
well be stated. 

Min. Several new Theorems have been suggested, but only 
two of them seem to me worth mentioning. They are : 

4 AU r'tyhf aut/tes an 1 equal. 9 

Ettc. I have already approved of that (p. 193). 

3f//i. The other is one that is popular with most of your 
Rivals : 

* Of all the Lines which can be drawn to a Line from a 
point without it> the jjerpe ndicular is least; and, of the rest, 
that which is nearer to the jjeqieudieular is less than one more 
remote; and the lesser is nearer than the greater; and from the 
mme point only two equal Lines can le drawn to the other 
Line, one on each side of the perpendicular? 

Euc. I like it on the whole, though so long an enunci 
ation will be alarming to beginners. But it is strictly 
analogous to III. 7. Introduce it by all means in the 
revised edition of my Manual. It will be well, however, 
to lay it down as a general rule, that no proposition shall 
be so interpolated, unless it be of such importance and 
value as to be thought worthy of being quoted as proved, 
in tb same way in which candidates in examinations are 
BOW allowed to quote propositions of mine. 

Mm. (mM afw/ttlyam,) Well ! I have no more to say. 



7-] EUCLILfS LAST WORDS. 199 



j. The summing-up. 

Euc. "The cock doth craw, the day doth daw/ and all 
respectable ghosts ought to be going- home. Let me carry 
with me the hope that I have convinced you of the import 
ance, if not the necessity, of retaining my order and num 
bering, and my method of treating straight Lines, angles, 
right angles, and (most especially) Parallels. Leave me 
these untouched, and I shall look on with great content 
ment while other changes are made while my proofs are 
abridged and improved while alternative proofs are ap 
pended to mine and while new problems and theorems are 
interpolated. 

In all these matters my Manual is capable of almost 
unlimited improvement. 

[To the sound of slow music, EUCLID and the other ghosts 
f heavily vanish* according to Shakespeare's approved stage- 
direction. MINOS wakes with a start, and betakes himself 
to bed) ' a sadder and a wiser man. *] 



APPENDICES, 



APPENDIX I 

Extract from Mr. Todliunter's essay on c Ele 
mentary Geometry? included in ' The 
Conflict of Studies, &c! 

IT has been said by a distinguished philosopher that England 
is " usually the last to enter into the general movement of the 
European mind." The author of the remark probably meant to 
. assert that a man or a system may have become famous on the 
continent, while we are almost ignorant of the name of the man 
and the claims of his system. Perhaps, however, a wider range 
might be given to the assertion. An exploded theory or a 
disadvantageous practice, like a rebel or a patriot in distress, 
seeks refuge on our shores to spend its last days in comfort if 
not in splendour. Just when those who originally set up an 
idol begin to suspect that they have been too extravagant in 
their devotions we receive the discredited image and commence 
our adorations. It is a less usual but more dangerous illus 
tration of the principle, if just as foreigners are learning to 
admire one of our peculiarities we should grow weary of it. 

In teaching elementary geometry in England we have for 
a long time been accustomed to use the well-known Elements of 
Euclid. At the present moment, when we learn from the best 
testimony, namely, the admission of anti-Euclideans, that both 
in France and Italy dissatisfaction is felt with the system 



202 APPENDIX L 



hitherto used, accompanied with more or less desire to adopt 
ours, we are urged by many persons to exchange our system 
for one which is falling out of favour on the continent. 

Many assertions have been made in discussion, which rest 
entirely on the authority of the individual advocate, and thus it 
is necessary to be somewhat critical in our estimate of the value 
of the testimony. Two witnesses who are put prominently 
forward are MM. Demogeot and Montucci, who drew up a 
report OB English education for the French Government. Now 
I have no doubt that these gentlemen were suited in some 
respects to report on English education, as they were selected 
for that purpose ; but I have searched in vain for any evidence 
of their special mathematical qualifications. No list of mathe 
matical publications that I have consulted has ever presented 
either of these names, and I am totally at a loss to conceive on 
what grounds an extravagant respect has been claimed for their 
opinions. The following sentence has been quoted with appro 
bation from these writers : "Le trait distinctif de Fenseignement 
des mathe"matiques en Augleterre c'est qu'on y fait appel plutot 
a la me"rnoire qu'a Intelligence de T6l&ve." In the first place 
we ought to know on what evidence this wide generalisation is 
constructed. Did the writers visit some of the humbler schools 
in England in which the elements of arithmetic and mensuration 
were rudely taught, and draw from this narrow experience an 
inference as to the range of mathematical instruction throughout 
England \ Or did they find on inspecting some of our larger 
public schools that the mathematical condition was unsatisfactory? 
In the latter case this might have arisen from exclusive devotion 
to classics, or from preference for some of the fashionable novelties 
of the day, or from want of attention and patience in the teachers. 
OB the most unfavourable supposition the condemnation pro 
nounced on the general mathematical training in England cannot 
1e Justified. But take some kind of experimental test. Let 
an inquirer carefully collect the mathematical examination papers 



TODHUNTER. 203 



issued throughout England in a single year, including those 
proposed at the Universities and the Colleges, and those set at 
the Military Examinations, the Civil Service Examinations, 
and the so-called Local Examinations. I say then, without 
fear of contradiction, that the original problems and examples 
contained in these papers will for interest, variety, and ingenuity 
surpass any similar set that could be found in any country of 
the world. Then any person practically conversant with teaching 
and examining can judge whether the teaching is likely to be 
the worst where the examining is the most excellent. 

The sentence quoted from MM, Demogeot and Montucci, 
in order to have any value, ought to have proceeded from 
writers more nearly on a level with the distinguished mathe 
matical teachers in England. So far as any foundation can 
be assigned for this statement, it will probably apply not to 
mathematics especially but to all our studies, and amount to 
this, that our incessant examinations lead to an over culti 
vation of the memory. Then as to the practical bearing of 
the remark on our present subject it is obvious that the charge, 
if true, is quite independent of the text-book used for instruction, 
and might remain equally valid if Euclid were exchanged for 
any modern author. 

The French gentlemen further on contrast what they call 
Euclid's verbiage with the elegant conciseness of the French 
methods. It is surely more than an answer to these writers 
to oppose the high opinion of the merits of Euclid expressed 
by mathematicians of European fame like Duhamel and Houel. 
See the First Report of the Association for the Improvement of 
Geometrical Teaching, p. 10. 

When we compare the lustre of the mathematical reputation 
of these latter names with the obscurity of the two former, it 
seems that there is a great want of accuracy in the statement 
made in a recent circular : ' The opinion of French mathe 
maticians on this question, is plainly expressed in the Report of 
MM. Demogeot and Montucci. . . / 



204 APPENDIX 7. 



I should have to quote very largely indeed if I wished to 
draw attention to every hazardous statement which has been 
advanced ; I must therefore severely restrain myself. Consider 
the following : ' Unquestionably the best teachers depart largely 
from his words, and even from his methods. That is, they use 
the work of Euclid, but they would teach better without it. 
And this is especially true of the application to problems. 
Everybody recollects, even if he have not the daily experience, 
how unavailable for problems a boy's knowledge of Euclid 
generally is. 1 The value of such a statement depends entirely 
on the range of the experience from which it has been derived. 
Suppose for instance that the writer had been for many 
years an examiner in a large University in which against each 
candidate's name the school was recorded from which he came ; 
suppose that the writer had also been much engaged in the 
numerous examinations connected with the military institutions; 
suppose that he had also been for a quarter of a century in 
residence at one of the largest colleges at Cambridge, and 
actively employed in the tuition ; suppose also that it had been 
his duty to classify the new students for lecture purposes by 
examining them in Euclid and other parts of elementary 
mathematics ; and finally suppose that he was in constant com 
munication with the teachers in many of the large schools: 
then his opinion would have enjoyed an authority which in the 
absence of these circumstances cannot be claimed for it. 

If I may venture to refer to my own experience, which I 
fear commenced when the writer whom I have just quoted 
was in his cradle, I may say that I have taught geometry 
both Euclidean and non-Euclidean, that my own early studies 
and prepossessions were towards the latter, but that my tes 
timony would now be entirely in favour of the former. 

I admit that to teach Euclid requires patience both from the 
lute- and the pupil ; but I can affirm that I have known many 
who bave succeeded admirably, and have sent a large 



TODHUNTER. 205 



number of pupils to the University well skilled in solving 
deductions and examples; nor have I ever known a really 
able and zealous teacher to fail. I am happy to supplement 
my own testimony by an extract from the very interesting 
lecture on Geometrical Teaching by Dr. Lees, of St. Andrews. 
* Whatever may be the cause of failure in England, it is clear 
as any demonstration can be that the failure cannot be ascribed to 
Euclid. Because in Scotland we do employ Euclid as the text 
book for our students, and in Scotland we have the teaching of 
Geometry attended with the most complete success; and this 
not only in the colleges, but in all the higher and more important 
schools and academies of the country, and in many of the parish 
schools even, where the attention of the teacher is necessarily so 
much divided/ See also the remarkable Narrative-Essay on a 
Liberal Education, by the Eev, S. Hawtrey, A.1L ? Assistant- 
Master, Eton. 

During the existence of the East India Company's military 
college at Addiscombe, it is well known that the cadets were 
instructed in mathematics by the aid of a course drawn up by 
the late Professor Cape. The geometry in this course was of 
the kind which our modern reformers recommend, being founded 
on Legendre, and adopting the principle of hypothetical con 
structions which is now so emphatically praised. In certain 
large schools where youths were trained for the military colleges 
it was usual to instruct a class of candidates for "Woolwich, in 
Euclid, and a class of candidates for Addiscombe in Cape's 
adaptation of Legendre. Fairness in the procedure was secured 
by giving the same number of hours by the same masters to 
each class ; and the honour and rewards which attended success 
supplied an effectual stimulus both to teachers and pupils. Now 
consider the result. I was assured by a teacher who was for 
many years distinguished for the number and the success of his 
pupils, that the training acquired by the Euclid class was far 
superior to that acquired by the Legendre class. The Euclid 



206 APPENDIX I. 



was not more difficult to teach and was more potent and more 
beneficial in its influence. The testimony made the stronger 
impression on me because at the time I was disposed from 
theoretical considerations to hold an opposite opinion ; I was 
inclined for example to support the use of hypothetical con 
structions. Such experience as I afterwards gained shewed the 
soundness of the judgment at which the practical teacher had 
arrived ; and I have also received the emphatic evidence of 
others who had good opportunities of considering the question, 
and had come to the same conclusion. I have myself examined 
at Woolwich and at Addiscombe, and am confident that the 
teaching in Loth institutions was sound and zealous ; but I have 
no hesitation in Baying that the foundation obtained from Euclid 
was sounder than that from Legendre. 

- Although I have admitted that the study of Euclid is one 
that really demands patient attention from the beginner, yet 
I cannot admit that the tax is unreasonable. My own. experi 
ence has been gained in the following manner. Some years 
since on being appointed principal mathematical lecturer in my 
college, more systematic arrangements were introduced for the 
lectures of the freshmen than had been previously adopted ; and 
as the Euclid seemed to be one of the less popular subjects I 
undertook it myself. Thus for a long period the way in which 
this has been taught in schools, and the results of such teaching, 
have been brought under my notice. It need scarcely be said 
that while many of the students who have thus presented them 
selves to me have been distinguished for mathematical taste and 
power, yet the majority have been of other kinds ; namely, either 
persons of ability whose attention was fully occupied with studies 
different from mathematics, or persons of scanty attainments 
and feeble power who could do little more than pass the ordinary 
lamination. I can distinctly affirm that the cases of hopeless 
&ikre ia Euclid were very few ; and the advantages derived 
fe til* stely, even by men of feeble ability, were most decided. 



TODHUNTER, 207 



In comparing the performance in Euclid with that in Arithmetic 
and Algebra there could be no doubt that the Euclid had made 
the deepest and most beneficial impression : in fact it might be 
asserted that this constituted by far the most valuable part of 
the whole training to which such persons were subjected. Even 
the modes of expression in Euclid, which have been theoretically 
condemned as long and wearisome, seemed to be in practice well 
adapted to the position of beginners. As I have already stated 
there appears to me a decided improvement gradually taking 
place in the knowledge of the subject exhibited by youths on 
entering the University. My deliberate judgment is that our 
ordinary students would suffer very considerably if instead of 
the well-reasoned system of Euclid any of the more popular 
but less rigid manuals were allowed to be taken as a substitute. 

Let me now make a few remarks on. the demand which has 
been made to allow other books instead of Euclid in examina 
tions. It has been said : " We demand that we should not be, 
as we are now, by the fact of Euclid being set as a text-book 
for so many examinations, practically obliged to adhere to one 
book. Surely such a request, made by men who know what they 
want, and are competent to form an opinion on the subject, 
and made in earnest,-: should induce the Universities and other 
examining bodies to yield their consent. The grounds of the 
demand then are three ; that it is made in earnest, that it is 
made by those who know what they want, and that it is made 
by those who are competent to form an opinion on the subject. 
I need not delay on two of the grounds ; the experience of every 
day shews that claimants may know what they want, and be 
terribly in earnest in their solicitations, and yet it may be the 
duty of those to whom the appeal is made to resist it. Moreover 
it is obvious that the adoption of Euclid as a text book is pre 
scribed by those who are equally in earnest and know what they 
recommend. In short if no institution is to be defended when 
it is attacked knowingly and earnestly, it is plain that no institu 
tion is safe. 



208 APPENDIX L 



I turn then to the other ground, namely that the demand is 
made "by men who are competent to form an opinion on the 
subject. Now it is not for me to affect to speak in the name of 
the University of Cambridge; mine is the opinion of only a 
private unofficial resident. But I have little doubt that many 
persons here will maintain, without questioning the competence 
of the claimants to form an opinion, that we ourselves are still 
much more competent to form an opinion. 

For it will not be denied that in all which relates to mathe 
matical knowledge we have an aggregate of eminence which far 
surpasses what has yet been collected together to press the 
demand on the University. Moreover as inspectors and judges 
we occupy a central position as it were, and thus enjoy oppor 
tunities which do not fall to isolated teachers however eminent 
and experienced. The incessant demands made upon the Uni 
versity to furnish examiners for schools and for the local exami 
nations keep us as a body practically familiar with the standard 
of excellence attained in various places of instruction. Then as 
college lecturers and private tutors we have the strongest motives 
for keenly discriminating the state of mathematical knowledge 
in different schools, as shewn by the performance of the candi 
dates when brought under our notice. Moreover some of the 
residents in the University by continued intercourse with old 
pupils, now themselves occupying important positions as teachers, 
are enabled to prolong and enlarge the experience which they 
may have already obtained directly or indirectly. If it is obvious 
that certain teachers by ability and devotion have for many years 
sent up well-trained pupils, the University may well consider 
that it would be neither right nor wise to deprive its best 
friends of their justly earned distinction, by relaxing in any way 
the rigour of the examinations. Instead then of urging an 
instant acquiescence with demands on the ground that those who 
make them are well qualified to judge, the claimants should 
adbftTour by argument to convince others who are still better 
qualified to judge. 



TODHUNTER. 209 



Here let me invite attention to the following remark which 
has been made in support of the claim : " In every other subject 
this is freely accorded ; we are not obliged to use certain 
grammars or dictionaries, or one fixed treatise on arithmetic, 
algebra, trigonometry, chemistry, or any other branch of science. 
Why are we to be tied to one book in geometry alone 1 " Now 
in the first place it may be said that there are great advantages 
in the general use of one common book; and that when one 
book has long been used almost exclusively it would be rash to 
throw away certain good in order to grasp at phantasmal benefits. 
So well is this principle established that we have seen in recent 
times a vigorous, and it would seem successful effort, to secure 
the use of a common Latin Grammar in the eminent public 
schools. In the second place the analogy which is adduced in the 
remark quoted above would be rejected by many persons as involv 
ing an obvious fallacy, namely that the word geometry denotes 
the same thing by all who use it. By the admirers of Euclid 
it means a system of demonstrated propositions valued more 
for the process of reasoning involved than for the results obtained. 
Whereas with some of the modern reformers the rigour of the 
method is of small account compared with the facts themselves. 
We have only to consult the modern books named in a certain 
list, beginning with the Essentials of Geometry, to see that 
practically the object of some of our reformers is not to teach 
the same subject with the aid of a different text-book, but to 
teach something very different from what is found in Euclid, 
under the common name of geometry. 

It may be said that I am assuming the point in question, 
namely, that Euclid is the best book in geometry; but this is 
not the case. I am not an advocate for finality in this matter; 
though I do go so far as to say that a book should be decidedly 
better than Euclid before we give up the advantages of uni 
formity Which it will be almost impossible to secure if the 
present system is abandoned. But, as it has been well observed 
by one of the most distinguished mathematicians in Cambridge, 

p 



210 APPENDIX L 



" The demand is unreasonable to throw aside Euclid in favour of 
any compendium however meagre and however unsound; and 
this is really the demand which is made : it will he time enough 
to consider about the discontinuance of Euclid when a better 
book is deliberately offered/' It may be added that the supe 
riority to Euclid must he established by indisputable evidence ; 
not by the author's own estimation, the natural but partial 
testimony of parental fondness ; not by the hasty prediction of 
some anonymous and irresponsible reviewer ; not by the authority 
of eminent men, unless the eminence is founded on mathematical 
attainments ; not even by the verdict of teachers who are not 
conspicuous for the success of their pupils. The decision must 
rest with students, teachers, and examiners, of considerable repu 
tation in the range of the mathematical sciences. 

It must be allowed that there is diversity of opinion among 
the opponents of Euclid, for while the majority seem to claim 
freedom in the use of any text-books they please, others rather 
advocate the construction and general adoption of a new text 
book. The former class on the whole seem to want something 
easier and more popular than Euclid; among the latter class 
there are a few whose notion seems to be that the text-book 
should be more rigorous and more extensive than Euclid. There 
are various considerations which seem to me to indicate that if 
a change be made it will not be in the direction of greater rigour \ 
the origin of the movement, the character of the text-books 
which have hitherto been issued, and the pressure of more 
modern and more attractive studies, combine to warn us that if 
the traditional authority which belongs to Euclid be abandoned, 
geometry will be compelled to occupy a position in general 
education much inferior to that which it now holds. 

There is one very obvious mode of advancing the cause of the 
ftnti-Ewlidean party, which I believe will do far more for them 
tlmn ife@ 3i confident assertions and predictions of the merits 
#f t&fcgpjse wiwh ikey advocate ; let them train youths on their 



TOD HUNTER. 211 



system to gain the highest places in the Cambridge Mathematical 
Tripos, and then other teachers will readily follow in the path 
thus opened to distinction. But it may naturally be said that as 
long as Euclid is prescribed for the text-book, the conditions of 
competition are unfair towards those who adopt some modern 
substitute ; I will examine this point. In the Cambridge 
Examination for Mathematical Honours there are at present 
sixteen papers ; a quarter of the first paper is devoted to book- 
work questions on Euclid. Now suppose that 1000 marks are 
assigned to the whole examination, and that about five of these 
fall to the book-work in Euclid. A student of any modern 
system would surely be able to secure some of these five marks, 
even from a stern Euclidean partisan. But to take the worst 
case, suppose the candidate deliberately rejects all chance of 
these five marks s and turns to the other matter on the paper, 
especially to the problems ; here the advantage will be irresist 
ibly on his side owing to the " superiority of the modern to the 
ancient methods of geometry " which is confidently asserted. It 
must be remembered that in spite of all warning and commands 
to the contrary, examiners will persist in making their papers 
longer than can be treated fully in the assigned time, so that the 
sacrifice of the book-work will be in itself trifling and will be 
abundantly compensated by the greater facility at the solution 
of problems which is claimed for the modern teaching, as com 
pared with the " unsuggestiveness " of Euclid, and by the greater 
accuracy of reasoning, since we are told that " the logical train 
ing to be got from Euclid is very imperfect and in some respects 
bad." Thus on the whole the disciple of the modern school will 
even in the first paper of the Cambridge Tripos Examination be 
more favourably situated than the student of Euclid; and of 
course in the other papers the advantages in his favour become 
largely increased. For we must remember that we are expressly 
told that Euclid is " an unsuitable preparation for the higher 
mathematical training of the present day ; " and that " ; those who 
continue their mathematical reading with a view of obtaining 

p 2 



212 APPENDIX L 



honours at the University . . . will gain much through economy 
of time and the advantage of modern lights/ 7 

The final result is this; according to the promises of the 
geometrical reformers, one of their pupils might sacrifice five 
marks out of a thousand, while for all the remaining 995 his 
chance would be superior to that of a Euclid -trained student. It 
may be added that in future the Cambridge Mathematical 
Examinations are to be rather longer than they have been up 
to the date of my writing ; BO that the advantage of the anti- 
Euclidean school will be increased. Moreover we must remember 
that in the Smith's Prizes Examination the elementary geometry 
of Euclid scarcely appears, so that the modern reformers would 
not have here any obstacle to the triumphant vindication of 
their superiority as teachers of the higher mathematics. The 
marvellous thing is that in these days of competition for educa- 
cational prizes those who believe themselves to possess such a 
vast superiority of methods do not keep the secret to them 
selves, instead of offering it to all, and pressing it on the reluc 
tant and incredulous. Surely instead of mere assertion of the 
benefits to be secured by the modern treatment, it will be far 
more dignified and far more conclusive to demonstrate, the pro 
position by brilliant success in the Cambridge Mathematical 
Tripos. Suppose we were to read in the ordinary channels of 
information some such notice as this next January : " The first 
six wranglers are considered to owe much of their success to the 
fact that in their training the fossil geometry of Alexandria was 
thrown aside and recent specimens substituted } " then opposition 
would be vanquished, and teachers would wonder, praise, and 
imitate. But until the promises of success are followed by a 
performance as yet never witnessed we are reminded of the case 
of a bald hairdresser who presses on his customers his infallible 
for producing redundant locks. 



To tho$e who object to Euclid as an inadequate course of 
it may then be replied briefly that it is easy, 



TQDHUNTER. 213 



if thought convenient or necessary, to supply any additional 
matter. But for my part I think there are grave objections 
to any large increase in the extent of the course of synthetical 
geometry "which is to he prepared for examination purposes. 
One great drawback to our present system of mathematical 
instruction and examination is the monotony which prevails in 
many parts. When a mathematical subject has been studied so 
far as to master the essential principles, little more is gained by 
pursuing these principles into almost endless applications. On 
this account we may be disposed to regard with slender satisfac 
tion the expenditure of much time on geometrical conic sections ; 
the student seems to gain only new facts, but no fresh ideas or 
principles, Thus after a moderate course of synthetical geo 
metry such as Euclid supplies, it may be most advantageous. for 
the student to pass on to other subjects like analytical geometry 
and trigonometry which present him with ideas of another kind, 
and not mere repetitions of those with which he is already 
familiar. 

It has been said, and apparently with great justice, that exami 
nation in elementry geometry under a system of unrestricted 
text-books will be a very troublesome process ; for it is obvious 
that in different systems the demonstration of a particular pro 
position may be more or less laborious, and so may be entitled 
to more or fewer marks. This perplexity is certainly felt by 
examiners as regards geometrical conic sections ; and by teachers 
also who may be uncertain as to the particular system which the 
examiners may prefer or favour. It has been asserted that the 
objection thus raised is imaginary, and that " the manuals of 
geometry will not differ from one another nearly so widely as 
the manuals of algebra or chemistry : yet it is not difficult to 
examine in algebra and chemistry/' But I am unable to feel 
the confidence thus expressed. It seems to me that much more 
variety may be expected in treatises on geometry than oa 
algebra ; certainly if we may judge from the experience of tke 



214 APPENDIX /. 



examiners at Cambridge the subject of geometrical conies is the 
most embarrassing which occurs at present, and this fact suggests 
a conclusion very different from that which is laid down in the 
preceding quotation. Of course there will be no trouble in 
examining a single school, because the system there adopted will 
be known and followed by the examiner. 

I have no wish to exaggerate the difficulty ; but I consider it 
to be real and serious, more especially as it presents itself at the 
outset of a youth's career, and so may cause disappointment just 
when discriminating encouragement is most valuable. But I 
think the matter must be left almost entirely to the discretion 
of examiners ; the attempts which have been made to settle it 
by regulation do not seem to me very happy. For example, I 
read : " As the existing text-books are not very numerous, it 
would not be too much to require examiners to be acquainted 
with them sufficiently for the purpose of testing the accuracy of 
written, or even, if necessary, of oral answers." The language 
seems to me truly extraordinary. Surely examiners are in 
general men of more mathematical attainments than this implies ; 
for it would appear that all we can expect them to do is to turn 
to some text-book and see if the student has correctly repro 
duced it. The process in a viva wee examination would be 
rather ignominious if when an answer had been returned by a 
candidate some indifferent manual had to be consulted to see if 
the answer was correct. 

I have heard that an examining board has recently issued 
instructions to its executive officers to make themselves ac 
quainted with the various text-books. This does not enjoin 
distinctly, what the above quotation implies, that the examiner 
is to accept all demonstrations which are in print as of nearly 
equal value; but it seems rather to suggest such a course. 
The point is important and should be settled. Suppose a 
candidate offered something taken from the Essentials of Geo- 
met'nt, and the examiner was convinced that the treatment was 
iaade<mate or unsound ; then is the candidate nevertheless to 



TOD HUNTER, 215 



obtain full marks ? Again, it may be asked, why printed books 
akme are to be accepted; and why a student who has gone 
through a manuscript course of geometry should be precluded 
from following it ? The regulation might be made that he should 
submit a 0py of his manuscript course to the examiner in 
order that it might be ascertained whether he had reproduced 
it accurately. As I have already intimated, the only plan 
which can be adopted is to choose able and impartial men for 
examiners, and trust them to appreciate the merits of the papers 
submitted by the candidate to them. 

The examiners will find many perplexing cases I have no 
doubt ; one great source of trouble seems to me to consist in 
the fact that what may be a sound demonstration to one person 
with adequate preliminary study is not a demonstration to 
another person who has not gone through the discipline. To 
tske a very simple example : let the proposition be, The angles 
a\ the base of an isosceles triangle are equal. Suppose a candi 
date dismisses this briefly with the words, this is evident from 
symmetry ; the question will be, what amount of credit is to be 
Assigned to him. It is quite possible that a well-trained mathe- 
maticion may hold himself convinced of the truth of the pro 
position by the consideration of symmetry, but it does not 
follow that the statement would really be a demonstration for 
an early student. Or suppose that an another imbued with 
"the doctrine of the imaginary and inconceivable" says as 
briefly " the proposition is true, for the inequality of the angles 
is inconceivable and* therefore false ; " then is the examiner to 
award full marks, even if he himself belongs to the school of 
metaphysics which denies that the inconceivable is necessarily 
the false 1 

It has been urged as an objection against Euclid that the 
number of his propositions is too great. Thus it has been said 
that the 173 propositions of the six books might be reduced to 
1 20, and taught in very little more than half the time required 



216 APPENDIX I. 



to go through the same matter in Euclid. So far as the half 
time is concerned this seems to be only an expression of belief 
as to the result of an untried experiment ; it is based on the 
comparison of a few other books with Euclid, one of these being 
the Course of the late Professor Cape ; as I have already staied, 
actual experience suggests a conclusion directly contrary to 
the present prediction. As to the number of propositions we 
readily admit that a reduction might be made, for it is obvious 
that we may in many cases either combine or separate according 
to our taste. But the difficulty of a subject does not vary 
directly as the number of propositions in which it is contained ; 
a single proposition will in some cases require more time and 
attention than half a dozen others. I have no doubt that vhe 
mixture of easy propositions with the more difficult is a great 
encouragement to beginners in Euclid ; and instead of diminish 
ing the number of propositions I should prefer to see some 
increase : for example I should like to have Euclid i. 2 6 divided 
into two parts, and Euclid i. 28 into two parts. 

Again, it has been said that Euclid is artificial, and that he 
" has sacrificed to a great extent simplicity and naturalness in 
his demonstrations ;" it is a curious instance of the difference of 
opinion which we may find on the same subject, for, with a much 
wider experience than the writer whom I quote, I believe that 
Euclid maintains, and does not sacrifice, simplicity and natural 
ness in his system, assuming that we wish to have strictness 
above all things. 

The exclusion of hypothetical constructions has been repre 
sented as a great defect in Euclid ; and it has been said that this 
has made the confused order of his first book necessary. Con 
fused order is rather a contradictory expression ; but it may be 
presumed that the charge is intended to be one of confusion : I 
venture to deny the confusion. I admit that Euclid wished to 
faake the subject depend on as few axioms and postulates as 
possible; and this I regard as one of his great merits; it has 
!>een shown by one of the most distinguished mathematicians of 



TODHUNTSR. 217 



our time how the history- of science teaches in the clearest 
language that the struggle against self-imposed restrictions 
has been of the most signal service in the advancement of 
knowledge. 

The use of hypothetical constructions will not present itself 
often enough to produce any very great saving in the demon 
strations; while the difficulty which they produce to many 
beginners, as shown by the experience to which I have already 
referred, is a fatal objection to them. Why should a beginner 
not assume that he can draw a circle through four given points 
if he finds it convenient ? 

Finally, I hold that Euclid, in his solution of the problems he 
requires, supplies matter which is simple and attractive to 
beginners, and which therefore adds practically nothing to then- 
labours, while it has the advantage of rendering his treatise far 
more rigorous and convincing to them. 

The objections against Euclid's order seem to me to spring 
mainly from an intrusion of natural history into the region of 
mathematics ; I am not the first to print this remark, though it 
occurred to me independently. It is to the influence of the 
classificatory sciences that we probably owe this notion that it is 
desirable or essential in our geometrical course to have all the 
properties of triangles thrown together, then all the properties 
of rectangles, then perhaps all the properties of circles ; and so 
on. Let me quote authority in favour of Euclid, far more 
impressive than any which on this point has been brought 
against him : " Euclid . . . fortunately for us, never dreamed of 
a geometry of triangles as distinguished from a geometry of circles, 
. . . but made one help out the other as he best could." 

Euclid has been blamed for his adherence to the syllogistic 
method ; but it is not necessary to say much on this point, 
because the reformers are not agreed concerning it : those who 
are against the syllogism may pair off with those who are for 
the syllogism. "We are told in this connexion that, " the result 



218 APPENDIX L 



is, as every one knows, that boys may have worked at Euclid for 
years, and may yet know next to nothing of Geometry." We 
may readily admit that such may be the case with boys excep 
tionally stupid or indolent ; but if any teacher records this as 
the average result of his experience, it must I think be singularly 
to his own discredit. 

There is, I see, a notion that the syllogistic form, since it 
makes the demonstrations a little longer, makes them more 
difficult ; this I cannot admit. The number of words employed 
is not a test of the difficulty of a demonstration. An examiner, 
especially if he is examining viva voce, can readily find out where 
the difficulties of the demonstrations really lie ; my own expe 
rience leads me to the conclusion that the syllogistic form, instead 
of being an impediment is really a great assistance, especially to 
early students. 

" Unsuggestiveness " has been urged as a fault in Euclid; 
which is interpreted to mean that it does not produce ability to 
solve problems. "We are told : " Everybody recollects, even if he 
have not the daily experience, how unavailable for problems a 
boy's knowledge of Euclid generally is. Yet this is the true 
test of geometrical knowledge ; and problems and original work 
ought to occupy a much larger share of a boy's time than they 
do at present." I need not repeat what I have already said, 
that English mathematicians, hitherto trained in Euclid, are 
unrivalled for their ingenuity and fertility in the construction 
and solution of problems. But I will remark that in the im 
portant mathematical examinations which are conducted at 
Cambridge the rapid and correct solution of problems is of 
paramount value, so that any teacher who can develop that 
-power in his pupils will need no other evidence of the merits 
of his system. 

Euclid's treatment of proportion has been especially marked 
out for condemnation ; indeed, with the boldness which attaches 
to many assertions on the subject of elementary geometry, it 
has been pronounced already dead. In my own college it has 



TODHUNTER. 219 



never been laid aside ; only a few months since one of our most 
influential tutors stated that he was accustomed to give a pro 
position out of the fifth hook of Euclid to some candidates for 
emoluments, and he considered it a very satisfactory constituent 
of the whole process of testing them. 

I should exceedingly regret the omission of the fifth book of 
Euclid, which I hold to be one of the most important parts of 
the training supplied by Elementary Geometry. I do not con 
sider it necessary fo'r beginners to go through the entire book ; 
but the leading propositions might be mastered, and the student 
led to see how they can be developed if necessary. I may refer 
here to some valuable remarks which have been x made on the 
subject by the writer of a Syllabus of Elementary Geometry . . . 
who himself I believe counts with the reformers. He sums up 
thus "... any easy and unsatisfactory short cuts (and I have 
sometimes seen an inclination for such) should be scouted, as 
a simple deception of inexperienced students/' 

However, I must remark that I see with great satisfaction 
the following Resolution which was adopted at a recent meeting 
of the Association for the Improvement of Geometrical Teaching : 
" That no treatise on Geometry can be regarded as complete 
without a rigorous treatment of ratio and proportion either by 
Euclid's method, or by some equally rigorous method of limits." 
It would be injudicious to lay much stress on resolutions carried 
by a majority of votes ; but at least we have a striking contra 
diction to the confident statement that Euclid's theory of propor 
tion is dead. We shall very likely see here, what has been 
noticed before, that a course may be proposed which differs 
widely from Euclid's, and then, under the guidance of superior 
knowledge and experience, the wanderers are brought back to the 
old path. Legendre's return to Euclid's treatment of parallels 
is a conspicuous example ; see the valuable paper by Professor 
Kelland on Superposition in the Edinburgh Transactions, 
Vol. xxi. 

I cannot avoid noticing one objection which has been urged 



220 APPENDIX 7. 



against Euclid in relation to his doctrine of proportion ; namely, 
that it leaves " the half-defined impression that all profound 
reasoning is something far fetched and artificial, and differing 
altogether from good clear common sense." It appears to me 
that if a person imagines that " good clear common sense " will 
be sufficient for mastering pnre and mixed mathematics, to say 
nothing of contributing to their progress, the sooner lie is un 
deceived the better. Mathematical science consists of a rich 
collection of investigations accumulated by the incessant labour 
of many years, by which results are obtained far beyond the 
range of unassisted common sense ; of these processes Euclid's 
theory of proportion is a good type, and it may well be said that 
from the degree of reverent attention which the student devotes 
to it, we may in most cases form a safe estimate of his future 
progress in these important subjects. 

In conclusion I will say that no person can be a warmer 
advocate than I am for the improvement of Geometrical Teaching : 
but I think that this may be obtained without the hazardous 
experiment of rejecting methods, the efficacy of which a long 
experience has abundantly demonstrated. 



APPENDIX II. 

Extract from Mr. De Morgans review of Mr. 
Wilson's Geometry, in the 'Atken&um 3 

for July 1 8, 1868. 

* 

The Schools' Inquiry Commission has raised the question 
whether Euclid be, as many suppose, the best elementary 
treatise on geometry, or whether it be a mockery, delusion, 
snare, hindrance, pitfall, shoal, shallow, and snake in the 



"We pass on to a slight examination of Mr. Wilson's book. 
We specially intend to separate the logician from the geometer. 
In the author's " own interest, and that he may be as powerful 1 
a defender as can be of a cause we expect and desire to see 
fully argued, we recommend him to revise his notions of logic. 
We know that mathematicians care no more for logic than 
logicians for mathematics. The two eyes of exact science are 
mathematics and logic : the mathematical sect puts out the 
logical eye, the logical sect puts out the mathematical eye; 
each believing that it sees better with one eye than with two. 
The consequences are ludicrous. On the one side we have, 
by confusion of words, the great logician Hamilton bringing 
forward two quantities which are { one and the same quantity,' 
Breadth and Depth, while, within a few sentences, ' the greater 
the Breadth, the less the Depth/ On the other side, we have 
the great mathematician, Mr. Wilson, also by confusion of 



222 APPENDIX II. 



words, speaking of the * invariably syllogistic form of his 
[Euclid's] reasoning,' and, to show that this is not a mere 
slip, he afterwards talks of the ' detailed syllogistic form ' as 
a c source of obscurity to beginners, and damaging to trne 
geometrical freedom and power. 7 

Euclid a book of syllogistic form ! We stared. We never 
heard of such a book, except the edition of Herlinus and 
Dasypodius (1566), who, quite ignorant that Euclid was 
syllogistic already, made him so, and reckoned up the syllogisms. 
Thus i. 47 has ' syllogism! novem' at the head. They did 
not get much thanks ; the book was never reprinted, and was 
in oblivion-dust when Hamilton mentioned the zealous but 
thick-headed logicians, as he called them. Prof. Mansel^in 
our own day, has reprinted one of their propositions as a 
curiosity. In 1831, Mr. De Morgan, advocating the reduction 
of a few propositions to detailed syllogistic form as an exercise 
for students^ gave i. 47 as a specimen, in the Library of Useful 
Knowledge ; this was reprinted, we believe, in the preface to 
various editions of Lardner's Euclid. A look will show the . 
difference between Euclid and syllogistic form. Had the 
Elements been syllogistic, it would have been quoted in all 
time, as a proof of the rapid diffusion of Aristotle's writings, 
that they had saturated his junior contemporary with their 
methods : with a controversy, most likely, raised by those who 
would have contended that Euclid invented syllogistic form for 
himself. Now it is well known that diffusion of Aristotle's 
writings commenced after his death, and that it was not quite 
correctly the common belief that evulgation did not take place 
until two hundred years after his death. Could this belief 
ever have existed if Euclid had invariably used 'syllogistic 
form'? 

What could have been meant ? Craving pardon if wrong, 
we suspect Mr. Wilson to mean that Euclid did not deal in 
arguments with suppressed premises. Euclid was quite right : 
the first reasonings presented to a beginner should be of full 



DE MORGAN. 223 



statement. He may be trained to suppression : but the true 
way to abbreviation is from the full length. Mr. Wilson does 
not use the phrases of reasoning consistently. He tells the 
student that a corollary is f a geometrical truth easily deducible 
from a theorem ' : and then, to the theorem that only one 
perpendicular can be drawn to a straight line, he gives as a 
corollary that the external angle of a triangle is greater than 
the internal opposite. This is not a corollary from the theorem, 
but a matter taken for granted in proving it. 

Leaving this, with a recommendation to the author to 
strengthen his armour by the study of logic, we pass on to 
the system. There is in it one great point, which brings down 
all the rest if it fall, and may perhaps but we must see 
Part II. before we decide support the rest if it stand. That 
point is the treatment of the angle, which amounts to this, 
that certain notions about direction, taken as self-evident, are 
permitted to make all about angles, parallels and all, immediate 
consequences. The notion of continuous change, and consequences 
derived from it, enters without even an express assumption: 
* continually ' is enough. 

Mr. "Wilson would not have ventured expressly to postulate 
that when a magnitude changes continuously, all magnitudes 
which change with it also change continuously. He knows 
that when a point moves on a line, an angle may undergo a 
sudden change of two right angles. He trusts to the beginner's 
perception of truth in the case before him: the whole truth 
would make that beginner feel that he is on a foundation of 
general principles made- safe for him by selection, and only 
safe because the exceptions are not likely to occur to his mind. 
On this we write, as Newton wrote on another matter, Falsa / 
Falsa f Non est Geometric* ! 

What ' direction ' is we are not told, except that ' straight 
lines which meet have different directions.' Is a direction a 
magnitude 1 Is one direction greater than another 1 We should 
suppose so; for an angle, a magnitude, a thing which is to 



224 APPENDIX //. 



be halved and quartered, is the c difference of the direction ' 
of ' two straight lines that meet one another.' A better defini 
tion follows ; the * quantity of turning J by which we pass from 
one direction to another. But hardly any use is made of this, 
and none at the commencement. And why two definitions'? 
Is the difference of two directions the same thing as the rotation 
by which we pass from one to the other? Is the difference 
of position of London and Rugby a number of miles on the 
railroad 1 Yes, in a loosely-derived and popular and slip-slop 
sense : and in like manner we say that one man is a pigeon-pie, 
and another is a shoulder of lamb, when we describe their 
contributions to a pic-nic. But non est geometria I Metaphor 
and paronomasia can draw the car of poetry ; but they tumble 
the waggon of geometry into the ditch. 

Parallels, of course, are lines which, have the same direction. 
It is stated, as an immediate consequence, that two lines which 
meet cannot make the same angle with a third line, on the 
same side, for they are in different directions. Parallels are 
knocked over in a trice. There Is a covert notion of direction, 
which, though only defined with reference to lines which meet, 
is straightway transferred to lines which do not. According 
to the definition, direction is a relation of lines which do meet, 
and yet lines which have the same direction can be lines which 
never meet. There is a great quantity of turning wanted; 
turning of implied assumption into expressed. Mr. Wilson 
would, we have no doubt, immediately introduce and defend 
all we ask for; and we quite admit that his system has a 
right to it. How do you know, we ask, that lines which have 
the same direction never meet 1 ? Answer lines which meet 
have different directions. We know they have; but how do 
we know that, under the definition given, the relation called 
direction has any application at all to lines which never meet $ 
Tfee use of the notion of limits may give an answer : but what 
is the system of geometry which introduces continuity and 
limits to ihe mind as yet untaught to think of space and of 



DE MORGAN. 225 



magnitude 1 Answer, a royal road. If the difficulty were 
met by expressed postulates, the very beginner himself would 
be frightened. 

There is a possibility that Mr. Wilson may mean that lines 
which make the same angle with a third on the same side are 
in the same direction. If this be the case, either he assumes 
that lines equally inclined to one straight line are equally 
inclined to all, and this we believe he does, under a play on 
the word c direction ' ; or he makes a quibble only one degree 
above a pun on his own arbitrary assumption of his right to 
the word * same 7 : and this we do not believe he does. He 
should have been more explicit : he should have said. My system 
involves an assumption which has lain at the root of many 
attempts upon the question of parallels, and has always been 
scouted as soon as seen. He should have added, I assume 
Euclid's eleventh axiom : I have a notion of direction ; I tell 
you that lines which meet have different directions ; I imply 
that lines which make different angles with a third have also 
different directions ; and I assume that lines of different directions 
will meet. Mr. Wilson is so concise that it is not easy to be 
very positive as to how much he will admit of the above, or 
how he will get over or round it. When put upon his 
'defence he must be more explicit. Mr. Wilson gives four 
explicit axioms about the straight line : and not one about the 
angle. 

We feel confidence that no such system as Mr. Wilson has 
put forward will replace Euclid in this country. The old 
geometry is a very English subject, and the heretics of this 
orthodoxy are the extreme of heretics: even Bishop Colenso 
has written a Euclid. And the reason is of the same kind as 
that by which the classics have held their ground in education. 
There is a mixture of good sense and of what, for want of a 
better name, people call prejudice : but to this mixture we owe 
our stability. The proper word is gostjudice, a clinging to past 



226 APPENDIX II. 



experience, often longer than is held judicious by after times. 
"We only desire to avail ourselves of this feeling until the book 
is produced which is to supplant Euclid ; we regret the manner 
in which it has allowed the retention of the faults of Euclid; 
and we trust the fight against it will rage until it ends in an 
amended form of Euclid. 



APPENDIX III. 



The enunciations of Tables I-IV, stated in full : 

with references to the various writers who 

ham assumed or proved them. 

[NT.B. Contranominals are bracketed. f A ' = 
' P ' = ' proved/] 

TABLE I. [See p. 32.] 









| 








1 


1 






CQ 


















P 








O 






P 


ft 


rn 


n 


pq 







M 


02 

M 


9 


k 


H 

W 




1 


a 
3 


W 



1 


H 

H 
PH 


1 


a 

H 
GQ 


w 
o 


g 
o 
o 

Hi 


3 

O 

a 


fe 


l_ 


(1 




P 


P 


A 


P 




A 


A 


P 


A 








A 


A 


A 






P 




A 


A 


A 




A 


I () 












P 















1. cc P G. ' Lines, wliicli have two common points, 

are ' coincidental.' 

2 (i). s F (cc)' or 5_! ; = cc unique. ' Different 

Lines have not two common points ; i. e. they have all points, 
but one, separate/ (Nothing is asserted of the excepted point.) 
This = ' Through two given points only one Line can be drawn.' 

2 (2). cs F -3T. * Lines, which have a common point 

and a separate point/ (or 'Different Lines, which have a 
common point,') ' are intersectional; i.e. have one point common 
and all others separate.' 

Q 2 



228 



APPENDIX III. 



TABLE I (continued). 

















Hi 


























P 


























5 


















fe 








3 


























i 
















Frl 


P-l 








P 


H 






02 






EUCLID 


LEGENDKI 


CUTHBER' 


fc 

1 


PIERCE 


"WlLLOCK 


f SYLLABI 


CHAUVEN 


LOOMIS 


MOBELL 


[ EEYNOLD 


i 
i 


( 3 


























\ 4 


P 




P 


P 




P 


P 


P 






P 




I 5 


P 


P 


P 








P 


P 


P 


P 


P 


P 


( 6 


























I 8 


























9 






P 










P 


P 


P 


P 


P 


10 






P 




















f 11 










A 
















1 12 








A 




A 




Def 










13 








A 



















3. et m F 0. ' Lines, which have a common point and 
make equal Z s with a transversal, are coincidental. 7 

4. X F THJ, ' Intersectional Lines make unequal Z s 
with any transversal.' (N.B. This is equivalent to ( JTF 5V, 
5V, 5V, ^V, 5V, 5V, and 5>' : the full statements of which are 
as follows : 

X F 5V- ' Intersectional Lines make unequal 

alt Zs with any transversal/ 

*X"IP 5V. 'Intersectional Lines make unequal 

ext and int opp Zs with any transversal.' 

X F 5V- ' Intersectional Lines make with any 

transversal two int Z s -=fc two right angles. 



TABLE, I. 229 

X F T/. c Any transversal, which is perpendicular 

to one of two intersectional Lines, is not so to the 
other/ 

X F' T^. ' Intersectional lines make unequal 

alt Zs with any transversal, that which is further from 
their point of intersection being > the other,' That is 
(since two intersectional Lines and a transversal constitute 
a triangle) ' An ext Z of a A > the int alt Z/ 

X F Tj. ' An ext Z of a A > the int opp Z/ 

X F T#. 'Two int Z s of a A < 2 L s.' 

5. st m F S. 'Different Lines, which make equal Zs 
with a transversal, are separations!.' (N.B. This is equivalent 
to ' st m or 5i e> or st i} or s r , F #/) 

6. ce F #. Lines, which have a common point and 
of which one contains 2 points on the same side of the other 
and equidistant from it, are coincidental.' 

7. X F F. ( Intersectional Lines are such that all 
points on each, which lie on the same side of the other, are 
unequally distant from it.' 

8. se F S. c Different Lines, of which one contains 2 
points on the same side of the other and equidistant from it, 
are separational. 7 

9. s8 real. ' If there be given a Line and a point not 
on it; a Line can be drawn, through the given point, and 
separational from the given Line. 

10. Xf V. 'Intersectional Lines diverge without 
limit ; i. e. a point can be found on each, whose distance from 
the other shall exceed any assigned length.' 

11. cD F C. ' Lines, which have a common point 
and the same direction, are coincidental/ 

12. Xfl/. c Intersectional Lines have different 
directions/ 

13. sD' real. ' If there be given a Line and a point 
not on it; a Line can be drawn, through the given point, 
and having a direction different from that of the given Line/ 



230 



APPENDIX HI. 



TABLE I (continued). 

















P 


























a 


















o 








' 


4 












EUCLID 


LEGENDRE 


CUTHBERTS 


WlLSON 


PIERCE 


WILLOCK 


* SYLLABUS 


CHAUVENE 


LOOMIS 


1 MOBELL 


02 

I. 

A 


[ WRIGHT 


f 14 


























I 15 8 












A 














f 16 












A 














\18 


























19 






A 





















14. ce F D* ' Lines, which have a common point and 

of which one contains 2 points on the same side of the other and 
equidistant from it, have the same direction/ 

15 (i). D' F #_r ' Lines, which have different direc 

tions, have all points, but one, separate.' (Nothing is asserted 
of the excepted point.) 

15 (2). c D f IP X. ' Lines, which have a common point 

and different directions, are intersectional/ 

16, C\ c | f \ \ c . t A Line, which has a- point 
common with one of two coincidental Lines, has a point 
common with the other also/ 

17. c\c\ST X\ | ; = PX|JT| . ^ALine, 
which has a point common with one of two separational Lines, 

also a point common with the other, intersects the one/ 
== i it intersects both/ 



TABLE I. 231 



18. ] c | F s| | . C A Line, which has a point 
common with one of two separational Lines, has a point separate 
from the other.' 

19. sE\cV\ F j pf. 'If, of two different 
Lines, the second (not assumed to be straight,) be equidistant 
from the first j a third Line, which has a point common with, 
and diverges without limit from the first, is intersectional with 
the second/ 



232 



APPENDIX ///. 



TABLE II. [See p. 35.] 









fc i 








f 


CJ 
















02 








*oa 


K 






CO 






EUCLID 


1 LEGENDRE 





j WILSON 


1 PIERCE 


1 WlLkQCK 


1 <SYLLABU 


j CHAUVEN 


J LOOMIS 


I 


1 REYNOLD 


1 WRIGHT 


na 


P 


P 
P 


p 

p j 


i 






P 


P 
P 


P 
P 


P 
P 


P 


P 


20 
I (3)* 


A 


P 








P 


| 


P 


P 


P 






3 



































i 






P 












6 




P 


i p 










P 


P 


P 




P 


I 7* 
















P 










8* 


























1 10 


























{I* 






p 





















1 (i). 'Angles, which, have the sides of the one separational 
from those of the other, each from each, are equal/ 

1 (2). SfT m . ' Separational Lines make equal Zs 
with any transversal/ 

2 (i). t i TP c, ' Lines, which make unequal Zs with 
a transversal, have a common point/ 

2 (2). sfy f X. * Different Lines, which make un 

equal Zs with a transversal, are intersectional/ (KB. This 
includes the following as a particular case.) 



TABLE II. 233 



Euclid? s Axiom. 

stjii F X. Different Lines, which make with 

a transversal 2 int L s < 2 L 5, are interactional' 

3. sT m real. c If there be given a Line and a point not 
on it ; a Line can be drawn, through the given point, and such 
that it and the given Line make equal Z s with any transversal. 7 

4. st m F T m . ' Different Lines, which make equal 
Z s with a certain transversal, do so with any transversal/ 

5. st m > f T m t. ' Different Lines, which make unequal 
Z s with a certain transversal, do so with any transversal.' 

6. $ IP E. ' Separational Lines are equidistant/ 

Simpson's Axiom. 

7. sffX. e Different Lines, of which one contains 
2 points unequally distant from the other, are intersectional! 

8. sE real. ' If there be given a Line and a point 
not on it ; a Line can be drawn, through the given point, and 
such that it and the given Line shall be equidistant from each 
other/ (N.B. This includes the following as a particular case.) 

Clavius* Axiom. 

c If there be given a Line and a point not on it ; a Line 
can be drawn, through the given point, equidistant from the 
given Line. 

9. se F T m . ' Different Lines, of which one has 2 points 
on the same side of the other and equidistant from it, make' equal 

Z s with any transversal/ 

10. st m f F F. 'Different Lines, which make unequal 
Z s with a transversal, are such that all points on each, which 
lie on the same side of the other, are unequally distant from it.' 

11. st m F #. l Different Lines, which make equal 
Z s with a transversal, are equidistant/ 

12. sffTynf. 'Different Lines, of which one has 2 
points unequally distant from the other, make unequal Zs with 
any transversal.' 



234 



APPENDIX ///. 



TABLE II (continued). 

















ID 


























fc 












































fc 








^ 


















o 








*.' 


^ 














9 


1 






fad 





1 






02 

Q 






EUCLID 


LEGEND 


1 

1 
O 


WILSON 


PIERCE 


WILLOC: 


1 


O 


LOOMIS 


MOKBLL 


BETNOL 


1 

h- 1 


f!3 
114 


























f 15(i) 


























1 00 






P 










A 




A 


A 


A 


1 16 ( f* 


P 


P 


P 








P 


P 


P 


P 


P 


P 
















A 


A 


A 




A 




((2) 
















A 




P 




P 








A 




















"(S) 


P 
P 


P 
P 


P 
P 


P 
P 


P 
P 


P 
P 


P 
P 


P 
P 


P 
P 


P 
P 


P 
P 


P 
P 



13. sefU. c Different Lines, of which one has 2 
points on the same side of the other and equidistant from it, 
are equidistant from each other/ 

14. sflfF. 'Different Lines, of which one has 2 
points unequally distant from the other, are such that all points 
on each, which lie on the same side of the other, are unequally 
distant from it. ? 

15 (i). }S\S F"^ 7 ] T~. 'Lines, which are 

separational from a third Line, are not intersectional.' 

15 (2). c|#|S F 0\ | ; = sS unique. < Lines, 

which have a common point and are separational from a third 
Line, are coincidental/ This == ' If there be given a Line and 



TABLE 77. 235 



a point not on it; only one Line can be drawn, through the 
given point, separational from the given Line/ 



15 (3). s|| F #| | . 'Different Lines, which 

are separational from a third Line, are separational from each 
other.' 

Playfair's A&iom. 



16(i). -2T| F( |tf|>S% ' Intersectional Lines 

cannot both be separational from a third Line? 



16(2). X\S\ F | I-Z. <A Line, which is in- 

tersectional with one of two separational Lines, is intersectional 
with the' other also/ 

The Ahmedalad Axiom. 

17. 'A Line cannot recede from and then approach another; 
nor can one approach and then recede from another on the same 
side of it? 

18 (i). ' An ext Z of a A = 2 int opp Zs. J 
18 (2). e The 3 Z s of a A = 2 L s.' 



236 



APPENDIX ///. 



TABLE in. [See p. 40.] 









o 




o 

g 


1 

1 





1 

2(1) 


I 


P 
P 


p 


( 3 ) 


P 


P 


p 


3 


"P 


P 




(4 
I 5 (i) 
( ( 2 ) 






p 


6(0 








(3) 


~p> 


P 


A 


ffii 




P 


P 


(3) 








\8 






P 



L sD P S. "sD f - related Lines are separational/ 

2 (i). < Angles, which have the sides of the one ' sD '- related 
to those of the other, each to each, are equal. 

2 (2). sD F T m . < '^'-related Lines make equal Z s 

with any transversal.' 

3. sDfE. ' c sD '-related Lines are equidistant.' 

^ 4. \C\8D F S\ | . 'A Line, which is coin 

cidental with one of two 'sD '-related Lines, is separational from 
the other/ 



5(i). c| \sJ)f \s\ . < A Line, which has a 

point common with one of two l sD '-related Lines, has a point 
separate from the other/ 



TABLE III. 237 



6(2). c | c sD F I-T) . 'A Line, which has 

a point common with one of two l sD '-related Lines and also 
a point common with the other, is intersectional with the one.' 
This = ' it is intersectional with both.' 



6 (i). sD sD F D\ \ . < Lines, which are 

'sD '-related to a third Line, have the same direction.' 

6 (2). ~1'D\8D F ~c5~\ | . 'Lines, which 

have a common point and are ( sD '-related to a third Line, have 
a common point and the same direction.' 

6 (3). s \sD\sD F aj j . ' Different Lines, 

which are 'sD '-related to a third Line, are 'sD '-related to 
each other.' 



7 (i). | sD | sD F X' \ . ' Lines, which are 

' sD '-related to a third Line, are not intersectional.' 

7 (2). c \sD\sD F ~C\ I . 'Lines, which have 

a common point and are ' sD '-related to a third Line, are coin 
cidental. 5 This EE c If there be given a Line and a point not on 
it ; only one Line can be drawn, through the given point, and 
< sD '-related to the given Line.' 

7 (3). s \sD\sD F ~S~\ i . ' Different Lines, 

which are c sD '- related to a third Line, are separational.' 



8. X | | F ( | sD sD )'. ' Intersectional Lines 

cannot both be ' sD '-related to a third Line.' 



238 



APPENDIX TIL 



TABLE IY. [See p. 41.] 









M 



















S 




M 





a 




P 


fi 


^ 


1 


A 


A 


A 


J2 






A 


( 3 A 


A 






4 


A 






(5 


P 


P 


P 


r 

(8 


A 







1. sD real. *If there be given a Line and a point 
not on it ; a Line can be drawn, through the given point, and 
* sD '- related to the given Line/ 

2. S P D. ' Separational Lines have the same direc 
tion/ 

3 (i). D' F c. ' Lines, which have different directions, 

have a common point/ 

3 (2). sZX F -2T. ' Different Lines, which have different 

directions, are intersectional/ 

4. c An angle may be transferred, preserving its magnitude 
and the directions of its sides/ This == 'If there be given 
a Line and a point not on it ; a Line can be drawn, through the 
given point, ' sD '-related to the given Line, and such that it 

, and the given Line make equal Z s with any transversal/ 

5. st m PD, 'Different Lines, which make equal Z s 
with a transversal, have the same direction/ 

6. si/ f &. ( Different Lines, which have different 
directions, make unequal Z s with any transversal/ 



TABLE IV. 239 



7. sefD. 'Different Lines, of which one contains 
2 points on the same side of the other and equidistant from 
it, have the same direction.' 

8. sD'VI'. 'Different Lines, which have different 
directions, are such that all points on each, which lie on the 
same side of the other, are unequally distant from it/ 



APPENDIX IV. 



The various methods of treating Parallels, adopted 
by Euclid and his Modern Rivals. 

[N.B. In each Section, the first Table gives the logical gene 
alogy of the propositions assumed or proved by the writer, 
numbered in the order in which they occxir, as well as their 
enunciations, expressed symbolically, so far as that is possible ; 
the second Table gives, first, references to the genealogical 
Table, secondly references to Tables I-IV, thirdly the enuncia 
tions in full, and fourthly references to the writer in question.] 

1. EUCLID. 



1. Th 



2. Th 



3. Th 



4. Th 



8. Th 
sS real 




9. Th 

ext Z of A = 

2 int opp Z s 

10. Th 



TREATMENT OF PARALLELS. 



241 



1. EUCLID. 





TABLES 
I-IV 




EUCLID. 


1. Th 


I. pt of 4 


Ext L of A > int alt L 


I. pt of 16 


2. 


rem of 


Ext Z of A > int opp Z ; 


I. rem of 16, 






and 2 int ZsofA<2l_s 


and 17 


3. 


LptofS 


Different Lines, which 


L 27 






make with a transversal 








equal alt Zs, are separa- 








tional 




4. 


rem of 


Different Lines, which 


28 






make with a transversal 








equal ext and int Zs or 








2 int Z s = 2 L s, are sepa- 








rational 




5. Ax 


II. 2 


Different Lines, which 


Ax. 12 




pt of (2) 


make with a transversal 








2 int Z s < 2 L s, are 








intersectional 




6. Th 


11. 1 (2) 


Separational Lines make, 


1.29 






with any transversal, equal 








alt Zs, equal ext and int 








Z s, and 2 int Z s = 2 L s 




7- 


15(3) 


Different Lines, which 


30 






are separational from the 








same Line, are separational 








from each other 




8. 


1.9 


If there he given a Line 


31. Not 






and a point not on it; a 


stated, hut 






Line can be drawn, through 


virtually con 






the given point, separa 


tained in Pro 






tional from the given Line 


blem 


9. 


18(i) 


Ext Z of A = 2 int opp 


pt of 32 






Zs 




10. 


() 


3 int ZsofA = 2 Ls 


rem of 32 



242 



APPENDIX IV. 



2. LEGENDEE, 



3. Th 



1. Th 
/sofA = 2L 

2. Tb 

ext Z of A = 
2 int opp Z s 



4. Th 
**,- F S 

9. Th 
*** F S 

10. Th 
#S* real 



11. Th 



5. Th 

Stf.F F 

6. Th 



7. Th 



8. Th 



12. Th 13. Th 

$ F $ Z s which have the 
sides of the one 
*$' from those of 
the other, each 
from each, are 
equal 



TABLES 
I-IV 



l.Th 



2. 

3. 



11.18(2) 



(0 

I.ptof5 



3ZsofA=2Ls 



Ext Z of A= 2 int opp Z s 
Different Lines, which 
have a common perpendi 
cular, are separational 



Th xix. 
Proved by 
help of an in 
finite series of 
triangles 
Th xix. Cor. 6 

XXI 



TREATMENT OF PARALLELS. 



243 



2. LEGENDEE. 





TABLES 
I-IV 




LEGEKDEB 


4. Th 


I.ptofS 


Different Lines, which 


Th xxii 






make with a transversal 2 








int Z s = 2 L s, are separa- 








tional 




5. 


II. 2 


Different Lines, which 


xxrii. From 




pt of (2) 


make with a transversal 2 


(i), by an in 






int L s < 2 L s, are inter- 


finite series of 






sectional 


angles 


6. 


II. 1 


Separational Lines make 


Th xxiv : 




pt of (2) 


with any transversal 2 int 


Contranomi- 






Zs = 2 L s 


nal of (5) 


7- 


)? 


Any transversal, which is 


do. Cor. 1 






j_ one of two separational 








Lines, is J_ the other 




8. 


II. 1 


Separational Lines make 


do. Cor. 2 




rein of (2) 


with any transversal equal alt 








Z s and equal ext and int Z s 




9. 


I. 


Different Lines, which 


do. Scholium 




rem of 5 


make with a transversal equal 








alt Z s or equal ext and int 








Z s, are separational 




10. 


I. 9 


If there be given a Line 


Pr.vi. Not 






and a point not on it ; a 


stated, but 






Line can be drawn, through 


virtually con 






the given point, separational 


tained in Pro 






from the given Line 


blem. 


11. 


n.i5( 3 ) 


Lines, which are separa 


Thxxv 






tional from the same Line, are 








separational from each other 




12. 


6 


Separational Lines are 


5XVI 






equidistant 




13. 


MI) 


Angles, which have the 


xxvn 






sides of the one separational 








from those of the other, each 








from each, are equal 





R 2 



244 



APPENDIX IV. ' 



3, CtJTHBERTSON. 



1. Th 
14. Th 2. Th 

! 

i 

9. Ax 


3. Th 4. Ax 
X F V a Line cannot recede from 
and then approach another; 
nor can one approach and 
then recede from another on 
the same side of it 
5. Th 

St r ~P E 


8. Th 


*E\cV\ F 


| \X 8t r \X\ I 


6. Th 

r" 




10. Th 


*t r \X\ F 1 | Ji 
ll. Th 
'8t r ' the only 'S' 
12. Th 
sS unique 


15. Th 


17. Th 13. Th 7. Th 


*\S\S F S\ | 


S F E sS real 


16. Th 18. Th 
Z s which have the sides ext Z of A = 
of the one 'S 1 from those 2 int opp Z s 
of the other, each from 19. Th 
each, are equal 3 Z s of A = 2l_s 


TABLES 
I-IY 




CUTHBEKTSON 


L Th I. pt of 4 
2* rem of 4 
Z 

2 


Ext Z of A > int alt Z 
Ext Z of A > int opp 
; and 2 int Z s of A < 
Ls 


p. 22. Pr.xni 

JJ 99 



TREATMENT OF PARALLELS. 



245 



3. CUTHBEKTSON". 





TABLES 
MY 




CUTHBERTSON 


3. Th 


I. 10 


Intersectional Lines di 


p. 33. Ded. 9 






verge without limit; i.e. 








a point can be found, on 








either of them, whose dis 








tance from the other shall 








exceed any assigned length 




4. Ax 


II. 17 


A Line cannot recede 


p. 34. Ax 






from and then approach 








another; nor can one ap 








proach and then recede from 








another on the same side of it 




5. Th 


ILptofll 


Different Lines, which 


P-35- 1-S- ' 






have a common perpen 


all points &c.' 






dicular, are equidistant 


down to 'equi 








distant from RS? 








Proved by mak 








ing diagram re 








volve 


6. 


I. pt of 5- 


Different Lines, which 


p. 35. Allud 






have a common perpen 


ed to in the 






dicular, are separational 


words 'no other 








line besides AS 








&c.' 


7. 


1.9 


A Line can be drawn, 


p. 34. Occurs 






separational from a given 


in enunciation ; 






Line, through a given point 


also alludedto in 






not on it 


the above words 


8. 


not in Tab 


(Asserts 3 and 5) 


p. 35. Neces 








sary link in argu 








ment : virtually 








asserted in the 








words c Again 








&e.' 



24G 



APPENDIX 7F. 



3. CUTHBEKTSON. 





TABLES 
I-IV 




CUTHBEETSON 


9. Ax 


1.19 


Two Lines, which are 


p. 35. Tacitly 






such that a third Line is 


assumed in the 






equidistant from one of 


words * . * . the 






them and diverges withoir 


straight line &c.' 






limit from the other, are 








interactional 




! 10. Th 


not in Tab 


Two Lines, which are 


p. 35. Virtu 






i such that a third Line has 


ally asserted in 




a common perpendiculai 


the above words 






with one of them anc 








is intersectional with the 








other, are interseetional 




11- 





If there be given a Line 


p. 35. 'Hence 






and a point not on it : the 


through A &c.' 






Line, drawn through the 








point so as to have a com 








mon perpendicular with 








the given Line, is the only 








one which can be drawn. 








through the point, separa- 








tional from the given Line 




12. 


II. 15 (2) 


Only one Line can be 


P-34,35- As 






drawn, separational from 


serted in enun 






a given Line, through a 


ciation, and im 






given point not on it 


plied as general 








conclusion 


13. 


6 


Separational Lines are 


P- 34, 35- As 






equidistant 


serted in enun- 








ciation, and de- 








ducible from 








argument 


14- 


15 


Different Lines, which 


p. 36. Pr. xx 






make equal angles with a 









tcansversal, are separational 





TREATMENT OF PARALLELS. 



247 



3. CTTTHBERTSON. 





TABLES 
I-IV 




CUTHBEETSON" 


15. Th 


II. 1 (2) 


Separational Lines make 
equal angles with any 
transversal 


p. 38. Pr. xxi 


16. 


W 


Angles, which haye the 
sides of the one separa- 
tional from those of the 


p. 39. Pr.xsx 
Cor. 


17. 


15(3) 


other, each from each, are 
equal 
Different Lines, which 
are separational from the 
same Line, are separa 
tional from each other 


p, 40. Pr. xxn 


18. 


18(i) 


Ext Z of A = 2 int opp 
Zs 


p.42,Pr.sxiY 


19. 


(0 


3/sofA=2Ls 


5> ?5 



248 



APPENDIX IV. 



4. "WILSON. 



1. 
sD 



Ax 
real 



2. Ax 

sD' real 



3. Ax 



4. Ax 



7. Ax 

an Z may be 
transferred, pre 
serving its mag 
nitude and the 
directions of its 
sides 



5. Th 



10. Th 
.JPT e , 

11. Th 

DYWa' 

12. Th 



6. Th 



8. Th 

L s, which have the 
sides of the one 
'sD' with those of 
the other, each with 
each, are equal 
9. Th 



8 \sD\sD P $D\ 



17. Ax 



13. Th 

ext Z of A = int opp L s 

14. Th 

3 ZsofA = 2Ls 

15. Th 
Z F 



16. Th 

sZ>P E 



TABLES 
I-IV 



WILSON 



1. Ax 



2. 



IV. 1 



L 13 



If there be given a Line 
and a point not on it, a 
Line can be drawn, through 
the given point, and 'sD'~ 
related to the given Line 

If there be given a Line 
and a point not on it, a 
Line can be drawn through 
the given point, and having 
a direction different from 
that of the given Line 



p. ii Ax. 6. 



TREATMENT OF PARALLELS. 



249 



4. WILSON. 





TABLES 
I-IV 




WILSON 


3. As 


I. 12 


Intersectional Lines 


p. ii. As. 7 






have different directions 




4. 


IY. 3 (2) 


Different Lines, which 


Ax. 8 






have different directions, 








are intersectional 




5. Th 


III. 1 


* sD '-related Lines are 


Eesult (i) 






separational 




6. 


6(3) 


Different Lines, which 


Eesult (2). 






are 'sD '-related to the 


Proved as theo 






same Line, are 'sD '-related 


rem from nature 






to each other 


of direction: but 








quite axiomatic, 








though ideal 


7. Ax 


IV. 4 


An Z maybe transferred*, 


p. 12. Ax. 9 






preserving its magnitude 








and the directions of its 








sides 




8. Th 


III. 2 (i) 


Angles, which have the 


Th. 4. Merely 






sides of the one ' sD '-re 


another form of 






lated to those of the other, 


the above axiom 






each to each, are equal 




9. Th 


2. 


c sD '-related Lines make 


p. 12. Th. 4. 




pt of (2) 


equal ext and int opp Z s 


Cor. 






with any transversal 




10. Th 


1.4 


Intersectional Lines 


p. 14. Th. 5 






make unequal ext and int 








oppZs with any transversal 




11. Th 


not in Tab 


Lines, which are not 


p. 14. Th. 5. 






'sD '-related, make, with 


Cor. 1. False. 






any transversal, unequal alt 


The correct form 






Z s and also 2 int Z s ^ 2 


would be 'Dif 






Ls 


ferent Lines, 








which have dif 








ferent direc 








tions,, make &c/ 



250 



APPENDIX IV. 



4. 





TABLES 
I-IV 




WILSON 


12. Tli 


IV. 5 


Different Lines, which 


p. 20. Cor. 2. 






make equal Zs with a 


Proved from 






transversal, have the same 


Cor. 1. As it 






direction 


happens, it fol 








lows equally well 








from the correct 








form of Cor. 1. 


13. 


II. 18 (i) 


Ext Z of A = 2 int opp 


p. 20. Th. 7 






Zs 




14. 


(2) 


3/sofA = 2l_s 


)) )) 


15. 


I. pt of 4 


Ext Z of A > each int 


Cor. 4 






opp Z 




16. 


III. 3 


<sZ> '-related Lines are 


p. 38. Exer 






equidistant 


cise 9 


17. Ax 


IY. 7 


Different Lines, of which 


p. 59. As 






one has two points on the 


sumed in course 






same side of the other and 


of Th. 24, in 






equidistant from it, have 


the words 'that 






the same direction 


is, CD will be 








parallel to AB' 



TREATMENT OF PARALLELS. 251 



[Turn over. 



252 



APPENDIX IV. 



5. PIERCE. 



1. Ax 
cD~PC 

2. Th 



\sD\sD F C\ 
3. Th 



4. Th 

Zs, which have the 
sides of the one c sD* 
with those of the other, 
are equal 

5. Th 
*D F T ae 



6. Ax 
sD real 



7. Th 
**<* F D 

12. Th_ 
\sD\sD F ~sl 



8. Th 
sD F T 

9. Th 



10. Th 



13. Th 



11. Th 
** r F D 

15. Th 
sDT E 



14. Th 

ext Z of A = 
int opp / s 



TABLES 
I-IV 



PIERCE 



1. Ax 

2. Th 



5. 



1.11 
111.7(2) 

III.1 

2(0 



2. 
ptof (2) 



Lines, which have a com 
mon point and the same 
direction, are coincidental 

Lines, which have a com 
mon point, and which are 
l sD '-related to a third 
Line, are coincidental 

' sD '-related Lines are 
separational 

Angles, which have the 
sides of the one 'sD '-re 
lated to those of the other, 
each to each, are equal 

'sD '-related Lines make 
with any transversal equal 
alt Z s and equal ext and 
int opp Z s 



p.p. 28. As 
sumed in course 
of argument 

p. 9. 28. 
Proved in 
course of argu 
ment 

p. 9. 28 

2 9 



30 



TREATMENT OF PARALLELS, 



253 



5. PIERCE. 





TABLES 

i-iv 




PIEECE 


6. Ax 


IV. 1 


If there be given a Line 


p. 10. 31. As 






and a point not on it ; a 


sumed in course 






Line can be drawn, through 


of argument 






the given point, and f sD'- 








related to the given Line 




7.Th 


pt of 5 


Different Lines, which 


p. 10, 31 






make with a transversal 








equal alt Zs or equal ext 








and int opp Z s, have the 








same direction 




8. 


III 2. 


<$Z> ? -related Lines make 


32 




remof(2) 


with any transversal 2 int 








Zs = 2 L s 




9- 


IV. 


Different Lines, which 


33 




rem of 5 


make with a transversal 








2 int Z s = 2 L s, have 








the same direction 




10. 


ni.2. 


A Line, which is _L one 


34- 




ptof(a) 


of two ' sD '-related Lines, 


Superfluous : 






is JL the other 


included in 5 


11. 


IY. 


Different Lines, which 


p. ii. 35- 




pt of 5 


have a common perpen 


Superfluous : 






dicular, have the same 


included in 7 






direction 




12. 


in. 6 ( 3 ) 


Different Lines, which 


p. n. 36. 






are 'sD '-related to a third 


Proved from 






Line, have the same direc 


nature of direc 






tion 


tion, but quite 








axiomatic 


13. 


11.18(2) 


3ZsofaA = 2Ls 


p. 20. 65 


14. 


(*) 


An ext Z of a A = 2 int 


p. 21. 71 






opp Zs 




15. 


ni.3 


'sD '-related Lines are 


p. 23- 82 ^ 






equidistant 





254 



APPENDIX 



6. "WlLLOCK. 



6. Ax 



1. As 2. Ax 



s \sD\sD P sD\ 



7. Th 



5. Th 



3. Th 



8. Th 
9 unique 



13. Ax 



_ _ 

S\c\e F \Z\Z 



4. Th ' 
cc unique 



11. Ax 

sD real 



14. Th 



9. Th 



sD\ c | c F 



15. Th 12. Th 19. Th 

XP T& st e fD ZsofA 

16. Th =2Ls 
Z F T f 20. Th 

ext Z of A = 
2 int opp Z s 



10. Th 17. Ax 



18. Th 
tw F Z 



l.Ax 



TABLES 
I-IV 



L 12 



Different 
Lines, which 
have a common 
point, have dif 
ferent directions 



TVlLLOCK 



p. 10. i. f the 

Directives have different 
directions. 7 All that we 
are told of these 'Direc 
tives/ in the enunciation, 
is that they are two : but 
this, alone, would not 
justify the assertion that 
they have different direc- 



TREATMENT OF PARALLELS. 



255 



6. WEDLOCK. 





TABLES 
I-IV 




"WlLLOCK 








tions, for they might be 








parallels. The enunciation 








is clearly meant to be 








' Two Directives, which 








have a common point, can 








&c' 


2. Ax 


L15(i) 


Lines, which 


p. 10. i. ' since the 






have different 


Directives have different 






directions, have 


directions, they must .... 






all points, but 


not meet again.' 






one, separate 




3. Th 


I. 2(2) 


Different 


p. 10. i. 






Lines, which 








have a common 








point, are inter- 








sectional 




4. 


2 W 


Through two 


p. 10. i. 'This is 






givenpoints only 


equivalent to Euclid's loth 






one line can be 


Axiom " two right Lines 






drawn 


cannot enclose a space."' 








This is not quite correct. 








The xoth Axiom asserts 








' s IP $_! ' ; while this article 








asserts l csf'; so that 








its subject has an addi 








tional property * c '. 


5. 


ni.i. 


'aZ? '-related 


p. ii. 5- 






Lines are sepa- 








rational 




6. As 


6 (3) 


Different 


p. 12. 7. 'if two' 






Lines, which are 


(parallels) ' could be drawn, 






<sD '-related to 


each would have the same 






the same Line, 


direction as that of the 






are 'sD '-related 


directive ' (and so the same 






to each other 


direction as each other) 



256 



APPENDIX IV. 



6. "VVlLLOCK. 





TABLES 
L-IV 




WILLOCK 


7, Th 


III. 8 


Intersectional 


p. 12. 7. 'these two 






Lines cannot 


parallels ' (which therefore 






both be 'sD'- 


are V) 'pass through the 






relaied to the 


point* (and thus are c c'). 






same Line 


4 They must therefore 








not be both parallels to the 








directive/ 


8. 3J 


7(2) 


If there be 


p. 12. 7. This must 






given a Line and 


not be taken to assert that 






a point not on it ; 


' one and only one can be 






only one Line 


drawn ' but merely to deny 






can be drawn, 


that more than one can be 






through the 


drawn 






given point, and 








1 sD '-related to 








the given Line 




9. 


2. 


'sD '-related 


p. 1 2. 8. Proved from 




pt of (2) 


Lines make with 


nature of direction, an 






any transversal 


'angle' being regarded as 






equal ext and 


'the difference of two 






int opp Z s 


directions ' 


10. 


2- 


sD '-related 


p. 12. 9 




rem.of(2) 


Lines make with 








any transversal 








equal alt Z s and 








2 int Zs=2 L s 




11. Ax 


IV. 1 


If there be 


p. 13. 10. 'some . . . 






given a Line and 


line through 0, is 






a point not on 


parallel to X.' 






it ; a Line can be 








drawn, through 








the given point, 








and 'sD'-related 








to the given Line 





TREATMENT OF PARALLELS. 



257 



6. "WlLLOCK. 





TABLES 
I-IY 




"WlLLOCK 


12. Th 


IV. 


Different 


p. 13. 10 




pt of 5 


Lines, which. 








make equal ext 








and int opp Zs 








with a trans 








versal, have the 








same direction 




13. Ax 


1.17 


A Line, which 
has a point com 


p. 14. 12. ''the angle 
ZOX, which is greater than 






mon with one of 


a^: Why greater? Clearly 






two separational 
Lines, and also a 


he assumes that X must 
diverge from(i. e. intersect) 






point common 


r r (His extreme parsi 






with the other, 


mony of letters in this 






is intersectional 


diagram is most confusing.) 






with both 


And why must it diverge ? 








Clearly because, starting 








from a point on T 19 it (in 








tersects 7, i.e.) reaches a 








point on a Line parallel to 








YU i. e. it reaches a point 








not on F r But why should 








a point, ft on a Line parallel 








to Y v be necessarily not on 








YJ Because parallel Lines 








are separational. Hence it 








is clear that he assumes it 








as axiomatic that !Fand Y 1 








being separational, and X 








passing through a point on 








each, X must intersect Y 1 


14. Th 


in. 5 (2) 


A Line, which 
has a point com 
mon with one of 


p. 14. 12. From the 
above (tacitly assumed) 
axiom, be clearly intends to 



258 



APPENDIX 



6, "WlLLOCK. 





TABLES 
UV 




TVlLLOCK 






two l $D'- related 


draw the conclusion that 






Lines, and also 
a point common 


the fact, of 7and T l being 
'$ '-related, leads to the 






with the other, 


same result 




Is interactional 








with both 




15. Th 


I. pt of 4 


An ext Z of a 


p. 14. 12. Note that 






A < int opp Z 


he omits the other part of 








Euc. I. 16, that it is > 








the int alt L 


16. 


I. ptof 4 


2 int Z s of a 


p. 14. 12 






A < 2 Ls 




17. Ax 


IV. 2 


Separational 
Lines have the 


13. 'suppose they 
do not meet. Then they 


18. Th 


II. 2. 


same direction 
Diff e rent 


should be parallel ' 
p. 14, IQ 




pt of (2) 


Lines, which 


Jr ^' i x u 






make with a 








transversal an 








ext Z > the int 








opp Z, or 2 int 








Z s < 2 L s, are 








intersectional 




19. 


18(2) 


3 ZsofaA = 


H 






2 Ls 




20.,, 


00 


An ext Z of a 


p. 15. 14. Cor. 1 






A = 2 int opp 








Zs 





TREATMENT OP PARALLELS. 259 

[Turn over. 



APPENDIX Jl'. 



7. CHAUVENET. 



1. Def 4. Tit 
cap// st f VS 



5. Th 
s# real 



6. Ax 



7. Th 



" 



XlSl F 



2. Ax 



F( 



8. Th 



9.Th 



12. Th 
8TE 

13. Th 
sE real 



10. Th 11. Th 14. Th 15. Th 

st M F $ sfy F -3T ^ s, which have 3 ZsofA = 2Ls 
the sides of the 16. Th 

one '$' from extZofA=2int 

those of the opp Zs 
other, are equal 17. Th 



TABLES 
I-IY 



CHAUVENET 



LDef 

2. Ax 

3. Ax 



I. 12 



Intersectional Lines haye 
different directions 

Intersectional Lines can 
not both be separational 
from the same Line 

A Line, which is inter- 
sectional with one of two 
separational Lines, is inter- 
sectional with the other 



p. 12. i 
P- 2 3- 43 



Contranominal 
of 2 



TREATMENT OF PARALLELS. 



261 



7. CHATJVENET. 





TABLES 
I-IV 




CHAUVENET 


4. Th 


I. pt of 5 


Different Lines, which 


P. 23. Pr. 






have a common perpendi 


xi. proved from 






cular, are separational 


earlier geo 








metry 


5. Th 


9 


If there be given a Line 


p. 23. Pr. xi. 






and a point not on it; a 


Cor. 1 






Line can be drawn, through 








the given point, and sepa- 








tional from the given Line 




6. Ax 


IL15(2) 


Lines, which have a com 


p. 2 3. Cor. 2. 






mon point and are separa 


' Moreover the 






tional from the same Line, 


perpendicular 






are coincidental 


... is parallel 








to AB . . . . 








and must coin 









cide with CD.' 


7. Th 


i- 


A Line, which is JL one 


p. 23. 46 




pt of (2) 


of two separational Lines, 








is J_ the other 




8. 


15 (3) 


Different Lines, which 


p. 24. Pr.xn. 






are separational from the 


Contranominal 






same Line, are separational 


of 2 






from each other 




9. Th 


II. 1 (2) 


Separational Lines make 


p. 24. Pr. 






equal Zs with any trans 


xni, and Cors 






versal 




10. 


I. 5 


Different Lines, which 


p. 25. Pr. 






make equal Zs with a 


xiv, and Cors 1 






transversal, are separational 


and 2 


11. 


II. 2. 


Different Lines, which 


p. 2 6. Pr.xiv. 




pt of (2) 


make with a transversal 


Cor. 3. Incor 






2 int Z s = 2 L s, are 


rectly deduced 






intersectional 


from 9 and 10, 









the latter being 








superfluous 



APPENDIX 



7. CHATJVESTET. 



i 




TABLES 

i-rv 




CHAUVENET 


12. Th 


,, $ 


Separational Lines are 


p. 26. Pr.xv 






equidistant 




13. 


8 


If there be given a Line 


! 77 






and a point not on it ; a 


Cor 






Line can be drawn through 








the ffiven point, such that 








the two Lines shall be equi 








distant from each other 




H. 


IT. 1 (i) 


Angles, which have the 


p. 27. Pr.xvi 






sides of the one separa- 








tional from those of the 








other, are equal 




15. 


18 (2) 


3/sofaA=2Ls 


p. 29. Pr* 








XVIII 


16. 


<*) 


An ext / of a A = 2 int 


Cor. 1 






opp Zs 




17.,, 


I. pt of 4 


An ext Z of a A > either 


?> >j 






of the int opp Z s 





TREATMENT OF PARALLELS. 263 

[Turn over. 



APPENDIX //I 



8. LOOMIS. 



1. Ax 

" F { 



2. Th 

st r F $ 



4. Th 



3. Th 
s real 



5. Th 

ti F T 
*~> ir - m 



7. Th 



8. Th 

A'P-ff 



9. Th 

Z s, which have 
the sides of the 
one '#' from 



10. Tlj 
ext Z of 
A = 2 



/ mi , -*" ^liu U p > 

6-Th those of the Zs 


*''* F -i other, are equal 1 1. Th 


3 ^s of 


A = 2 


Ls 




TABLES 








I-IV 




LOOMIS 


1. Ax 


II.lG(i) 


Intersectional Lines can 


i - 
p. 17. Ax. 12 






not both be separational 








from the same Line 




2. Th 


I ptof5J Different Lines, which 


p-3i. Pr.xx 




j have a common perpendi 
cular, are separational 




3. 


9 


If there be given a Line, 


Not stated, 






and a point not on it; a 


but deducible 


4. 


ir 

rem of 5 


Line can be drawn, through 
the given point, and sepa 
rational from the given Line 
Different Lines, which 
make equal angles with a 
transversal, are separational 


from above, and 
assumed as true 
in Pr. xxvn 
PP- 32, 33- 

T. XXI, XXII 



TREATMENT OF PARALLELS. 



265 



8. LOOMIS. 





TABLES 
I-IV 




LOOMIS 


5. Th 


H. 1 (2) 


Separational Lines make 
qual Zs with any trans 


P. 33- Pr - 

XXIII 






versal 






2 


Different Lines, which 


C r -3 


>3 


pt of (2) 


nake w,ith a transversal 








2 int Z s < 2 L s, are in- 








jersectional 




7. ?J 


15(3) 


Different Lines, which 


p. 34- Pr- 






are separational from a 


XXIV 






third line, are separationa. 








from each other 




8 


?j e 


Separational Lines are 


p. 35. Pr - 


Q 


Id) 


equidistant 
Angles, which have the 


XXV 

Pr. xxvi 


" 


j) \ , 


sides of the one separationa 








from those of the other 








each from each, are equal 




10. 


18 (i) 


An ext Z of a A = 2 in 


p. 36. Pr. 




7) \ 


opp Z s 


XXVII 


11. 


JJ V ' 


The 3ZsofaA = 2L 


" " 



26(5 



APPENDIX 



9. ITOKELL. 



1. Th 



3. Ax 

sS unique 



2, Th 5. Th 

stfreal SF^V 
7. Th 



4. Th 



6. Th 




12. Th 

ext Z of A = 
2 int opp L s 



_ 

T\S\S F " 



10. Th 

Z s, which have the 
sides of the one '$' 
from those of the 
other, are equal 



1. Th 

2. 

3. Ax 

4. Th 



TABLES 
I-IV 



I. pt of 5 
I. 9 



,, 16 (2) 



Different Lines, which 
have a common perpen 
dicular, are separational 

If there be given a Line 
and a point not on it; a 
Line can be drawn, through 
the given point, and sepa 
rational from the given Line 

If there be given a Line 
and a point not on it ; only 
one Line can be drawn, 
through the given point, 
and separational from the 
given Line 

A Line, which is inter- 
sectional with one of two 
separational Lines, is inter- 
sectional with the other 



MORELL 



p. 21. Th. xix 
Th. xx 



^ Th.xx. 
' and it may be 
admitted &c. } 



p. 21. Th.xx. 
Cor 



TREATMENT OF PARALLELS. 



267 



9. IVEOBELL. 





TABLES 
I-IV 




MOEELL 


5.Th. 


II. 1. 


A Line, which, is JL one 


p. 22. Th.xxi 




pt of (2) 


of two separations! Lines, 








is JL- the other 




6. 


MS) 


Different Lines, which 


Th. xxii 






are separational from a 








third Line, are separational 








from each other 




7. 


1 


Separational Lines make 


p. 2224. Th. 




rem of (2) 


equal Zs with any trans 


XXIII, XXIV 






versal 




8. 


I. 


Different Lines, which 


p. 25. Th. xxv 




rem of 5 


make equal Zs with a 








transversal, are separational 




9. 


II. 2. 


Different Lines, which 


p. 2 6. Th.xxv. 




pt of (2) 


make with a transversal 


Cor 


* 




2 int L s < 2 L s, are 








intersectional 




10. 


;> 1(1) 


Angles, which have the 


Th. xxvi. 






sides of the one separational 








from those of the other, 








each from each, are equal 




11- 


18 (2) 


The 3 /s of a A= 2 Ls 


p. 27. Th. 








XXVIII 


12. 


(^ 


An ext Z of a A = 2 int 


p. 28. 






opp Zs 


Cor. 1 


13. 


6 


Separational Lines are 


p. 32. Th. 






equidistant 


xxxi. Cor. 2 



268 



APPENDIX 



10. REYNOLDS. 



1. Th 3. Ax^ 

^ptf AJ i V(~S\SY 



2. Th 4. Th 

* real 8 F T m 



6. Th 

ext Z of A = 5 
2 int opp L s 

7. Th 8. Th 

3 Z of A = 2 L s A" F 



5. Th_ 

y F "^T 



TABLES 
I-IV 



REYNOLDS 



l.Th 



I. 5 



3. Ax 



4. Th 



II 16(i) 



(I 



Different Lines, which 
make equal Zs with a trans 
versal, are separational 

If there be given a Line 
and a point not on it ; a 
Line can be drawn, through 
the given point, and sepa 
rational from the given Line 

Intersectional Lines can 
not both be separational 
from a third Line 

Separational Lines make 
equal Zs with any trans 
versal 



p.p. Th.vn, 
and Cors 

Not stated : 
but deducible 
from above, and 
assumed as true 
in Th. x 

p. 10. Th, 
vin. Assumed 
in course of ar 
gument 

p. 10. Th. 
vin, and Cors 



TREA TMENT OF PARALLELS. 



269 



10. BEYNOLDS. 





TABLES 
I-IV 




BEYNOLDS 


5. Tli 


IL15(3) 


Different Lines, which are 


p. 1 1. Th.ix 






separational from a third 








Line, are separational from 








each other 




6. 


,, 18(i) 


An ext Z of a A = 2 int 


Th.x 






opp Zs 




7. 


00 


The 3ZsofaA = 2Ls 


yy 


8. 


I. 4 


An ext Z of a A > either 


p. 12. Th.x. 






of the 2 int opp Z s 


Cor. 2 



270 APPENDIX IV, 


11. HEIGHT. 


1. Th 3. Ax 

st r f S sS unique 

A A 


/ 

2. Th 
sS real 

v . . . i 


7. Th 

8. Th 
j. 


4.Th 


A 


X\S\ F | |A r 


5. Th 6. Th 


s[S\S F #j | c S\S F C\ \ 


13. Th 9. Th 10. Th 12. Th 
3 Z s of A = st m F S st t F % s, which have the 
2 L s 11. Th sides of one C /S" from 
14. Th SfE those of the other, are 
ext L of A = equal 
2 int opp / s 




TABLES 
I-IV 




WEIGHT 


1. Th 
2. 

3. Ax 


I. pt of 5 
I. 9 

11.15(2) 


Different Lines, which 
have a common perpendi 
cular, are separational 
If there be given a Line 
and a point not on it; a 
Line can be drawn, through 
the given point, and sepa 
rational from the given Line 
If there be given a Line 
and a point not on it; only 
one Line can be drawn, 
through the given point, 
and separational from the 
given Lone 


p. 32. Th.xiv 
Cor. 

Scholium 



TREA TMENT OF PARALLELS. 



271 



11. WRIGHT. 





TABLES 
I-IV 




WRIGHT 


4.Th 


LI. 16 (2) 


A Line, which is inter - 


P. 32- 59 






ectional with one of two 








separational Lines, is inter- 








sectional with the other 






15( 2 ) 


Different Lines, which 


, 60 


U. ,, 


JJ \ / 


are separational from a 
third Line, are separational 








from each other 




6. 


(3) 


Lines, which have a 
common point and which 
are separational from a 
third Line, are coincidental 


p. 33. Tkxv. 
' This perpen- 
icular being 
Darallel to AJS 








an be no other 








han CD.' 


7 


, 1 


A Line, which is J_ one 


p. 33. Th.xv 


* * ?? 


t of (2) 


of two separational Lines, 








is j_ the other 




8. 


remof(2) 


Separational Lines make 
equal Zs with any trans 


. Th.xvi, 
and Cors 






versal 




Q 


I. 5 


Different Lines, which 


P- 34- 6 4 } 


a. ,, 




make equal Zs with 


65 






transversal, are separationa. 




.. 


II. 2. 


Different Lines, which 


p. 35- 66. 


J.V. 55 


pt of (2) 


make with a transversa 


1 






2 int Zs < 2 Ls, are in 








tersectional 




11. ,, 


jj ^ 


Separational Lines ar 


p. 36. 68 


12. 


II. 1 (i) 


equidistant 
Angles, which have th 
sides of the one separationa 


p. 37. Th. 
xvm 






from those of the other 




* 




each from each, are equal 




13. 

L "i. ,, 


18(2 


ThesZs of a A = 2 L 
An ext Z of a A = th 


p. 4 1. Th.xix 
r - 






a int opp Zs 





272 



APPENDIX IV. 



12. WILSON'S 'SYLLABUS '-MANUAL. 



'I. Th 



2. Th 

X p 2> 



4. Th 
*k P S 



3. Ax 



F( \s\sy 



5. Th 
6-6' real 



6. Th 



7. Th 
, or st e , or s^ p 



8. Th 



9. Th 



10. Th 

ext L of A = 2 int opp* Z s 

11. Th 

3 Zs of A=2 L s 



*\S\S P 



12. Th 
sE real 



13. Th 



TABLES 
I-IV 



f SYLLABUS ' 
MAITUAL 



l.Th 

2. 

3. Ax 

4. Th 

5. Th 



Lptof 4 

J5 3) 

II. 16 (!) 
1.5 

L9 



An ext Z of a A > 

either of the int opp Z s 

Two int Zs of a A < 
2 L s 

Inter sectional Lines 
cannot both be separa- 
tional from a third Line 

Different Lines, which 
make equal alt Zs with 
a transversal, are separa- 
tional 

If there be given a Line 
and a point not on it; a 
Line can be drawn, through 



p. 22. Th. 9. 
Proved as in 
Euc. 

p. 3 2.Th.!8. 
do. 

p. 42. Ax. 5. 
Playfair's Ax 
iom 

p.43-Th.21. 
Proved as in 
Euc. 

not stated, 
but tacitly de 
duced from Th. 



7REATMENT OF PARALLELS. 



273 



12. WILSON'S ' SYLLABUS '-MANUAL. 





TABLES 
I-IV 




' SYLLABUS '- 
MANUAL 






;he given point, separa- 


21 in course of 






ional from the given Line 


Th.25 


6. Th 


II. 1 


Separational Lines 


p. 24. Th.22 




ptof (2) 


make equal alt Zs with 








any transversal 




7 


not in Tab 


Different Lines, which 


p. 4 g.Th.23. 


j> 




make, with a transversal, 


Proved byEuc. 






equal alt Z s or equal ext 


1. 13, 15 






and int opp Zs or 2 int 








Z s = 2 L s, make with 








it equal Z s 




8. 


,, 1(2) 


Separational Lines 


p,46.Th.23. 






make, with any trans 


Cor 






versal, equal ext and int 








opp Z s, and 2 int Z s = 








2 L S 




9 


,,15 (3) 


Different Lines, which 


p. 46. Th.24 


47 3J 


77 \*J / 


are Separational from a 








third Line, are separa- 








tional from each other 




10. 


18 (i) 


An ext Z of a A=2 int 
opp Zs 


p. 47. Th.25. 
Proved as in 

Euc. 


11. 


(2) 


3ZsofA=2Ls 


do. do. 


12. 


8 


If there be given a Line 
and a point not on it ; a 


p. J72. ii. 
Enunciated as 






Line can be drawn, through 


a Theorem in 






the given point, equidistant 
from the given Line 


words ' Locus 
of a point, at a 








given distance 








&c/ but no 








proof supplied 



274 



APPENDIX IV. 



12. WILSON'S 'SinGLABUs'- MANUAL. 





TABLES 
I-V 




' SYLLABUS '- 
MANUAL 


13. Th 


II. 6 


Separational Lines are 


p.8i. Def.l. 






equidistant 


Assumed in 








words 'the per 








pendicular dis 








tance between 








the base and 








the opposite 








side' but no 








where proved 



APPENDIX V. 

Proof that, if any one proposition of Table II 

le granted as an Axiom, the rest can be 

deduced from it. (See p. 38.) 



"... and so we make it quite a merry -go-rounder." I was obliged to 
consider a little before I understood what Mr. Peggotty meant by this 
figure, expressive of a complete circle of intelligence. 



It Is to be proved that, if any one of the propositions of 
Table II be granted, the rest can be proved. 

Euclid I, 1 to 28, is assumed as proved. 

It is assumed that, where two propositions are contranominals, 
so that each can be proved from the other, it is not necessary to 
include both in the series of proofs. 

It is assumed as axiomatic that either of two finite magnitudes 
of the same kind may be multiplied so as to exceed the other. 

The following Lemmas are assumed as proved. They may 
easily be proved by the help of Euc. I. 4, 16, and 26. 

LEMMA 1. 

If, in two quadrilateral figures, three sides and the included 
angles of the one be respectively equal to three sides and the 
included angles of the other, the figures are equal in all respects. 

[Analogous to Euc. I. 4. 

LEMMA 2. 

If, in two quadrilateral figures, three angles and the adjacent 
sides of the one be respectively equal to three angles and the 
adjacent sides of the other, the figures are equal in all respects. 

[Analogous to Euc. I. 26 (a). 
T 2 



276 APPENDIX V. 



LEMMA 3. 

It is not possible to draw two perpendiculars to a Line from 
the same point. 



The first cyclical series includes props. 4, 3, 11, 8, 17, 13, 
9, 18, each of which is proved by the one next before it, 
without the help of any other, the last being used to prove 
the first. Hence, if any one of these eight be granted, the 
rest can be proved. 



(a), n.4. 



Lines , which have a separate point and make equal angles with 
a certain transversal, do so with all transversals. 



Let AB, CD, make equal Zs with EF] and let G-R be any 
other transversal ; then shall they make equal Z s with GH. 
Joi:q EH. 

Then the Z s of the A EFH= 2 L s ; [(*) 

and so also for the A EHG- ; 
/. the 4 Zfeof^.F.#=:4L-s; 
but the Z s QBF, EFH= 2 L s ; [%> 



.-. AB, CD, make equal Zs with Off. 

Therefore Lines which have &c. Q- E. D. 



CYCLICAL PROOFS OF TABLE II. 277 

0). H. 3. [sT m real] 

Through a given point without a given Line a Line can le 
drawn such tJiat the two Lines make equal angles with all trans 
versals. 

For, if through the given point there he drawn a transversal, 
there can also be drawn through it a Line such that the two 
Lines make equal Z s with the transversal ; [Euc. I. 23. 

and this Line will be such that the two Lines make equal 
Zs with all transversals. [(). 

Therefore &c. Q. E. D. 

(y). 11.11. \_st m VE} 

Lines, which make equal angles with a certain transversal 
are equidistant from each other. 



H 



Let AB, CD, make equal angles with EF. 

In CD take any points G, H, and draw GK, EL JL CD. 
Then shall GK=HL. 

Bisect OH at M, and draw MN J- CD. 

Now a Line can be drawn through E such that it and CD 
make equal Zs with all transversals; [(), 

and such a Line would make the Z AEFEFD ; 

,\ such a Line would coincide with AB ; 

/. the Z ZNM=NMH=L. 

Hence, in the figures KM, LM } the Zs at @, M, N, in the 
one, are respectively equal to the Z s at H } M, N, in the other, 
and the sides GM, MN, in the one, to HM, MN, in the other; 

.*. GKHL. [Lemma 2. 

Therefore Lines &c. Q. E. D. 



278 



APPENDIX V. 



(a). II. 8. [sE real] 

Through a given point without a given Line a Line may 
be drawn such that the two Lines are equidistant from each other. 

For, if through the given point there be drawn a transversal, 
there can also be drawn through it a Line such that the two 
Lines make equal Z s with the transversal ; [Euc. I. 23. 

and this Line will be such that the two Lines are equidistant 
from each other. LvX)- 

Therefore, &c. Q- E - D - 

(0. II. 17. 

A Line cajinot recede from and then approach another; nor 
can one approach and then recede from another on the same side 
<>f & 

B 




H 



If possible, let ABO first recede from, and then approach, 
DE> that is, let the perpendicular -Z?#*be > each of the two 
perpendiculars AF, CH. 

From GB cut off GK=AF '; and first let AF=Cff. 

Now a Line may be drawn, through A, eqmdistant from 
OE; [(S). 

and it will pass through K and C j 

.-. two Lines, AKO t AJ5G, contain a space ; which is absurd. 
t Secondly, let A F^ OH ; and let AF be the greater. Produce 
SO to L> making HL=AF. 

ISieai a Line, drawn through A, equidistant from DU, will 
pass fcougit K and L 9 which lie on opposite sides of EG ; 



CYCLICAL PROOFS OF TABLE 77 279 

.-. it will cut BO ', 
let it cut it at M ; 

,\ two Lines, AKM, ABM, contain a space ; which is absurd. 
Similarly it may be proved that ABO cannot first recede from 
and then approach DE, on the same side of it. 

Therefore a Line, &c. Q. E. D. 



/*-\ TT f e\ f "T^ XT'] 

(Q. JL1. 13. [se IT -c/J 

Lines t of which one contains two points equidistant from the 
other, are equidistant from each other. 

A ELF o 



G K H 

Let AB contain two points JB, F, equidistant from CD. From 
E, F, draw EG-, FH, j- CD ; bisect GH in K, and from K draw 
EL JL CD. 

Then EGFH*, [hyp. 

hence, in the figures EK, FK, the sides EG, GK, KL, in 
the one, are respectively equal to FH, HK, XL. in the other, 
and the Z s at G, K, in the one, to the Z s at H, K in the 
other ; 

/. the Zs at L are equal, and are right. [Lemma 1. 

Hence, if the diagram be reversed, KL retaining its position, 
AB will coincide with BA. 

Hence, if there be a point in LA whose distance is < LK, 
there is another such point in LB, and the Line AB will first 
recede from and then approach CD ; which is absurd. [(*). 

Similarly if there be one whose distance is >LK. 

.*. AB is equidistant from CD. 

Similarly, CD is equidistant from AB. 

Therefore Lines, &c. Q- E. D. 



280 



APPENDIX V. 



(ij). II. 9, [SB f T M ] 

Lines, of which one contains two points equidistant from tJie 
other, make equal angles with all transversals. 



H E B 



L F K 



Let AB contain two points equidistant from CD, and let EF 
be a certain transversal : then shall the Z AEF=EFD. 

For 1J3 ? (70, are equidistant from each other. [(). 

Bisect EF*tG; through draw HffK -L CD; in (75 take 
two points I, M, equidistant from K; and draw LN, ME, 
JLGD. 

Then LN-MB. 

Hence, in the figures JSK, EK, the sides Nl, LK, KH, in the 
one, are respectively equal to EM, M, KS, in the other, and 
the Z s at L, K, in the one, to the Z s at J/, K in the other; 

/. the Zs at H are equal, and are right. [Lemma 1. 

Hence, if A GEE be applied to A GKF, so that GE coincides 
-with GF, and Z EGH with the equal Z J<?A' ? #ff will fall on 
FK; otherwise from the same point two perpendiculars would 
be drawn to f , which is impossible; [Lemma 3. 



Q- E - 



Therefore Lines, <fec. 



CYCLICAL PROOFS OF TABLE II, 



281 



(6). II. 18. 

If one side of a triangle "be produced, the exterior angle is 
equal to the two interior and opposite angles; and the three 
angles of a triangle are together equal to two right angles. 




Let BA , a side of the triangle BAG, be produced to D. 
From A draw AE J. EC; take F 3 any other point in SO, 
and from F draw FCr JL BC and equal to AE ; and join AG. 
Then, v A, (?, are equidistant from BC, 
/. AG 9 BC, make equal Zs with all transversals; [(>?). 

that is, L DAG =5, and GAC=C; 
.-. the whole L DAC=B+C. 
To each add L BAG] 

then the 3 Zs of the A=Zs DAG, BAC=2 Ls. 
Therefore if one side &c. Q. E. D. 



282 



APPENDIX V. 



The second cyclical series includes props. 16 (i), 1 (2), 6. 



(*). II. 16 (t). [Z\ 



\S\8Y] 



Intersecting Lines cannot both be separational from the same 
Line. 




If possible, let AB, CD, intersecting at E, be both separa- 
tional from FG. 

In ED take any point K, and draw EH, KLM, _L FG. 

Then, v AB is separational from FG y EHLM-, [(/*). 

and v CD is separational from FG, EH=KM; 

.'. LM-=KM> which is absurd. 

Therefore intersecting Lines &c. Q. R D. 



(X). 11.1(2). 
Separational Lines make equal angles with all transversals. 




Let AB 9 CD, be separational Lines; and let EFG be any 
transversal. 

If Z XFBzFGD, let EFB be the greater; and make Z 



CYCLICAL PROOFS OP TABLE II. 283 

.*. FH is separational from CD ; [Euc, I. 26. 

.*. the intersectional Lines AB, FH, are botli separational 
from CD ; which is absurd. [(). 

.-. Z .##5 is not > FGD; 
similarly, it is not less ; 
.-. AB, CD, make equal Zs with EFG. 
Therefore separational Lines &c. Q. E. D. 



(4 n.6. 

Separational Lines are equidistant from each other. 
ELF 



K H 



Let AB, CD } be two separational Lines; and from any 
points E, F, draw J2&, FH, J, to CD ; they shall be equal 

Bisect GH at K, and draw KL J_ to CD ; 

/. the angle ELK~LKH~& right angle; [(X). 

hence, in the figures EK, FK> the Z s at ff , K, L, in the 
ane, are respectively equal to the Zs at H, K> L, in the other, 
and the sides GK, KL^ in the one, to HK, KL, in the other ; 

/. EG=FH. [Lemma 2. 

Similarly for any other two points in AB. 

/. AB is equidistant from CD. 

Similarly, CD is equidistant from AB. 

Therefore separational Lines &c. Q. E, D. 



284 



APPENDIX V. 



It remains to be shewn that, if either cyclical series be proved, 
a member of the other series can be deduced from it. 

This will be done by first deducing prop. 7 (the contra- 
nominal of prop. 6, a member of the second series) from the first 
series; and secondly deducing prop. 4 (a member of the first 
series) from the second series. 



(,).!!. 7. 

Lines, which hace a separate point, and one of which has two 
points unequally distant from the other, are inter sectional. 



K 



Let AB contain two points E, F, whose distances from CD 
(EG, FFI) are unequal, EG being the greater : they shall be 
intersectional. 

Produce fIFto K, making HK^GE] join EK, and produce 
it to L. 

Then CD, EL are equidistant from each other, [(). 

and EG is _L EL, . [(,), 

and is the common distance between CD and EL. 

la FB, produced if necessary, take FM=JBF; through M 
draw NR j_ CD and EL ; in MN take MS=sF t and join F&. 

\- KH, NR, are both JL CD, 

.;LEFK-FHSi [(a). 

alao JSP, FK^FM, MS] 

/, L F8MEKF, and is right. 



CYCLICAL PROOFS OF TABLE 2L 285 

Again, v EL, FS are both _i_ NS, 

.*. they are equidistant ; [(-y). 

.-. NS^KF-, 

,-. NM = double KF. 

Similarly, by taking in EB, produced if necessary, any multiple 
of EF 9 a point will be found in EB wkose distance from EL is 
the same multiple of KF ; 

but there is a multiple of KF which > EG- ; [Axiom 

.-. a point may be found in EB, produced if necessary, whose 
distance from EL > the common distance between CD and EL ; 

.-. AB, CD, are intersectional. 

Therefore Lines which have &c. Q. E. D. 

(I), ii. 4 . \?t m p ay 

Lines, which have a separate paint and make equal angles 
with a certain transversal, do so with all transversals. 

For they are separational, [Euc. I. 27, 28. 

and therefore make equal Z s with all transversals. [(X). 

Therefore Lines &c. Q. E. D. 



APPENDIX VI. 



List of propositions of Euc. /, //, with references 

to their occurrence in the manuals of his 

Modern Rivals. 



1. REFERENCES TO LEGENDRE, CUTHBERTSON, 
' SYLLABUS '-MANUAL. 



EUCLID 


LEGENDRE 


CUTHBERTSOtf 


1 SYLLABUS '- 
MANUAL 


I 


I 


Page 


I 


Page 


I 


Page 


Ax 10 


Ax 4 


6 


Ax 


2 


Def5 


7 


11 


Th I 


?J 


Th 8 Cor 


17 


Th 1 


12 


12 


23 


26 










1 Pr 






Pr A 


11 






2 






(P) 


74 






3 






te) 


75 






4 Th 


Th 6 


10 


Th 1 


4 


Th 5 


18 


5 


12 


14 


2 


5 


6 


20 


Cor 


Cor 








Cor 




6 Th 


Th 13 


15 


4 


7 


8 


22 


Cor 










Cor 




7 Th 






(r) 


76 






8 


Th 11 Sch 


14 


5 


8 


15 


28 


9 Pr 


Pr 5 


51 


Pr B 


12 


Pr 1 


61 


10 


1 


49 


C 


13 


4 


63 


n ,, 


2 


50 


7 


16 


2 


62 


12 


3 





11 


20 


3 


33 



APPENDIX VI. 1. 



287 



1. KEFEEENCES TO WILSON,. PIERCE, 

WlLLOOK. 



EUCLID 


WILSON 


PlEBCE 


WlLLOCK 


I 


I 


Page 




Page 




Page 


Ax 10 


Ax 2 


3 


16 Th 


6 






11 


Th 


7 






Th 


10 


12 














1 Pr 










1 


33 


2 










2 


34 


3 










3 


36 


4 Th 


Th 16 


26 


51,52 


15 


9 


46 


5 


8 


21 


55 


16 


1 


40 


Cor 


Cor 


> 


56 


17 






6 Th 


10 


22 


58 





6(1) 


43 


Cor 


Cor 


)> 


59 









7 Th 






60 


18 






8 


18 


28 


61 





8 


45 


9 Pr 


Pr 1 


40 


138 


39 


5 


35 


10 


3 


42 


132 


38 


6 


36 


11 ,, 


2 


41 


134 


?? 


7 


j> 


12 


4 


42 


133 


3J 


8 


5> 



288 



APPENDIX VI. 1. 



EUCLID 


LEGENDKE 


CUTHBEETSON" 


6 SYLLABUS '- 
MANUAL 






Page 




Page 




Page 


13 Th 


Th 2 


7 


Th 9 


18 


Th 2 


13 


14 


4 


9 


10 


19 


3 


14 


15 


5 





6 


14 


4 


5) 


16 (a) 






13 


22 


9 


22 


* ' ?J 






" 


23 


18 


32 


18 


14 


15 


14 


24 


! 10 


23 


19 








15 


25 


11 


24 


20 


8 


11 


16 


26 


12 


25 


21 


9 


12 


17 


27 


13 


26 




II 












22 Pr 






PrD 


30 


Pr 5 


64 


23 


Pr 4 


51 


E 


31* 


6 


65 




I 












24 Th 


ThlO 


12 


Thl8 


28 


Thl4 


27 


25 


Sch 


13 


19 


29 


16 


29 


26 () 


7 


11 


3 


6 


7 


21 


(*) 






25 Cor 


43 


17 


30 


27 Th 


Th24 Sch 


28 


Th20 


36 


TU21 


43 


28 (a) 


J} 





J? 


37 






(J)) 


22 


25 










29 (a) 
(&) 


24 Cor 2 
Sch 


28 


21 


38 

3} 


22 

23 Cor 


44 
46 


(c) 


24 


)} 





39 






30 


25 


29 


22 


40 


24 


I 




n 












SI Pr 


Pr 6 


52 


Lemma 


34 


Pr 7 


66 



APPENDIX VI. 1. 



289 



EUCLID 


WILSON 


PlEECB 


WlLLOCK 






age 




ge 




ge 


13 Th 
14 
15 


Th 1 


8 
9 


24 
23 





h 4 


1 



16 (a),, 
(*) 


Th 7 Cor4 





* 




12 


3 


17 
18 . 
19 
20 


9 

11 
13 


21 
22 

24 


62 


- 


f\ 

6(2) 


43 

44 


21 


Th 


35 


40 








22 Pr 


Pr 5: 


43 


143 


40 


1 


54 


aO jj 


SCor I 


44 


136 


39 


9 


av 


24 T 


Tli 17 


27 


63 


19 


12 


47 


nK 


19 


?,9 






n 


jj 


26 (a) 


15 


26 


54 


16 


10 
11 


46 


27 T 














28 (a) 














29 (0) 














(c). 














30 














31 















290 



APPENDIX VL 1. 



EUCLLD 


LEGENDKE 


CUTHBEBTSON 


c SYLLABUS '- 
MANUAL 




I 


Page 




Page 




Page 


32(a)Th 


Thl9Cor6 


23 


Th24 


42 


Th25 


47 


(hi 


19 


20 


SJ 





yj 


>> 


Cor 1 
2 


20 


23 


30 Cor 
30 


49 

48 


26 . 
Cor 


48 
49 


33 Th 


30 


32 


23 


41 


30 


53 


34 (a),, 
(*) 


28 

3) 


30 
31 


26 


44 


27, 28 
28 


50 

39 












II 




35 Th 






Th31 


52 


Th 1 


82 


36 






Cor 


53 






37 






32 Cor 


54 






38 








w 






39 






33 


55 


Th 2 Cor 3 


84 


40 






Cor 











41 






32 


54 






42 Pr 






Pr L 


59 


Pr 1 


99 


43 Th 






Th34 


56 


Th 4 


86 


44 Pr 






PrM.Cor 


60 


Pr 2 


100 


45 






1ST. Cor 


61 


3 





Cor 














46 Pr 






Pr K 


51 






46 Cor 






Th27 


45 








III 


















35 


57 






47 Th 


Thll 


71 


36 


58 


Th 9 


91 


48 















APPENDIX VL 1. 



291 



EUCLID 


WILSON 




PIERCE 




WlLLOCB 








age 




age 




age 


32(a)Th 

(&) 

Cor 1 | 


Th 7 



6 Cor 


20 

33 

16 


71 
65 
72 


21 
20 
21 


ThUCorl 
14 


15 
14 


2 


6 


j> 










33 Th 














34 (a) 
(&) 














35 Th 














36 














37 














38 














39 














40 














41 














42 Pr 














43 Th 














44 Pr 














45 

Cor 














46 Pr 














46 Co 














47 Th 
48 


29 


63 


256 


74 


14 
18 


84 

88 



U 2 



292 



APPENDIX VI. 1. 



EUCLID 


LEGENDBE 


CUTHBERTSON 


6 SYLLABUS '- 
MANUAL 


II 


ni 


Page 


II 


Page 


U 


Page 


1 Th 






Thl 


82 


Th5 


87 


2 






Corl 


83 


Cor 2 


88 


3 






Cor 2 


j> 


Corl 




4 


Th 8 


69 


Th2 


84 


Th 6 




Cor 














5 Th 










8 Cor 


91 


Cor 


10 


70 






8 


90 


6 Th 










8 Cor 


91 


7 


9 





2 


.84 


7 


89 


8 









85 












I 








9 






Th(m) 


72 


13 


96 


10 






Cor 


)) 


? 


)j 








II 








11 Pr 






PrB 


89 


Pr 6 


103 


12 Th 


Thl3 


74 


Th3 


86 


ThlO 


94 


13 


12 


73 


4 


87 


11 


95 


14 Pr 






PrA 


88 


Pr 4 


101 



APPENDIX VI. 1. 



293 



EUCLID 


WILSON 


FIERCE 


"WlLLOCK 


II 




Page 




Page 




Page 


1 Th 














2 














3 
4 


Th25 


60 






Cor 3 


74 


Cor 
5 Th 
Cor 
6 Th 
7 Th 
8 


27 Cor 
27 

26 


62 
61 

60 






10 
6 
11 
5 
9 


82 
76 
83 
75 

78 


9 


28 


63 






12 


83 


10 










13 


84 


11 Pr 


Ex 3 


67 






14 


104 


12 Th 


Th31 


66 






16 


87 


13 


30 


65 






17 


88 


14 Pr 


(4) 


71 


289 


84 


3 


96 



294 



APPENDIX VL 2. 



2. KEFEBENCES TO THE OTHEB MODEBK EIYALS. 



EUCLID 


CHAITVEKET 


LOOMIS 


I 


I 


Page 


I 


Page 


Ax 10 


Ax 


12 


Ax 11 


17 


11 


1 Cor 


14 


1 Cor 


18 


12 


14 Cor 3 


26 


23 Cor 3 


34 


1 Pr 










2 










3 










4 Th 


20 Th 


30 


6 Th 


22 


5 


25 


33 


10 


24 


Cor 


Cor 


34 


Cor 2 


25 


6 Th 


27 




1 -I 




Cor 


Cor 




IX J? 

Cor 


" 


7 Th 








" 


8 


22 


31 


15 


27 




II 




V 




9 Pr 


28 Pr 


78 


5 Pr 


95 


10 


25 


76 


1 


93 


11 
12 


26 
27 


77 


2 
3 


94 




I 




I 




13 Th 


2 Th 


15 


2 Th 


19 


i* 9) 


3 


17 


3 


20 


15 


* 





5 




(*),, 





















18 

19 


26 

28 


34 
35 


12 . 

jj jj 


25 


1 21 ja)',) 


17 


29 


8 
9 


23 

24 


-. (5) " . 


19 


30 







APPENDIX VI. 2. 



295 



2. HEFEKEKCES TO THE OTHER MODEEK RIVALS. 



EUCLID 


MOEELL 


EETNOLDS 


WEIGHT 


I 


I 


Page 


I 


Page 


I 


Page 


Ax 10 


Ax 


1 






A* 


1 


11 


Th iCor 


5 


Ax 


2 


Th 


6 


12 


25 Cor 


26 






16 Sch 


35 


1 Pr 














2 














3 














4Th 


Th 5 


9 


Thl4 


15 


Th8 (2) 


16 


5 


, 10 


13 


33 11 


12 


9 (3) 


19 


Cor 


Corl 


J? 


Cor 2 




Cor 


20 


6Th 


11 


14 


12 Cor 


13 


9 (i) 


18 


Cor 


Cor 


15 






Cor 


20 


7Th 














8 


9 


12 


13 


14 


8 (3) 


16 




* 








II 




9Pr 


Pr 9 


66 


Pr 2 


30 


Pr 9 


87 


10 






1 


29 


8 


86 


*! it 






33 3 


31 


33 11 


88 


12 


7 


64 


33 





33 33 





13 Th 


Th 2 


6 


Thl 


3 


Th 2 


8 


13: J? 


3 


7 


33 33 


?J 


i> 3 





15. 


4 


8 


33 2 


4 


5 


11 


16 () 






10 Cor 2 


12 






(6),, 






33 


J? 






* ' 7J 














18 


12 


15 


12 


13 


9 (4) 


19 


19 


33 


33 





j> 


33 9 (2) 


18 


20 






3 


5 





13 


21 (a) 


8 


12 


4 


' 3J 


6 


14 


(6),, 















296 



APPENDIX VI. 2, 



EUCLID 


CHATJVENET 


Looms 




II 


Page 


V 


Page 


22 Pr 
23 


34 Pr 

29 


81 
79 


4 Pr 


95 




I 




I 




24 Th 


24 Th 


33 


13 Th 


26 


25 


Cor 





14 


27 


26 (a),, 


21 


31 


7 


23 


(&) 
27 


14 


25 


22 


33 


28 (a) 

(*) 

29(a) 


Cor 1 
,. 2 
13 
1 Cor 2 


7? 

26 
24 
25 


21 ," 
23 


32 
33 


30 " 


99 3 

12 


2*4 


24 


34 




II 




V 




31 Pr 


30 Pr 


79 


6 Pr 


96 




I 




I 




32(a)Th 


18 Cor 1 


29 


27 Th 


36 


H)\ 


Th 


? , 








" Corl 


29 


37 


28 


37 


2 


Cor 2 


38 


29 





33 Th 


32 


40 


32 





34 


30 


39 


30 


38 


35 










36 










37 










38 










39 










40 










41 











APPENDIX VI. 2. 



297 



EUCLID 


MORELL 


BEYNOLDS 


WEIGHT 






Page 




Page 


II 


Page 


22 Pr 


Pr 6 


64 


Pr 7 


32 


Pr 6 


83 


23 


1 


61 


4 


32 


1 


79 


24 Th 


Th 7 


10 ' 






Th 7 


15 


25 














26 (a) 


6 


10 


Thl5 


16 


i. 8 C 1 ) 


16 


27 T, 


25 


25 


7 Cor 2 


9 


,3 16 


33 


28 a) 






7 ' 








&) 


33 33 




Cor 3 


33 


33 3} 
33 3} 


33 
13 


29 a) , 


24 


24 


8 Cor 2 


10 


33 33 


73 


&) 


23 


22 


?> * 


}} 


33 33 


33 


c),, 


24 


24 


Cor-3 


n 


33 3 





30 


22 


22 


33 *^ 


11 


14 Sch 


60 












II 




31 Pr 


Pr 8 


65 






Pr 7 


85 


32(a)Th 


Th28Corl 


28 


ThlO 


11 


Thl9Cor 


41 


w 


28 


27 


33 3) 


33 


19 


33 


Corl 


29 


29 


18 


20 


20 


42 


2 


30 


30 


35 J3 


33 


Cor, 


43 


33 Th 


33 


33 


33 17 


-20 


22 


48 


34 


31 


31 


16 


19 


,3 21 


47 








and III 1 


60 












HI 




TV 




35 






Th 2 


61 


Th 1 


185 


36 






Cor 


J? 






37 






33 4 


62 


Cor 


186 


38 






Corl 









39 






Cor 2 


63 


'Sch 


187 


40 
















41 






3 


62 







298 



APPENDIX .VI. 2. 



EUCLID 


CHATJVEI^BT 


LOOMIS 






Page 




Page 


42 Pr 










43 Th 










44 Pr 










45 










Cor 










46 Pr 












IV 




IV 




46 Cor 










47 Th 


10 Th 


133 


11 Th 


73 


48 










II 










1 Th 










2 










3 










4 






8 Th 


71 


Cor 










5Th 










Cor 






10 


73 


6Th 










7 






9 


72 


8 >, 










9 










10 










11 Pr 










12 Th 


16 Th 


113 


13 Th 


76 


13 


15 


112- 


12 


75 


14 Pr 


12 Pr 


136 


22 Pr 


103 



APfEN&IX VI. j2. 



299 



EUCLID 


MQRELL 


REYNOLDS 


WEIGHT 






Page 




Page 




Page 


42 Pr 






Pr 1 


76 


Pr 2 


198 


43 Th 




1 


Th 1 Cor 


60 






44 Pr 














45 














Cor 














46 , 
















V 








IV 




46 Cor 
47 Th 


Th 8 


149 


Thl2 


69 


Th 2 


187 


48 














n 










IV 




iTh 














2 














3 
4 - 


Th 9 


151 


Th 9 


67 


Th 4 


190 


Cor 
5Th 
Cor 
6Th 
7 


11 
10 


152 
152 


11 

10 


68 
67 


5 
6 Cor 

n & 

4 Sch 


191 
193 
192 
191 


8 














9 














10 














11 Pr 










Pr 3 


198 




m 




IV 








12 Th 
13 


Th 22 

M 21 


101 
100 


Thl7 
16 


97 
>j 


Th 7 
8 


193 
194 


14 Pr 










Pr 2 Sch 


198 




102689 



OD< 

5 m 
5? 



