Chapter 6: On Providence

From anything at all that exists or happens in the world it is easy to praise Providence, provided a man has two things: the capacity to see what belongs to each person and each thing and what happens to it, and a grateful temper. Without those two, one man will not see what things are good for, and another will not be thankful for them even when he does see.

If God had made colours but not made the power of seeing them, what use would they have been? None whatever. And the other way round: if He had made the power of sight but had not made objects for that power to fall on, what use would it have been then? None whatever. Well, suppose He had made both, and had not made light? No use again. Who is it, then, who fitted this to that and that to this? Who fitted the knife to its sheath and the sheath to the knife? Nobody?

From the very make of a finished thing we are in the habit of concluding that it is certainly the work of some craftsman, and was not put together for nothing. Does each of those things prove a workman, then, and do visible objects and the power of sight and the light not prove Him? And the existence of male and female, and the desire of each for the other, and the ability to use the parts that were built for it — do these not declare the workman too?

If they do not, then consider how our understanding is made. When we meet things through the senses we do not simply take in impressions of them: we select something out of them, we take something away, we add, we put this and that together by means of them, and in fact we move from some things to others that are in a way like them. Is not even that enough to shift some men, and stop them forgetting the workman? If not, let them explain to us what it is that makes each particular thing — or how things so marvellous, so like the contrivances of art, could exist by chance and by their own motion.

Well then, is all this done only in us? A great deal of it is done only in us, being what a rational creature especially needed. But you will find much that we share with the animals. Do they understand what is being done, then? Not at all. Using a thing and understanding it are two different things. God needed the animals to use impressions, and needed us to understand the use of impressions. That is why for them it is enough to eat and drink and sleep and breed and do the rest of what each of them does; whereas for us, to whom He also gave the power of thought, those things are not enough. Unless we act properly and in an orderly way, in line with the nature and make of each thing, we shall never reach our true end. For where creatures are differently made, their actions and their ends are different too. In a creature made only for use, use by itself is enough; but in a creature that can also understand the use — man — there is no reaching his proper end without the exercise of understanding.

So God makes each animal for something: one to be eaten, another to work the land, another to give cheese, another for some similar use. What need have any of those to understand impressions and tell one from another? But God brought man in to be a spectator of God and of God's works — and not only a spectator, an interpreter. That is why it is a disgrace for a man to begin and end where the animals do. He ought rather to begin where they begin, and to end where nature ends in us; and nature ends in contemplation and understanding and a way of life in line with nature. So see that you do not die without having been a spectator of these things.

You travel to Olympia to look at the work of Phidias, and every one of you counts it a misfortune to die without having seen such things. But where no travelling is needed at all — where a man already stands with the works of God in front of him — will you not want to look at them and understand them? Will you not notice what you are, or what you were born for, or what this power of sight was given to you for?

"But there are disagreeable and difficult things in life."

And at Olympia there are not? Are you not scorched there? Are you not crushed by the crowd? Have you anywhere decent to bathe? Do you not get soaked when it rains? Do you not have your fill of noise and shouting and the rest of it? But I imagine you set all that against the magnificence of the spectacle, and put up with it.

Well then — have you not been given capacities to bear whatever happens? Have you not been given greatness of spirit? Courage? Endurance? If I have greatness of spirit, why should I trouble myself over anything that can happen? What is going to distract me, or disturb me, or look painful to me? Am I not to use the power for the purpose I was given it for, instead of sitting there grieving and moaning over events?

"Yes, but my nose runs."

What have you got hands for, slave? Is it not so that you can wipe your nose?

"So is it reasonable that there should be running noses in the world at all?"

How much better it would be to wipe your nose than to find fault with the universe.

What do you suppose Hercules would have amounted to if there had been no lion, no hydra, no stag, no boar, and no brutal and criminal men for him to drive out and clear away? What would he have been doing if none of it had existed? Plainly he would have rolled himself up and gone to sleep. In the first place, then, he would never have been Hercules, dozing his whole life away in that comfort. And even if he had been, what use would he have been? What use his arms, and the strength of the rest of him, and his endurance and his noble spirit, if circumstances had never come along to rouse him and train him?

Well, is a man to lay on such training for himself, then — to import a lion into his country from somewhere, and a boar, and a hydra? That would be folly and madness. But since they did exist, and were there to be found, they served to show what Hercules was and to give him his exercise.

Come then, you too: notice this, look at the capacities you have, and when you have looked at them, say — send me now, Zeus, any difficulty you please, for I have the means you gave me and the powers to do myself honour through whatever happens.

But no. You sit there trembling in case something happens, and weeping and moaning and groaning over what does happen, and then you blame the gods. What can come of such smallness of spirit but irreverence? And God has not only given us these capacities, by which we shall be able to bear anything that happens without being crushed or broken by it: like a good king and a true father, He has given them to us unblocked, subject to no compulsion, nothing standing in their way, and put them entirely in our own power — without even keeping back for Himself any power of blocking or hindering them.

And you, who were given these powers free and for your own, do not use them. You do not even see what you were given, or who gave it. Some of you are blind to the giver and will not so much as acknowledge your benefactor; others, out of smallness of spirit, take to fault-finding and bringing charges against God.

Yet I will show you that you have powers and means for greatness of spirit and courage. What powers you have for fault-finding and making accusations — that you can show me.
