Chapter 8: Why Logical Skill Is Not Safe in the Untrained

There are as many ways of varying the forms of arguments and enthymemes in argument as there are of exchanging equivalent expressions for one another. Here is an instance. If you have borrowed and not repaid, you owe me the money. You have not borrowed and you have not repaid; therefore you do not owe me the money. To do this skilfully suits no man better than the philosopher. If an enthymeme is an incomplete syllogism, then plainly a man trained in the complete syllogism must be just as expert in the incomplete one.

Why, then, do we not train ourselves and each other in this way? Because — I answer — as things stand, even though we do not train in these matters, and even though I at least do not draw you away from the study of how to live, we still make no progress in virtue. So what are we to expect if we take this occupation on as well? Especially since it would not merely be an occupation drawing us away from more necessary things: it would also be a cause of conceit and arrogance, and no small one.

The power of arguing and the capacity to persuade are great, particularly when much exercised and given the extra polish of good language. And in general, any capacity acquired by the untrained and the weak brings with it the danger of their being puffed up and swollen by it. What means could you use to persuade a young man who excels at this that he ought not to become an appendage to it, but to make it an appendage to himself? Does he not trample on all such arguments and strut about in front of us, puffed up and swollen, refusing to let anyone correct him or remind him of what he has neglected and where he has turned aside?

"What then — was Plato not a philosopher?"

And was Hippocrates not a physician? But you see how Hippocrates writes. Does Hippocrates write like that in his capacity as a physician? Why do you jumble together things that happen to have been combined in the same men? And if Plato was handsome and strong, ought I to set about becoming handsome or strong myself, as though that were necessary for philosophy, on the ground that a certain philosopher was handsome and a philosopher at once? Will you not see the difference, and distinguish what men become philosophers in respect of from what belongs to them in other respects? And if I were a philosopher, ought you to be made lame as well?

What of it, then? Am I taking these capacities of yours away from you? Not at all — no more than I take away the power of sight. But if you ask me what the good of a man is, I can name you nothing but a certain condition of the will with regard to impressions.
