Chapter 10: Against Those Chasing Promotion in Rome

If we applied ourselves to our own work as busily as the old men at Rome apply themselves to the business they are employed on, perhaps we too might get something done.

I know a man older than myself who is now superintendent of the corn supply at Rome. I remember when he came through here on his way back from exile, and what he said as he went over the events of his earlier life — how he declared that from his return onward he would attend to nothing but spending the rest of his days in quiet and peace. How little of life is left to me, he said.

You will not do it, I told him. The moment you get a whiff of Rome you will forget every word of this; and if they let you into the imperial palace, you will shoulder your way in gladly and thank God for it.

"Epictetus," he answered, "if you ever find me setting so much as one foot inside that palace, think what you like of me."

And what did he do? Before he had even entered the city, letters from Caesar met him. He took them, forgot the lot, and has been piling one piece of business on another ever since. I wish I were standing beside him now to remind him what he said as he came through, and to point out what a much better prophet I am than he is.

Well then — am I saying that man is a creature made to do nothing? Certainly not. We are active. Take me: as soon as the day comes I remind myself briefly of what I have to go over with my pupils. Then straight away I say to myself, and what is it to me how a certain person reads? The first thing for me is to get some sleep.

And what likeness is there anyway between what they do and what we do? Look at what they do and you will see. What do they do all day long but make up accounts, hold enquiries, give and take advice about a little grain, a scrap of land and profits of that sort? Is it the same thing to receive a petition and read in it, "I beg you to allow me to export a small quantity of corn," and to read one that runs, "I beg you to learn from Chrysippus how the world is administered, and what place the rational creature holds in it; and to consider who you are, and what your good and your bad consist of"? Are these things alike? Do they call for the same amount of care? Is it as disgraceful to neglect the one as the other?

Well then — are we the only lazy ones, the only ones who love our sleep? No: much more it is you young men. When we old men see young men playing we are eager to join in and play too; and if I saw you keen and hard at work, I should be far more eager still to join you in the serious business.
