Chapter 11: On Family Affection

A magistrate came to visit him, and Epictetus asked him about various matters, and among them whether he had a wife and children. The man said he had.

And how do you find it?

"Miserable," said the man.

In what way? Men do not marry and have children in order to be wretched — rather the opposite.

"But I am so wretched over my children," the man said, "that lately, when my little girl was ill and they thought her in danger, I could not bear to stay with her. I left the house until somebody sent word that she had recovered."

Well — do you think you did right?

"I acted naturally," the man replied.

Then satisfy me that you acted naturally, and I will satisfy you that whatever happens according to nature happens rightly.

"That is how all fathers behave," he said, "or at any rate most of them."

I do not deny it. But what we are asking is whether such behaviour is right. On your reasoning we should have to say that tumours come for the good of the body, because they do come; and generally, that doing wrong is natural, because nearly all of us do wrong, or at least most. So show me how your behaviour was natural.

"I cannot," he said. "You show me rather how it was not according to nature, and not rightly done."

Well, said Epictetus, if we were enquiring about white and black, what test would we use to tell them apart?

"Sight."

And about hot and cold, hard and soft?

"Touch."

Then since we are enquiring about what is according to nature, and what is done rightly and not rightly, what sort of test do you think we should use?

"I do not know."

And yet not knowing the test for colours and smells, or for tastes, is perhaps no great harm. But if a man does not know the test for good and bad, and for what is according to nature and against it — does that seem a small harm to you?

"The greatest harm there is."

Come, tell me: does everything that strikes some people as good and proper rightly strike them so? Is it possible that the Jews and the Syrians and the Egyptians and the Romans are all of them right in their views about food?

"How could they be?"

Well, I suppose it is absolutely necessary that if the Egyptians are right the rest must be wrong, and if the Jews are right the rest cannot be.

"Certainly."

And where there is ignorance, there is also a want of learning and training in things that matter.

He agreed.

Then you, said Epictetus, now that you know this, will from now on give your serious attention to nothing else. You will apply your mind to nothing but learning the test of what is according to nature, and to using it to settle each case as it comes. And in the present business I can help you this far. Does affection for your own family strike you as being according to nature, and good?

"Certainly."

And is such affection natural and good, while what is consistent with reason is not good?

"By no means."

Then is what is consistent with reason in conflict with affection?

"I think not."

Quite right. If it were otherwise, then of two conflicting things one being according to nature, the other would have to be against nature. Is that not so?

"It is."

So whatever we find to be both affectionate and consistent with reason, we can confidently declare right and good.

"Agreed."

Well then, to leave your sick child and go away is not reasonable, and I do not suppose you will claim it is. What is left is to enquire whether it was consistent with affection.

"Yes, let us consider that."

You had an affectionate disposition toward your child. Did you do right, then, in running off and leaving her? And has her mother no affection for the child?

"Of course she has."

Ought her mother to have left her too, then, or not?

"She ought not."

And the nurse — does she love the child?

"She does."

Ought she to have left her as well?

"By no means."

And the man who looks after her lessons, does he not love her?

"He does."

Ought he to have deserted her too? So then, should the child have been left alone and helpless, on account of all this great affection of yours and of the people around her — or should she have died in the hands of people who neither loved her nor cared for her?

"Certainly not."

Now this is unfair and unreasonable: to refuse to let people who have as much affection as you do the very thing you think proper for yourself to do, on the ground that you have affection. It is absurd. Come then: if you were ill, would you want your relatives to be affectionate in this way — all of them, children and wife too — to the point of leaving you alone and deserted?

"By no means."

And would you want to be loved by your own people in such a way that, through their excessive affection, you were always left alone when you were ill? Or would you sooner pray, if it were possible, to be loved by your enemies and deserted by them? And if that is so, what follows is that your behaviour was not an act of affection at all.

Well then — was there nothing that moved you and drove you to desert your child? How could there be nothing? But it may have been something of the kind that moved a certain man at Rome to cover his head while the horse he had backed was running; and when the horse unexpectedly won, they had to bring sponges to bring him round from his faint.

What is the thing that moves us, then? Discussing that exactly is perhaps not for now. It is enough to be convinced of this much, if what the philosophers say is true: that we must not look for it anywhere outside, but that in every case it is one and the same thing that causes us to do or not do something, to say or not say something, to be puffed up or downcast, to avoid a thing or go after it — the very thing that is at this moment the cause for me and for you: for you, of coming to me and sitting and listening, and for me, of saying what I am saying.

And what is that? Anything but our will to do so? Nothing else. If we had willed otherwise, what else would we have been doing but the thing we willed? So this was the cause of Achilles' grief — not the death of Patroclus, since another man does not behave like that when his companion dies, but the fact that Achilles chose to. And in your case this was the very cause of your running away then: that you chose to. And on the other side, if you stay with her in future, the cause will be the same. And now you are going to Rome because you choose to; and if you change your mind, you will not go.

In a word: neither death nor exile nor pain nor anything of the kind is the cause of our doing or not doing anything. Our own judgments and our own choices are.

Do I convince you of this, or not?

"You convince me."

Then as the causes are in each case, so are the effects. So from this day on, whenever we do something wrongly, we shall lay it at the door of nothing but the judgment we did it from; and that is what we shall set about removing and cutting out — more than we would cut tumours and abscesses out of the body. And in the same way we shall give the same account of the cause of the things we do rightly. We shall stop putting forward as the cause of any evil to us a slave, or a neighbour, or a wife, or children, being convinced that if we do not think things to be what we do think them, we do not perform the acts that follow from thinking so — and that thinking or not thinking is in our power, and not in externals.

"That is so," he said.

From this day, then, we shall enquire into nothing else and examine nothing else — not what quality or condition anything has, not land, not slaves, not horses, not dogs — nothing but judgments.

"I hope so."

You see, then, that you will have to become a scholar, a creature everyone laughs at, if you really mean to make an examination of your own judgments. And that this is not the work of a single hour or a single day, you know yourself.
