Chapter 17: Why Logic Is Necessary

Since reason is the capacity that analyses and perfects everything else, and ought not itself to go unanalysed, what is it to be analysed by? Plainly either by itself or by something else. If by something else, then that other thing is either reason too, or something superior to reason — which is impossible. And if it is reason, then who is to analyse that reason? If that reason does the job for itself, then our reason can do it for itself as well. And if we are going to need something further, the business goes on forever and never ends. So reason is analysed by itself.

Yes — but curing our judgments is more urgent, and things of that sort.

Do you want to hear about those, then? Listen. But if you say to me, "I do not know whether you are arguing truly or falsely," and if I express myself somewhere ambiguously and you say, "Draw the distinction," I shall put up with you no longer. I shall say to you: it was more urgent.

That, I suppose, is why the Stoic teachers put the logical art first — as in measuring out corn we start by examining the measure. If we do not settle first what a peck is and what a balance is, how shall we be able to measure or weigh anything at all?

So in this case, if we have not fully learned and accurately examined the test of everything else, by which everything else is learned, shall we be able to examine or learn anything accurately? How could we?

Yes, but the peck measure is only a bit of wood, and bears no fruit.

But it can measure corn.

Logic bears no fruit either.

We shall see about that. But even if a man granted it, it is enough that logic has the power of distinguishing and examining other things, and, so to speak, of measuring and weighing them. Who says so? Only Chrysippus and Zeno and Cleanthes? Does Antisthenes not say it? And who is it who wrote that the examination of names is the beginning of education? Does Socrates not say it? And of whom does Xenophon write that he began with the examination of names, and what each name meant?

Is this the great and marvellous thing, then — to understand Chrysippus, or to expound him? Who says that?

Then what is the marvellous thing?

To understand the will of nature.

Well then, do you grasp it yourself, by your own power? And what more do you need? If it is true that all men go wrong unwillingly, and you have learned the truth, then you must necessarily be acting rightly.

But in fact I do not grasp the will of nature. So who tells us what it is?

They say Chrysippus does.

I go along, and I enquire what this interpreter of nature says. I begin not to understand what he says. I look for an interpreter of Chrysippus. Well, consider how this is put — just as if it were put in Latin.

And what has the interpreter got to be haughty about? There is nothing that could fairly be charged against even Chrysippus as haughtiness, if he only interprets the will of nature and does not follow it himself — and much more so with his interpreter. For we have no need of Chrysippus for his own sake, but so that we may understand nature. We do not need a diviner for his own sake, but because we think that through him we shall know what is coming and understand the signs the gods give. We do not need the entrails of animals for their own sake, but because signs are given through them. And we do not stare in wonder at the crow or the raven, but at God, who gives signs through them.

So I go to the man who interprets these things, the sacrificer, and I say: inspect the entrails for me, and tell me what signs they give.

The man takes the entrails, opens them, and interprets. Man, he says, you have a will that is by nature free from blocking and free from compulsion. It is written here in the entrails. I will show you this first in the matter of assent. Can any man block you from assenting to the truth? No man can. Can any man force you to accept what is false? No man can. You see that in this matter your will is unblocked, uncompelled, unimpeded.

Well then, in the matter of desire and going after an object, is it any different? And what can overcome pursuit but another pursuit? What can overcome desire and avoidance but another desire and avoidance?

"But if you put the fear of death in front of me, you do compel me."

No: it is not what is put in front of you that compels, but your judgment that it is better to do such-and-such than to die. In that case it was your own judgment that compelled you — will compelled will. If God had made that part of himself which he took from himself and gave to us capable of being blocked or compelled, either by himself or by another, he would not be God, and he would not be taking care of us as he ought.

This, says the diviner, is what I find in the victims: these are the signs given to you. If you choose, you are free. If you choose, you will blame no one and bring charges against no one. Everything at once will be according to your own mind and the mind of God.

It is for the sake of that divination that I go to this diviner, and to the philosopher — not admiring the man for his interpreting, but admiring the things he interprets.
