Chapter 19: How to Behave Toward Tyrants

If a man has some advantage, or thinks he has when he has not, and if he is untrained, he is bound to be puffed up by it. The tyrant, for instance, says: "I am master of everything."

And what can you do for me? Can you give me a desire that nothing can block? How could you? Do you have the unfailing power of avoiding what you want to avoid? Do you have the power of moving toward an object without going wrong? And where did you get such a power? Come — when you are on a ship, do you trust yourself or the helmsman? And in a chariot, whom do you trust but the driver? And how is it in all the other arts? Just the same. So where does this power of yours lie?

"Everyone pays me respect."

Well, I pay respect to my dinner plate: I wash it and wipe it. And for the sake of my oil flask I drive a peg into the wall. Are these things my superiors, then? No — but they supply some of my needs, and that is why I look after them. And do I not look after my donkey? Do I not wash his feet and rub him down?

Do you not know that every man looks after himself, and looks after you exactly as he looks after his donkey? Who looks after you as a man? Show me. Who wants to become like you? Who imitates you, the way men imitate Socrates?

"But I can cut off your head."

You are right. I had forgotten that I must pay you the same regard I pay a fever or an attack of bile — and put up an altar to you, as there is an altar to Fever at Rome.

What is it, then, that disturbs and frightens the crowd? The tyrant and his bodyguards? I should hope not. It is not possible that what is free by nature can be disturbed by anything else, or blocked by anything but itself. It is a man's own judgments that disturb him. When the tyrant says, "I will chain your leg," the man who values his leg says, "Don't — have pity on me." But the man who values his own will says, "If it looks more useful to you, chain it."

"Do you not care?"

I do not care.

"I will show you that I am master."

You cannot. Zeus set me free. Do you suppose he meant to let his own son be enslaved? You are master of my carcass. Take it.

"So when you come near me, you pay me no regard?"

No — I pay regard to myself. And if you want me to say I pay regard to you as well, I tell you that I pay you the same regard I pay my cooking pot.

This is not a twisted kind of self-regard. Every creature is made so as to do everything for its own sake. Even the sun does everything for its own sake — even Zeus himself. But when Zeus chooses to be the Giver of Rain and the Giver of Fruits and the Father of Gods and Men, you see he cannot get these offices and these names unless he is useful to mankind. And in general he has made the nature of the rational creature such that it cannot get any of its own proper interests unless it contributes something to the common interest. In that sense it is not antisocial for a man to do everything for himself. What did you expect — that a man should neglect himself and his own interest? And in that case how could there be one and the same principle in all creatures, the principle of attachment to themselves?

What follows, then? When absurd notions about things outside our will lie underneath our judgments — as though those things were good or bad — we cannot help paying regard to tyrants. Though I could wish men paid regard only to tyrants, and not to their bedchamber servants as well.

How is it that a man becomes wise all at once, the moment Caesar puts him in charge of the imperial chamber pot? How is it that we say straight away, "Felicion spoke very sensibly to me"? I wish he were thrown out of the bedchamber, so that he could look like a fool to you again.

Epaphroditus had a shoemaker whom he sold because he was good for nothing. By some stroke of luck the man was bought by one of Caesar's people and became Caesar's shoemaker. You should have seen the respect Epaphroditus paid him then. "And how is my good Felicion, may I ask?" And if one of us asked what the master was doing, the answer was, "He is consulting Felicion about something." Had he not sold the man as good for nothing? Who made him wise all of a sudden?

That is what it is to value something other than the things that depend on the will.

A man has been raised to a tribuneship. Everyone who meets him offers congratulations: one kisses his eyes, another his neck, the slaves kiss his hands. He goes home and finds the torches lit. He climbs the Capitol and offers sacrifice for the occasion. Now who ever sacrificed for having had good desires? For having acted in line with nature? We thank the gods, in fact, for the things we locate our good in.

Somebody was talking to me today about the priesthood of Augustus. Man, I said, let it alone; you will spend a great deal for nothing.

"But the men who draw up contracts will write my name in them."

Are you going to stand next to everyone who reads them and say, "That is my name written there"? And even if you could be present at all of them now, what will you do when you are dead?

"My name will survive."

Carve it on a stone and it will survive. But come — what memory of you will there be outside Nicopolis?

"But I shall wear a golden crown."

If you want a crown so badly, get a crown of roses and put that on. You will look far more elegant.
