Chapter 25: On the Same Subject

If these things are true, and if we are not being silly or acting a part when we say that a man's good is in the will and his evil too, and that everything else has nothing to do with us — why are we still disturbed? Why are we still afraid? The things we have been busy about are in nobody's power, and the things that are in other people's power we do not care about. What sort of trouble have we left?

"Give me instructions."

Why should I give you instructions? Has Zeus not given you instructions? Has he not given you what is your own, free from blocking and hindrance, and what is not your own, subject to blocking and hindrance? What instructions did you bring with you, then, when you came from him? Hold on to what is yours by every means; do not desire what belongs to others. Trustworthiness is your own. Self-respect is your own. Who can take these things from you? Who but yourself will block you from using them?

And what do you do? When you go after what is not your own, you lose what is. With such prompting and such orders from Zeus, what more do you want from me? Am I more powerful than he is? More to be trusted? If you keep to his, do you need any others?

"But he did not give those orders."

Produce your preconceptions. Produce the philosophers' proofs. Produce what you have often heard, and what you have said yourself; produce what you have read and what you have thought over. Then you will see that all of it comes from God.

How long is it right to keep to these instructions from God, and not break up the game? As long as the game is played properly. At the Saturnalia a king is chosen by lot, since it has been the custom to play at this. The king gives orders: you drink, you mix the wine, you sing, you go, you come. I obey, so that the game shall not be broken up because of me. But if he says, "Consider yourself in a bad way," I answer, I do not consider myself so — and who is going to force me to?

Again, we agreed to play Agamemnon and Achilles. The man appointed to play Agamemnon says to me, "Go to Achilles and take Briseis from him." I go. He says, "Come," and I come.

We ought to behave in life as we behave with hypothetical arguments. "Suppose it is night." I suppose it is night. "Well then, is it day?" No, because I granted the hypothesis that it was night. "Suppose you think it is night." Suppose I do. "But also think that it is night." That does not follow from the hypothesis.

So it is in this case too. "Suppose you are unlucky." Well, suppose I am. "Are you unhappy, then?" Yes. "Well, are you troubled by an unfavourable fortune?" Yes. "But think also that you are in misery." That does not follow from the hypothesis — and Another forbids me to think it.

How long, then, must we obey such orders? As long as it pays; and that means, as long as I keep what is fitting and consistent. Some men are sour and bad-tempered, and say, "I cannot dine with this man and have to listen to him telling me every day how he fought in Mysia. I told you, brother, how I climbed the hill — and then the siege started again." Another man says, "I would rather get my dinner and let him talk as much as he likes." And you must weigh these judgments up. Only do nothing in a downcast mood, nor as a man afflicted, nor as one who thinks himself miserable — because nobody forces you into that.

Has somebody made smoke in the room? If it is moderate, I shall stay. If it is too much, I go out. For you must always remember this and hold on to it: the door is open.

"Do not live in Nicopolis," you say to me. I will not live in Nicopolis. "Nor in Athens." I will not live in Athens. "Nor in Rome." I will not live in Rome. "Live on Gyarus." I will live on Gyarus — but living on Gyarus seems like a great deal of smoke to me, and I depart to the place where nobody will block me from living, since that dwelling is open to everyone. And as to the last garment, which is this poor body, nobody has any power over me beyond it.

This was why Demetrius said to Nero: "You threaten me with death, and nature threatens you."

If I fix my admiration on the poor body, I have handed myself over as a slave. If on my little property, the same: I show at once what I can be caught by. When a snake pulls in his head I tell you to strike the part he is guarding — and you may be sure that whatever part you choose to guard is the part your master will attack. Remember that, and whom will you go on flattering, or fearing?

"But I should like to sit where the senators sit."

Do you see that you are hemming yourself in, squeezing yourself?

"How else am I going to get a good view in the amphitheatre?"

Man, do not be a spectator at all, and you will not be squeezed. Why give yourself trouble? Or wait a little, and when the show is over sit down in the seats reserved for senators and sun yourself.

Remember this general truth: it is we who squeeze ourselves and hem ourselves in — that is, our judgments squeeze us and hem us in. What is it to be insulted? Stand by a stone and insult it; what will you get out of it? So if a man listens like a stone, what has the insulter gained? But if the insulter has the weakness of the insulted man as a foothold, then he does accomplish something.

"Strip him." What do you mean, him? Take hold of his coat and strip that off. "I have insulted you." Much good may it do you.

This was Socrates' practice, and it is why he always had the same face. But we would rather practise and study anything at all than the means by which we might be unblocked and free.

"Philosophers talk in paradoxes," you say. And are there no paradoxes in the other arts? What is more paradoxical than puncturing a man's eye so that he may see? If somebody said that to a man who knew nothing of surgery, would he not laugh at him? So where is the wonder if in philosophy too many things that are true look paradoxical to the inexperienced?
