Chapter 26: What the Rule of Life Is

While somebody was reading out hypothetical arguments, Epictetus said:

This too is a hypothetical law — that we must accept what follows from the hypothesis. But long before that law comes the law of life: that we must act in line with nature. If we want to observe what is natural in every matter and every circumstance, then plainly in everything we ought to aim at not letting the consequence escape us, and at not admitting the contradictory.

So philosophers train us first in theory, which is easier, and then lead us on to the harder things; because in theory there is nothing pulling us away from following what we are taught, whereas in the business of living there are a great many distractions. A man is ridiculous, then, who says he wants to start with the business of real life, since it is not easy to start with the harder things.

And this is the argument to use on parents who are annoyed at their children studying philosophy. Am I doing wrong, then, father? Do I not know what is suitable and proper for me? If this can neither be learned nor taught, why do you blame me? And if it can be taught, then teach me; and if you cannot, let me learn from the men who say they know how to teach it. What do you suppose — that I fall into evil and miss the good on purpose? I hope not. What is the cause of my going wrong, then? Ignorance. Do you not want me to be rid of my ignorance? Who was ever taught the pilot's art, or music, by anger? Do you suppose I shall learn the art of living by means of your anger?

Only a man who really has that intention is entitled to talk this way. But if a man reads these arguments and attends the philosophers merely to make a display at a dinner party and show that he knows about hypothetical arguments, what other object has he than that some senator sitting beside him should admire him? For that is where the really great opportunities are, and the wealth here at Nicopolis looks like small change there. This is why it is hard for a man to master his impressions where the things that upset his judgment are so large.

I know a man who complained, clutching Epaphroditus by the knees, that he had only a million and a half denarii left. And what did Epaphroditus do? Laugh at him, as we slaves of Epaphroditus did? No — he cried out in astonishment: "Poor man! How did you keep quiet about it? How did you bear it?"

When Epictetus had pulled up the man who was reading the hypothetical arguments, and the teacher who had set the reading was laughing at the reader, Epictetus said to the teacher: "You are laughing at yourself. You did not prepare the young man, and you did not find out whether he was able to follow this material; perhaps you are only using him as a reader."

Well then, said Epictetus: if a man has not the ability to follow a complex argument, do we trust him when he gives praise? Do we trust him when he gives blame? Do we allow that he is able to form a judgment about good or bad? And if such a man blames somebody, does the man care about the blame? And if he praises somebody, is that man puffed up — when in so small a matter as a hypothetical syllogism the man praising him cannot see what follows from the hypothesis?

This, then, is where philosophy begins: a man's perception of the state of his own governing part. When a man knows it is weak, he will not use it on the hardest things. But as it is, men who cannot swallow a mouthful buy whole volumes and try to bolt them down; and so they vomit them up again, or get indigestion, and then come the cramps and the running colds and the fevers. They ought to have considered what they were capable of.

In theory it is easy to convince an ignorant man; in the business of real life nobody offers himself up to be convinced, and we hate the man who has convinced us. But Socrates advised us not to live a life that goes unexamined.
