Chapter 28: Why We Should Not Be Angry at People; and What Counts as Small and Great

What is the cause of assenting to anything? The fact that it appears true. So it is not possible to assent to what appears untrue. Why? Because this is the nature of the understanding: to lean toward the true, to be dissatisfied with the false, and to withhold assent where things are uncertain.

What is the proof? Persuade yourself, if you can, that it is night now. You cannot. Take away your conviction that it is day. You cannot. Persuade yourself, or unpersuade yourself, that the stars are even in number. Impossible.

So when a man assents to something false, be sure he did not mean to assent to it as false. Every soul is deprived of the truth unwillingly, as Plato says: the falsehood looked true to him.

Well — in actions, what have we that corresponds to true and false here? We have the fitting and the unfitting, the profitable and the unprofitable, what suits a person and what does not, and the like. Can a man think a thing useful to him and not choose it? He cannot.

Remember how Medea puts it.

	I know the evil that I am about to do,
	but passion is stronger than my better judgment.

She thought that indulging her passion and taking revenge on her husband was more profitable than sparing her children. It was — to her. But she was deceived. Show her plainly that she is deceived and she will not do it; but so long as you do not show her, what can she follow but the way things look to her? Nothing else.

Why are you angry with the unhappy woman, then, for having gone astray about the most important things and become a viper instead of a human being? Why not rather pity her — as we pity the blind and the lame — since she has been blinded and crippled in the highest of her capacities?

Whoever clearly holds on to this — that a man's measure for every act is how the thing appears to him, whether it appears good or bad; that if it is good he is free from blame, and if bad he suffers the penalty himself, since it is impossible that the man deceived should be one person and the man who suffers another — whoever holds on to that will never be angry with anybody, or vexed with anybody, or insult or blame anybody, or hate or quarrel with anybody.

So do all these great and terrible deeds have their origin in how things appear? Yes: that origin and no other.

The Iliad is nothing but impressions and the use of impressions. It appeared to Paris that he should carry off the wife of Menelaus; it appeared to Helen that she should go with him. Now if it had appeared to Menelaus that being rid of such a wife was a gain, what would have happened? Not only would the Iliad have been lost, but the Odyssey too.

So did such great things hang on so small a matter? But what do you mean by "such great things"? Wars and civil disorder, and the destruction of many men and many cities. And what is so great about that? Is it nothing?

Well — what is so great about the death of many oxen and many sheep, or the burning and wrecking of many nests of swallows and storks? Are those things like these? Very like. Men's bodies are destroyed, and so are the bodies of oxen and sheep. Men's dwellings are burned, and so are storks' nests. What is great or terrible in it? Show me the difference between a man's house and a stork's nest, as far as each is a dwelling — except that a man builds his little house out of beams and tiles and bricks, and the stork builds hers out of sticks and mud.

Are a stork and a man alike, then? What do you say? In body they are very much alike.

Does a man differ from a stork in no respect at all? Do not suppose I say that. There is no difference in the respects I have mentioned. Where is the difference, then? Search and you will find it lies elsewhere. See whether it is not in a man's understanding of what he does; in his fellowship with others; in trustworthiness; in self-respect; in steadiness; in intelligence.

Where is the great good and the great evil in men, then? Where the difference is. If the difference is preserved and stays walled in — if self-respect is not destroyed, nor trustworthiness, nor intelligence — then the man is preserved too. But if any of these is destroyed and stormed like a city, then the man perishes; and this is what the great things consist of.

Paris suffered great damage, you say, when the Greeks invaded and sacked Troy and his brothers died. Not at all: no man is damaged by an act that is not his own. What happened then was only the destruction of storks' nests. The ruin of Paris was when he lost self-respect, trustworthiness, regard for hospitality and decency. And when was Achilles ruined? When Patroclus died? No. It happened when he began to be angry, when he wept over a girl, when he forgot that he was at Troy not to collect mistresses but to fight. These things are the ruin of men; this is being besieged; this is the destruction of cities — when right judgments are destroyed, when they are corrupted.

"But when women are carried off, and children taken captive, and the men killed — are these not evils?"

And how is it that you add these opinions to the facts? Explain that to me too.

"No — you explain how you can say they are not evils."

Let us come to the rules. Produce your preconceptions. It is because this is neglected that we cannot wonder enough at what men do. When we mean to judge weights, we do not judge by guesswork. Where we mean to judge straight from crooked, we do not judge by guesswork. In every case where it is in our interest to know the truth of a matter, not one of us ever does anything by guesswork. But in the things that depend on the first and only cause of doing right or wrong, of happiness or unhappiness, of good luck or bad — there alone we are careless and reckless. There we have nothing like a balance and nothing like a rule: an impression turns up, and straight away I act on it.

Am I to suppose I am better than Achilles or Agamemnon, then — that they, by following their impressions, do and suffer such great evils, while for me the impression is quite good enough?

And what tragedy has any other beginning? The Atreus of Euripides — what is it? An impression. The Oedipus of Sophocles? An impression. The Phoenix? An impression. The Hippolytus? An impression. What sort of a man do you suppose he is, then, who pays no attention to this matter? And what do we call the people who follow every impression? We call them madmen. And are we behaving any differently?
