Chapter 9: How We Claim the Title of Philosopher Because We Cannot Live Up to Being Human

It is no small thing just to do this one thing: to fulfil the promise a man's nature makes. For what is a man? The answer is: a rational and mortal creature. And by the rational part, what are we separated from? From wild beasts. And from what else? From sheep and animals like them.

So take care to do nothing like a wild beast. If you do, you have lost the character of a man; you have not kept your promise. See that you do nothing like a sheep — and if you do, in that case too the man is lost.

When do we behave like sheep? When we act out of greed, out of lust, rashly, filthily, thoughtlessly — what have we sunk to? To sheep. What have we lost? Our reason. And when we act quarrelsomely and harmfully and in a rage and violently, what have we sunk to? To wild beasts. So some of us are great wild beasts and others little ones, mean and small — which is why a man may say, let me at least be eaten by a lion.

In all these ways the promise a man makes by acting as a man is destroyed. When is a compound proposition maintained? When it does what its nature promises — so a compound proposition is preserved when it is a conjunction of truths. When is a disjunctive proposition maintained? When it does what it promises. When are flutes preserved, or a lyre, a horse, a dog? When each keeps its promise.

Is it any wonder, then, that a man is preserved and lost in the same way? Every man is improved and preserved by the acts that correspond to him: the carpenter by acts of carpentry, the grammarian by acts of grammar. But if a man gets into the habit of writing ungrammatically, his art must be corrupted and destroyed.

So acts of self-respect preserve the self-respecting man, and shameless acts destroy him; acts of good faith preserve the trustworthy man, and the contrary acts destroy him. And on the other side, contrary acts strengthen contrary characters: shamelessness strengthens the shameless man, faithlessness the faithless man, abuse the abusive man, anger the bad-tempered man; and taking more than he gives makes the greedy man greedier.

This is why philosophers warn us not to be satisfied with learning only, but to add study to it, and then practice. We have been used to doing the opposite for a long time, and we put into practice judgments that are the opposite of the true ones. So if we do not also put the right judgments into practice, we shall be nothing but expounders of other men's opinions.

Which of us cannot already discourse by the rules of the art about good and bad things? That some things are good and some bad and some indifferent; that the good are the virtues and what shares in the virtues, the bad their opposites, and the indifferent things are wealth, health, reputation.

And then, if in the middle of our talk there is some louder noise than usual, or somebody present laughs at us, we are thrown. Philosopher, where are the things you were talking about? Where did you get them and bring them out from? From your lips, and nowhere else. So why do you spoil the help other men provided? Why do you treat the weightiest matters as though you were playing at dice?

It is one thing to store bread and wine in a storehouse and another to eat them. What has been eaten is digested and distributed, and has become sinew, flesh, bone, blood, good colour, good breathing. What is stored up you can take out and show whenever you like — but you have no other advantage from it than seeming to possess it.

For what is the difference between expounding these doctrines and expounding those of men who hold the opposite? Sit down now and expound the opinions of Epicurus by the rules of the art, and perhaps you will expound them more usefully than Epicurus himself. Why call yourself a Stoic, then? Why deceive the crowd? Why act the part of a Jew when you are a Greek?

Do you not see on what grounds each man is called a Jew, or a Syrian, or an Egyptian? When we see a man leaning both ways we are used to saying, this man is no Jew, he is only acting the part. But when he takes on the feelings of a man who has been steeped in the doctrine and has adopted that sect, then he is one in fact, and he is called one.

So we too, dipped falsely, are Jews in name and something else in fact. Our feelings do not match our words. We are a long way from practising what we say, and from what we are proud of as though we knew it. And so, being unable to fulfil even what the character of a man promises, we take on the profession of a philosopher as well — a burden as heavy as if a man who cannot carry ten pounds tried to lift the stone that Ajax lifted.
