Chapter 11: Where Philosophy Begins

Philosophy begins — for the man who comes to it the right way, through the door — with an awareness of his own weakness and inability in the things that matter.

We come into the world with no innate notion of a right-angled triangle, or of a quarter tone, or of a semitone; we learn each of these by a sort of instruction according to an art, and that is why men who do not know them do not think they know them. But as for good and evil, beautiful and ugly, fitting and unfitting, happiness and misfortune, proper and improper, what we ought to do and what we ought not — who ever came into the world without an inborn idea of these?

So we all use the words, and try to fit our preconceptions to particular cases: he did well, he did not do well; he did as he ought, not as he ought; he has been unlucky, he has been lucky; he is unjust, he is just. Which of us does not use these words? Which of us puts off using them until he has learned them, as he puts off using the words for lines or for musical notes?

The reason is that we come into the world already taught something on this subject by nature, so to speak — and starting from that, we have added conceit on top.

"Why should I not know the beautiful and the ugly?" a man says. "Have I not the notion of it?"

You have.

"Do I not fit it to particulars?"

You do.

"Then do I not fit it properly?"

There lies the whole question, and there is where the conceit comes in. Starting from what is agreed, men go on by an unsuitable fitting to what is in dispute. If they had this power of fitting as well as the notions, what would stop them being perfect?

But since you think you fit your preconceptions to particulars properly, tell me where you get that from.

"Because I think so."

But somebody else does not think so, and he thinks he is fitting them properly too. Or does he not think so?

"He does think so."

Is it possible, then, that you can both be fitting your preconceptions properly to things you hold contrary opinions about?

"It is not possible."

Then can you show us anything better as regards fitting the preconceptions than your thinking that you do? Does the madman do anything other than what seems right to him? Is that test enough for him too?

"It is not enough."

Then come to something better than seeming.

"And what is that?"

Notice: here is the beginning of philosophy. A perception that men disagree with one another; an enquiry into the cause of the disagreement; a condemnation of mere seeming and a distrust of it; a certain investigation of what seems, to see whether it seems rightly; and the discovery of some standard — as we discovered the balance for settling weights, and the carpenter's rule for straight and crooked. This is where philosophy begins.

Must we say that everything is right which seems right to everybody? And how can contradictions be right? So not everything, then — only what seems right to us. And why more than what seems right to the Syrians? Why more than what seems right to the Egyptians? Why more than what seems right to me, or to any other man? Not more at all.

So what seems so to each man is not sufficient for settling what is so. With weights and measures we are not satisfied with the bare appearance either; in each case we have found a standard. And in this matter, then, is there no standard better than seeming? How could it be that the most necessary things among men should have no mark, and be impossible to find out?

So there is a standard. Then why do we not look for it and find it, and afterwards use it without ever departing from it — never so much as stretching out a finger without it? For this, I think, is the thing which, once found, cures the madness of men who use mere seeming as their measure and misuse it; so that from then on, starting from certain known and settled principles, we may use in particular cases the preconceptions we have clearly fixed.

What is the matter put before us for enquiry? Pleasure, let us say. Put it to the standard; throw it into the balance. Ought the good to be the sort of thing we can properly have confidence in? Yes. And the sort of thing we ought to trust? It ought to be. Is it right to trust anything insecure? No. And is pleasure secure? No. Then take it and throw it out of the scale, and drive it far away from the place where the good things stand.

And if you are not sharp-sighted and one balance is not enough for you, bring another. Is it right to be lifted up over what is good? Yes. Is it proper, then, to be lifted up over a present pleasure? Take care not to say that it is; and if you do say it, I shall not think you worth even the balance.

This is how things are tested and weighed, when the standards are ready. And philosophising is this: examining the standards and establishing them. Using them once they are known is the work of a wise and good man.
