Chapter 12: On Argument and Discussion

What a man must learn in order to practise the art of argument has been set out accurately by our philosophers. But as for the proper use of it, we have no practice at all.

Give any one of us you like an uneducated man to argue with, and he cannot find out how to handle him. He shifts the man a little, and then if the man answers off the point he does not know what to do with him, and either abuses him or laughs at him and says, "He is uneducated; you can do nothing with him."

But a guide, when he has found a man off the road, leads him into the right one; he does not laugh at him and abuse him and walk away. So do you show the uneducated man the truth, and you will see that he follows. And as long as you do not show it to him, do not laugh at him — feel your own incapacity instead.

How did Socrates behave? He used to make his opponent in an argument bear witness for him, and he wanted no other witness. So he could say: I do not care about other witnesses; I am always satisfied with the evidence of the man I am arguing with. I do not ask other people's opinion, only the opinion of the man disputing with me.

He used to make the conclusions that follow from our natural notions so plain that every man saw the contradiction, if there was one, and backed out of it. Like this. Does the envious man feel joy? "By no means — he feels pain." Well, do you take envy to be pain over evils? "And what envy is there of evils?" So he brought his opponent to say that envy is pain over good things. Well then, would any man envy people who are nothing to him? "By no means."

And having completed the notion and fixed it clearly, he would go away — without saying to his opponent, "Define envy for me"; and if the man had defined it, without saying, "You have defined it badly, the terms of the definition do not answer to the thing defined."

Those are technical phrases, and for that reason unpleasant and barely intelligible to uneducated men — and we philosophers cannot do without them. But that the uneducated man himself, following the impressions put before him, should be able to concede a point or reject it, we shall never move him to by using such phrases. And so, conscious of our own inability, we do not attempt it — those of us with any caution, at least. But most men, the rash ones, go into such arguments, confuse themselves and confuse others, and finally walk away abusing their opponents and abused in turn.

Now this was the first and chief thing about Socrates: never to be irritated in argument, never to say anything abusive or insulting, but to bear with abusive people and put an end to the quarrel. If you want to know how great his power was in this, read Xenophon's Symposium and see how many quarrels he ended. That is why the poets too praise this power so highly:

	Quickly and skilfully he settles great disputes.
	— Hesiod, Theogony v 87.

Well then — the business is not very safe nowadays, and particularly at Rome. Anyone who attempts it must not do it in a corner, you may be sure; he must go to a man of consular rank, if it so happens, or to a rich man, and ask him:

Sir, can you tell me who you have put in charge of your horses? "I can tell you." You have not entrusted them to just anybody, to a man with no experience of horses? "By no means." Well, can you tell me who you entrust your gold and silver to, or your clothes? "I do not entrust even those to just anybody." Well — and your own body: have you thought about who to trust the care of it to? "Certainly." To a man of experience, I suppose — a trainer, or a doctor? "Without doubt."

And are these the best things you have, or do you possess something else better than all of them? "What sort of thing do you mean?" I mean the thing that uses all these, and tests each of them, and deliberates. "Do you mean the soul?" You are right, that is what I mean. "In truth I do think the soul is a far better thing than anything else I possess."

Then can you show us how you have taken care of the soul? It is hardly likely that a man as wise as you, with a reputation in the city, would thoughtlessly and carelessly let the most valuable thing he owns go neglected and perish. "Certainly not." But have you taken care of it yourself? And did you learn how from somebody else, or work out the means on your own?

And here comes the danger. First, that he may say, "What business is this of yours, my good man? Who are you?" And then, if you go on bothering him, that he may raise his hands and hit you. I was an admirer of this method of teaching myself once, until I fell into these dangers.
