Chapter 15: Against Those Who Stubbornly Stick to What They Have Decided

When some people have heard that a man ought to be firm, and that the will is naturally free and not subject to compulsion while everything else is subject to blocking and to slavery and lies in other men's power, they suppose they ought to hold without deviation to everything they have decided.

But in the first place what has been decided ought to be sound. I want tone in a body — but the tone a healthy body has, an athlete's body. If it is plain to me that you have the tone of a man in a frenzy, and you boast of it, I shall tell you: man, go and find a doctor. That is not tone; that is the loss of it.

Something of the same kind, in a different way, happens to men who listen to these lectures the wrong way. One of my own companions decided for no reason to starve himself to death. I heard of it on the third day of his fast and went to ask what had happened.

"I have decided," he said.

Still — tell me what made you decide. If you decided rightly, we shall sit with you and help you on your way; but if the decision was unreasonable, change your mind.

"We ought to keep to our decisions."

Man, what are you doing? Not to all our decisions — to the right ones. If you are now convinced that it is night, do not change your mind, if you think fit; hold on and say, we ought to stand by our decisions. Will you not begin at the beginning and lay the foundation — an enquiry into whether the decision is sound or unsound — and then build firmness and security on top of it? If you lay a rotten and crumbling foundation, will your miserable little building not come down all the faster, the more and the heavier the materials you pile on it?

Would you take a man out of life for no reason at all — a friend and a companion, a fellow citizen of the same city, both the great city and the small one? And then, while you are committing murder and destroying a man who has done no wrong, do you say you must stand by your decisions? And if it ever somehow came into your head to kill me, would you have to stand by that decision too?

Now this man was persuaded to change his mind, though with difficulty. But there are some you cannot convince at all these days; so that I feel I now know what I did not know before — the meaning of the saying that you can neither persuade a fool nor break him. May it never be my lot to have a wise fool for a friend: there is nothing harder to deal with.

"I have made up my mind," the man says. So have madmen; and the more firmly they form a judgment about things that do not exist, the more hellebore they need to bring them round.

Will you not behave like a sick man and call in the doctor? "I am ill, master; help me. Consider what I must do; it is my part to obey you." So it is here too: I do not know what I ought to do, and I have come to learn. "Not at all — talk to me about something else. On this I have decided."

About what else? What is greater or more useful than convincing you that it is not enough to have made your decision and to refuse to change it? This is the tone of madness, not of health.

"I will die if you force me to this."

Why, man? What has happened?

"I have decided."

I have had a lucky escape, then, that you did not decide to kill me.

"I will take no money."

Why?

"I have decided."

You may be sure that with the very same energy you are now using to refuse it, there is nothing to stop you at some point leaning without any reason toward taking money, and then saying: I have decided. As in a diseased body full of fluxes the humour flows now to these parts and now to those, so a sick soul does not know which way to lean; and if to that leaning and that movement obstinacy is added as well, then the trouble is past help and past cure.
