Chapter 20: Against the Epicureans and the Academics

Propositions that are true and evident have to be used even by the men who contradict them; and perhaps the greatest proof that a thing is evident is that even the man who denies it turns out to need it at the same moment.

For instance, if a man denies that anything is universally true, plainly he has to make the contradictory statement: that nothing is universally true. Wretch, will you not admit even this? For what is it but affirming that whatever is universally affirmed is false?

Again, suppose a man comes forward and says: know that nothing can be known, and that nothing admits of sure evidence. Or another says: believe me — you will be the better for it — that a man ought not to believe anything. Or another: learn from me, man, that it is not possible to learn anything; I am telling you so, and I will teach you if you like.

How do these differ from — whom shall I name? — the men who call themselves Academics? "Gentlemen, agree with us that nobody agrees with anybody. Believe us that nobody believes anybody."

In the same way Epicurus, when he sets out to destroy the natural fellowship of mankind, uses the very thing he is destroying. What does he say? "Do not be deceived, men, do not be led astray, do not be mistaken. There is no natural fellowship among rational creatures. Believe me. The men who say otherwise are deceiving you and leading you on with false reasoning."

What is it to you? Let us be deceived. Will you be any worse off if all the rest of us are convinced that there is a natural fellowship between us and that it ought by all means to be preserved? It will be much better and safer for you.

Man, why do you trouble yourself about us? Why do you lie awake for us? Why do you light your lamp? Why do you get up early? Why do you write so many books — so that not one of us shall be deceived about the gods and believe they take care of men, or suppose the nature of the good to be anything other than pleasure?

If that is how things are, then lie down and sleep and live the life of a worm, which is what you judged yourself fit for. Eat and drink and enjoy women, and relieve yourself, and snore. What is it to you how the rest of us think about these matters, rightly or wrongly? What have we to do with you?

You take care of sheep because they give us wool and milk, and their flesh in the end. Would it not be a fine thing if men could be lulled and enchanted by the Stoics and sleep and present themselves to you and your kind to be sheared and milked? This is what you ought to be saying to your fellow Epicureans — and ought you not to keep it from everybody else, and above all persuade them that we are naturally fitted for fellowship and that self-control is a good thing, so that everything may be kept safe for you?

Or ought we to keep up this fellowship with some men and not with others? With whom, then? With those who keep it up on their side, or with those who violate it? And who violates it more than you, who lay down doctrines like these?

What was it, then, that woke Epicurus from his sleep and forced him to write what he wrote? What but the strongest thing in men — nature, which drags a man to her own will though he is unwilling and complaining? Since you think, she says, that there is no community among mankind, write this opinion down and leave it for others, and break your sleep for it, and by your own practice condemn your own opinions.

Shall we say that Orestes was driven by the Furies and roused out of his deep sleep — and that fiercer Furies and Pains did not rouse Epicurus and refuse to let him rest, but forced him to publish his own troubles, as madness and wine forced the priests of Cybele to publish theirs?

So strong and unconquerable is a man's nature. How can a vine be moved to behave like an olive tree, or an olive tree like a vine? It is impossible; it cannot even be imagined. So it is not possible for a man to lose the movements of a man completely — and even men who have been castrated cannot rid themselves of a man's desires. In the same way Epicurus cut away all the offices of a man, of a head of a household, of a citizen and of a friend; but he did not cut away human desires, because he could not — any more than the lazy Academics can throw away their own senses or blind them, though they have tried with all their might.

What a shameful thing it is, when a man has been given by nature measures and standards for knowing the truth, that he should not try to add to them and improve them, but do the exact opposite and try to take away and destroy whatever lets us discern the truth.

What do you say, philosopher? Piety and holiness — what do you take them to be? "If you like, I will prove that they are good things." Very well, prove it, so that our citizens may turn round and honour the divine and stop neglecting the things of highest value. "And do you have the proofs?" I have, and I am thankful for them.

"Well then, since you are so pleased with them, hear the opposite: that there are no gods, and that if there are, they take no care of men, and there is no fellowship between us and them; and that this piety and holiness people talk of is the lying of braggarts and sophists — or, certainly, of lawgivers, for the purpose of frightening wrongdoers and holding them back."

Well done, philosopher. You have done something for our citizens. You have brought all the young men round to contempt for things divine.

"What — does that not satisfy you? Learn now that justice is nothing, that self-respect is folly, that a father is nothing, a son nothing."

Well done, philosopher. Keep at it. Persuade the young men, so that we may have more people holding your opinions and saying what you say. It was from principles like these that our well-ordered states grew. Sparta was founded on these; Lycurgus fixed these opinions in the Spartans by his laws and his education — that slavery is no more shameful than honourable, and that the condition of free men is no more honourable than shameful; and it was from these opinions that the men who died at Thermopylae died. And what other opinions were they that made the Athenians leave their city?

And then the men who talk like this marry and have children, and busy themselves in public affairs, and get themselves made priests and interpreters. Of what? Of gods who do not exist. And they consult the priestess at Delphi so as to hear lies, and report the oracles to other people. Monstrous impudence and imposture.

Man, what are you doing? Refuting yourself every day? And will you not give up these chilly efforts? When you eat, where do you carry your hand — to your mouth or to your eye? When you wash, what do you get into? Do you ever call a pot a dish, or a ladle a spit?

If I were the slave of one of these men, even if I had to be flogged for it daily, I would torment him. If he said, "Boy, throw some olive oil in the bath," I would take fish pickle and pour it over his head. "What is this?" he would say. An impression came to me, I swear by your guardian spirit, that could not be told from oil and was exactly like it. "Bring me the barley drink," he says. I would fill a dish with sharp sauce and carry it to him. "Did I not ask for the barley drink?" Yes, master — this is the barley drink. "Take it and smell it; take it and taste it." And how do you know our senses do not deceive us?

If I had three or four fellow slaves of the same mind, I would drive him to hang himself in a rage, or else to change his opinion. As it is, these men make fun of us: they use everything nature gives, and destroy it in words.

Grateful men indeed, and modest, who if they do nothing else eat bread every day and still have the effrontery to say we do not know whether there is any Demeter, or her daughter Persephone, or any Pluto — to say nothing of their enjoying the night and the day, the seasons of the year, the stars, the sea, the land, and the cooperation of mankind, and not being moved in the least by any of it to give it any attention. They only want to belch out their little problem, and having exercised their stomachs, to go off to the baths.

But what they are going to say, and about what, and to whom, and what their hearers will learn from the talk — that they do not care about in the smallest degree. Nor whether some well-born young man, after hearing such talk, may take harm from it; nor whether, having taken harm, he may lose every seed of his own good nature. Nor whether we are helping an adulterer to be shameless in what he does; nor whether some public embezzler may find a clever excuse in these doctrines; nor whether another man who neglects his parents may be confirmed in his boldness by this teaching.

So what, in your view, is good or bad? This, or that?

Why should a man say anything more in answer to people like these, or give them any reason, or listen to any reason from them, or try to convince them? By Zeus, one might much sooner expect to change the minds of men who have lost all shame about sex than of men who have gone this deaf and this blind to their own troubles.
