Chapter 24: To a Man Epictetus Did Not Think Much Of

A certain person said to him: "I have often wanted to hear you, and I came to you, and you never gave me any answer. Now, if it is possible, I beg you to say something to me."

Epictetus said: Do you think that as there is an art in everything else, so there is an art in speaking, and that a man who has the art will speak skilfully and a man who has not will speak unskilfully?

"I do think so."

Then a man who benefits himself by speaking and is able to benefit others will be speaking skilfully; and a man who is damaged by speaking and damages others will be unskilled in this art? And you can find that some men are damaged by speaking and others benefited.

And are all who listen benefited by what they hear? Or will you find that among them too some are benefited and some damaged?

"There are both among these as well," he said.

Then in this case too, those who listen skilfully are benefited and those who listen unskilfully are damaged. He agreed.

Is there an art in listening, then, as there is in speaking?

"It seems so."

If you like, look at it this way as well. The practice of music — whom does it belong to? A musician. And the proper making of a statue — whom does that belong to? A sculptor. And looking at a statue skilfully: does that seem to you to need no art at all?

"That needs art too."

Then if speaking properly is the business of a man with the skill, do you see that listening with benefit is the business of a man with the skill as well?

Now as to speaking and listening perfectly and usefully, let us say nothing more for the present, if you please; we are both a long way from anything of that kind. But I think every man will grant this much: that a man who is going to listen to philosophers needs some amount of practice in listening. Is it not so?

Tell me, then, what I should talk to you about. What subject are you able to listen to?

"Good and evil."

Good and evil in what? In a horse? "No." In an ox? "No." In what, then? In a man? "Yes."

Do we know, then, what a man is? What notion we have of him? Have our ears had any practice at all in this matter? Do you understand what nature is? Can you follow me at all when I say I shall use demonstration on you? How could you? Do you understand this very thing — what a demonstration is, or how anything is demonstrated, or by what means? Or what things resemble demonstration and are not demonstration? Do you know what is true and what is false? What follows from a thing, and what is inconsistent with it or out of keeping with it?

But am I to stir you up to philosophy — and how? Shall I show you the inconsistency in most men's opinions, which is why they differ about good and evil and about what is profitable and unprofitable, when you do not know this very thing, what inconsistency is?

Show me what I shall accomplish by talking to you. Rouse my inclination to do it. When suitable grass is put in front of a sheep, it stirs the sheep's inclination to eat; but put a stone or a piece of bread in front of it and it will not be stirred to eat. In the same way there are natural inclinations in us to speak, when the listener turns out to be somebody, when he stirs us himself. But when he sits beside us like a stone or like grass, how can he rouse a man's desire to speak?

Does the vine say to the farmer, "Take care of me"? No: by showing in itself that it will be profitable to the farmer if he does take care of it, it invites him to take care. When children are attractive and lively, whom do they not invite to play with them and crawl about with them and lisp with them? But who is eager to play with a donkey, or to bray with it? Because it is small, it is still only a little donkey.

"Why do you say nothing to me, then?"

I can only say this to you: that a man who does not know who he is, or what he exists for, or what this world is, or whom he shares it with; who does not know what things are good and bad, beautiful and ugly; who understands neither argument nor demonstration, and does not know what is true and what is false and cannot tell them apart — such a man will neither desire nor turn away nor move toward anything according to nature, nor intend, nor assent, nor dissent, nor suspend judgment. To put it in a few words, he will go about deaf and blind, thinking he is somebody when he is nobody.

Is this something new? Has it not been the case ever since the human race existed that all errors and misfortunes have come out of this ignorance?

Why did Agamemnon and Achilles quarrel with each other? Was it not through not knowing what is profitable and what is not? Does the one not say it is profitable to give Chryseis back to her father, and the other say it is not? Does the one not say he ought to take somebody else's prize, and the other that he ought not? Did they not, for these reasons, forget both who they were and what they had come there for?

Man, what did you come for? To get mistresses, or to fight? "To fight." With whom — the Trojans or the Greeks? "The Trojans." Then do you leave Hector alone and draw your sword on your own king?

And you, most excellent sir: do you neglect a king's duties, you who are the people's guardian and have such cares on you? Are you quarrelling over a girl with the most warlike of your allies, whom you ought to be taking care of and protecting by every means? Do you make yourself worse than a well-behaved priest who treats these fine gladiators with all respect?

Do you see what ignorance of what is profitable does?

"But I am rich too." Are you richer than Agamemnon? "But I am handsome too." Are you handsomer than Achilles? "But I have beautiful hair as well." Did Achilles not have more beautiful hair, and golden? And he did not comb it elegantly or dress it. "But I am strong too." Can you lift as great a stone as Hector or Ajax? "But I am well-born as well." Is your mother a goddess? Is your father sprung from Zeus? And what good did any of that do him, when he sat weeping over a girl? "But I am an orator." And was he not? Do you not see how he handled the most skilful of the Greeks in speaking, Odysseus and Phoenix, and stopped their mouths?

That is all I have to say to you — and I say even this unwillingly. Why? Because you have not roused me. What am I to look to in order to be roused, as men who know horses are roused by a fine one? To your body? You treat it disgracefully. To your clothes? They are luxurious. To your behaviour, to your look? They are as good as nothing.

When you want to listen to a philosopher, do not say to him, "You tell me nothing." Only show yourself worth being spoken to, fit to be spoken to — and you will see how you move the speaker.
