Chapter 1: On Personal Beauty and Finery

A young man who studied rhetoric came to see Epictetus with his hair done more carefully than usual and the rest of him dressed up. Epictetus said:

Tell me whether you do not think that some dogs are beautiful and some horses, and so with all the other animals.

"I do think so," the young man replied.

And are some men beautiful too, and others ugly?

"Certainly."

Now do we call each of them beautiful in the same kind for the same reason, or is each beautiful for something of its own? You can judge the matter this way. Since we see that a dog is naturally made for one thing and a horse for another and a nightingale, say, for another still, we may declare quite properly, in general, that each of them is beautiful when it is at its best according to its own nature. But since the nature of each is different, each of them seems to me to be beautiful in a different way. Is it not so?

He agreed that it was.

Then what makes a dog beautiful makes a horse ugly, and what makes a horse beautiful makes a dog ugly — if it is true that their natures are different.

"It seems so."

I think what makes a champion in the all-in fight beautiful makes a bad wrestler and a completely ridiculous runner; and a man who is beautiful for the pentathlon is very ugly for wrestling.

"That is so," he said.

Then what makes a man beautiful? Is it the same sort of thing that makes a dog or a horse beautiful in its kind?

"It is," he said.

And what makes a dog beautiful? Having the excellence of a dog. And a horse? Having the excellence of a horse. And what makes a man beautiful? Is it not having the excellence of a man?

So if you want to be beautiful, young man, work at this — at acquiring human excellence.

And what is that? Notice whom you praise, when you praise people without partiality: do you praise the just or the unjust? The just. The moderate or the immoderate? The moderate. The self-controlled or the uncontrolled? The self-controlled.

So if you make yourself such a man, you will know you are making yourself beautiful; and so long as you neglect these things you must be ugly, however much you contrive to look beautiful.

Beyond that I do not know what to say to you. If I say what I think, I shall offend you, and you will perhaps leave the school and not come back. And if I do not say what I think, look what I shall be doing: you come to me to be improved, and I improve you not at all; you come to me as to a philosopher, and I say nothing to you as a philosopher. And how cruel it is to you, to leave you uncorrected.

If you ever afterwards come to your senses, you will blame me with good reason and say: "What did Epictetus see in me? He saw me in such a state, coming to him in such a scandalous condition, and neglected me and never said a word. Did he despair of me so completely? Was I not young? Was I not able to listen to reason? How many other young men at that age make plenty of mistakes like it? I hear that a certain Polemo went from being a thoroughly dissolute youth to a great change. Well, suppose he did not think I would be a Polemo — he might at least have put my hair right, he might have stripped off my ornaments, he might have stopped me plucking the hair off my body. But when he saw me dressed like — what shall I call it? — he kept silent."

I do not say like what; but you will say it when you come to your senses, and know what it is and what sort of men dress that way.

If you bring that charge against me hereafter, what defence shall I make? Shall I say the man will not be persuaded by me? Was Laius persuaded by Apollo? Did he not go off and get drunk and pay no attention to the oracle? And did Apollo refuse to tell him the truth for that reason? I do not know whether you will be persuaded by me or not; but Apollo knew perfectly well that Laius would not be persuaded, and spoke all the same.

And why did he speak? I answer: why is he Apollo? Why does he deliver oracles? Why has he set himself up in that place as a prophet and a source of truth, for the whole world to come to? And why are the words "Know yourself" written in front of the temple, though nobody takes any notice of them?

Did Socrates persuade all his hearers to take care of themselves? Not a thousandth part of them. But all the same, having been put in that position by the deity, as he says himself, he never left it. And what does he say even to his judges? "If you acquit me on condition that I stop doing what I do now, I will not agree, and I will not stop. I shall go up to young men and old, and, to put it plainly, to every man I meet, and ask the questions I ask now; and I shall do it most of all to you, my fellow citizens, because you are more closely related to me."

Are you so inquisitive, Socrates, and such a busybody? What business is it of yours how we behave? And what is this you are saying? "You are a member of the same community and the same family, and you neglect yourself, and show yourself a bad citizen to the state, a bad relation to your relations, a bad neighbour to your neighbours."

And who are you, then?

Here it is a great thing to say: I am the man whose duty it is to take care of men. It is not every little heifer that dares to face a lion; but if the bull comes up and faces him, say to the bull, if you like, "And who are you? What business have you here?"

Man, in every kind something is produced that excels — among oxen, among dogs, among bees, among horses. Do not say to the one that excels, "And who are you?" If you do, it will find a voice somehow and say: I am the sort of thing the purple is in a garment. Do not expect me to be like the rest, and do not blame my nature for having made me different from other men.

What of it? Am I such a man? Certainly not. And are you the sort of man who can listen to the truth? I wish you were. But since I have in a way been sentenced to wear a white beard and a cloak, and you come to me as to a philosopher, I will not treat you cruelly, nor as though I despaired of you. I will say:

Young man, whom do you want to make beautiful? First know who you are, and then adorn yourself accordingly. You are a human being; that is, a mortal creature with the power of using impressions rationally. And what does "rationally" mean? In line with nature, and completely.

So what do you have that is your own? Is it the animal part? No. The fact that you are mortal? No. The power of using impressions? No. What you have as your own is reason. Adorn that and make that beautiful — and leave your hair to the one who made it as he chose.

Come: what other names have you? Are you a man or a woman? A man. Then adorn yourself as a man, not as a woman. A woman is naturally smooth and delicate, and if she has a great deal of hair on her body she is a freak and is put on show at Rome among the freaks. And in a man it is monstrous not to have hair; if he has none by nature, he is a freak. But if he cuts his hair off and plucks it out, what are we to do with him? Where shall we exhibit him? Under what label shall we put him on show? "I will exhibit to you a man who would rather be a woman than a man." What a terrible sight. There is nobody who will not wonder at such a notice.

Indeed I think the men who pluck their hair out do it without knowing what they are doing. Man, what fault do you find with your nature? That it made you a man? Then ought nature to have made every human creature a woman? And what advantage would you have got out of adorning yourself in that case? Whom would you have adorned yourself for, if every human creature were a woman?

But you are not pleased with the business. Then set to work on the whole of it. Take away — what is it called? — the thing that causes the hair. Make yourself a woman in every respect, so that we are not left guessing. Do not make one half a man and the other half a woman.

Whom do you want to please? Women? Then please them as a man. "But they like smooth men." Will you not go and hang yourself? And if women took their pleasure in men who let themselves be used that way, would you become one? Is this your business? Is this what you were born for — that dissolute women should take pleasure in you?

Shall we make a man like you a citizen of Corinth, and perhaps a city magistrate, or chief of the young men, or a general, or superintendent of the games? And when you have taken a wife, do you mean to go on having your hair plucked out? To please whom, and for what? And when you have had children, will you bring them into the state as hair-pluckers too? A fine citizen, and senator, and public speaker. We ought certainly to pray for young men like that to be born among us and brought up.

Do not do it, I beg you by the gods, young man. But having once heard these words, go away and say to yourself: "Epictetus did not say this to me — how could he? Some kindly god said it through him. It would never have come into his head to say it, since he is not in the habit of talking that way to anybody. Come then, let us obey God, so that we may not be under his anger."

You say no. But if a crow signifies something to you by its croaking, it is not the crow that signifies but God through the crow. And if he signifies something through a human voice, will he not make the man say this to you, so that you may know the power of the divine — that he signifies to some men one way and to others another, and that about the greatest and chief matters he signifies through the noblest messenger?

What else does the poet mean:

	For we ourselves had warned him, and had sent
	Hermes the sharp-eyed watcher, Argus' slayer:
	not to kill the husband, nor to wed the wife.

Was Hermes going to come down from heaven to say this to Aegisthus? And now the gods say this to you, and send the messenger, the slayer of Argus, to warn you not to twist what is already well arranged, and not to meddle with it, but to let a man be a man and a woman a woman, a handsome man be a handsome man and an ugly man an ugly man. For you are not flesh and hair: you are will. And if your will is beautiful, then you will be beautiful.

Up to now I have not dared to tell you that you are ugly, because I think you are readier to hear anything else than that. But see what Socrates says to Alcibiades, the most beautiful and blooming of men. "Try, then, to be beautiful." And what does he tell him? Dress your hair and pluck the hairs off your legs? Nothing of the kind. Adorn your will; get rid of your bad opinions.

And what about the body? Leave it as nature made it. Somebody else has looked after that; entrust it to him.

What then — is a man to go uncleaned? Certainly not. But clean what you are and what nature made you. A man should be clean as a man, a woman as a woman, a child as a child. You say no. Then let us pluck out the lion's mane too, so that he shall not go uncleaned, and the cock's comb, since he ought to be cleaned as well. Cleaned, yes — but as a cock, and the lion as a lion, and the hunting dog as a hunting dog.
