Chapter 4: Against a Man Who Cheered Too Loudly in the Theater

The governor of Epirus had shown his support for an actor in an unseemly way and had been publicly criticised for it. Afterwards he told Epictetus that he had been criticised and that he was annoyed with the men who criticised him. Epictetus said:

What harm were they doing? They were taking sides too, just as you were.

"But does anybody show his support like that?"

When they see you — their governor, a friend of Caesar and his deputy — showing your support like that, was it not to be expected that they would show theirs the same way? If it is not right to show it that way, then do not do it yourself; and if it is right, why are you angry when they follow your example?

Whom have the many to copy but you, who are their superiors? Whose example should they look to when they go to the theatre, if not yours? "See how Caesar's deputy behaves. He has shouted, so I shall shout too. He jumps up from his seat, so I shall jump up. His slaves are sitting all over the theatre calling out; I have no slaves, but I will shout for myself as loud as I can, as loud as all of them together."

So you ought to know, when you go into the theatre, that you go in as a rule and an example to the rest of how they should watch a performance.

Why did they criticise you, then? Because every man hates whatever gets in his way. They wanted one man crowned, you wanted another. They got in your way and you got in theirs. You turned out to be the stronger, and they did what they could — they criticised the thing that was blocking them.

What would you have, then? That you should do as you please and they should not even say what they please? What is surprising about it? Do farmers not abuse Zeus when he gets in their way? Do sailors not abuse him? Do people ever stop abusing Caesar? And what of it? Does Zeus not know? Is what is said not reported to Caesar? And what does Caesar do? He knows that if he punished everybody who abused him he would have nobody left to rule.

So when you go into the theatre you ought to say — not "Let Sophron be crowned", but this: "Come, let me keep my will in this matter in line with nature. No man is dearer to me than myself, so it would be ridiculous for me to be hurt in order that some actor may be crowned. Whom do I want to win the prize, then? The actor who does win it. And so the man I want to win will always win."

"But I want Sophron crowned." Hold as many games as you like in your own house — Nemean, Pythian, Isthmian, Olympian — and proclaim him the victor. But in public do not claim more than your share, and do not try to take for yourself what belongs to everybody. And if you will not agree to that, then put up with being abused: when you behave like the crowd, you put yourself on their level.
