Chapter 7: To the Governor of the Free Cities, Who Was an Epicurean

The administrator came to visit him, and the man was an Epicurean. Epictetus said:

It is proper for us who are not philosophers to make enquiries of you who are — as men coming to a strange city make enquiries of the citizens, of people who know the place — about what the best thing in the world is, so that we too, having enquired, may go after what is best and look at it, as visitors do with the sights of a city.

That there are three things belonging to a man — soul, body, and externals — hardly anybody denies. It remains for you philosophers to answer which is best. What are we to tell people? Is the flesh the best? And was it for that that Maximus sailed as far as Cassiope in winter with his son, and went with him, so that his flesh might be gratified?

When the man said it was not, and added, "Far be it from him," Epictetus said: Is it not fitting, then, to be actively occupied with what is best?

"It is the most fitting thing of all."

Then what do we possess that is better than the flesh?

"The soul," he replied.

And the good things of the best — are they better, or the good things of the worse?

"The good things of the best."

And are the good things of the best within the power of the will or not?

"They are within it."

Then is the pleasure of the soul something within the power of the will?

"It is," he replied.

And what will this pleasure depend on? On itself? That cannot even be conceived. There must first exist a certain substance of the good, by getting which we shall feel pleasure in the soul.

He agreed to this as well.

Then what shall we depend on for this pleasure of the soul? If it depends on things of the soul, the substance of the good has been found: for good cannot be one thing and the thing we are rationally delighted by another; nor, if what comes first is not good, can what follows be good, since for the thing that follows to be good, the thing that comes first must be good.

But you would not say that, if you are in your right mind, since you would then be saying something inconsistent with Epicurus and with the rest of your doctrines. So it remains that the pleasure of the soul is the pleasure that comes from things of the body — and again that those bodily things must be what comes first, and the substance of the good.

So Maximus acted foolishly if he made that voyage for any reason but the flesh, that is, for the best. And a man acts foolishly if he keeps his hands off what belongs to others when he is a judge and able to take it.

But if you like, let us consider only this: how the thing may be done secretly and safely, so that nobody knows. For Epicurus himself does not declare stealing to be bad; he only admits that being caught is. And because there is no way to be secure against being caught, he says: do not steal.

But I tell you that if the stealing is done cleverly and carefully we shall not be caught. And besides, we have powerful friends in Rome, both men and women, and the Greeks are weak, and nobody will dare go up to Rome to complain. Why do you hold back from your own good? It is senseless, foolish. And even if you tell me you do hold back, I shall not believe you.

For as it is impossible to assent to what appears false, and to turn away from what appears true, so it is impossible to hold back from what appears good. And wealth is a good thing, and certainly the most efficient producer of pleasure. Why not acquire wealth? And why should we not seduce our neighbour's wife, if we can do it without being caught? And if the husband talks foolishly about it, why not throw him out of the house?

If you want to be the sort of philosopher you ought to be — a complete one, consistent with your own doctrines — this is how you must act. And if you will not, then you will be no different from us so-called Stoics: we too say one thing and do another. We talk about what is fine and do what is base. But you will be perverse in the opposite direction: teaching what is bad and practising what is good.

In God's name, do you imagine a city of Epicureans? "I do not marry." "Nor I — a man ought not to marry, nor have children, nor take part in public business."

What will happen, then? Where will the citizens come from? Who will bring them up? Who will be in charge of the young men, who will preside over the gymnasium? And what will the teacher teach them? What the Spartans were taught, or what the Athenians were taught?

Come, take a young man and bring him up according to your doctrines. The doctrines are bad, they undermine the state, they are ruinous to families, and they do not become women. Drop them, man.

You live in a chief city. It is your duty to hold office, to judge justly, to keep your hands off what belongs to others. No woman should look beautiful to you but your own wife, and no youth, and no silver vessel, and no gold one. Look for doctrines that are consistent with what I say, and by taking them for your guide you will hold back with pleasure from things that have such power to persuade us and overpower us.

But if, on top of the persuasive power of these things, we also invent a philosophy like this one, which helps push us toward them and strengthens us in that direction, what will the result be?

In a piece of chased metalwork, which is the better part — the silver or the workmanship? The substance of the hand is flesh; but the work of the hand is the leading thing.

So there are three kinds of duty as well: those directed toward a thing's existing at all; those directed toward its existing in a particular way; and third, the leading things themselves. And so in a man too we ought not to value the material, the poor flesh, but the leading things.

And what are those? Taking part in public business, marrying, having children, revering God, taking care of one's parents; and in general, having desires and avoidances and pursuits and refusals in the way we ought to have them, and according to our nature.

And how has nature constituted us? Free, noble, capable of shame. What other creature blushes? What other can receive the impression of shame? And we are so constituted that pleasure is made subordinate to these things, as a servant, an attendant, so that it may call out our activity and keep us steady in acts that are in line with nature.

"But I am rich and I need nothing."

Then why pretend to be a philosopher? Your gold and silver vessels are enough for you. What need have you of principles?

"But I am also a judge of the Greeks."

Do you know how to judge? Who taught you to know?

"Caesar wrote me a commission."

Let him write you a commission to judge music; what use will it be to you? And how did you become a judge anyway? Whose hand did you kiss — Symphorus' or Numenius'? Outside whose bedroom did you sleep? Whom did you send presents to? Do you not see, then, that being a judge is worth exactly as much as Numenius is?

"But I can throw any man I please into prison."

So you can a stone.

"But I can beat with sticks whoever I please."

So you can a donkey.

That is not governing men. Govern us as rational creatures. Show us what is good for us and we will follow it; show us what is bad for us and we will turn away from it. Make us imitators of yourself, as Socrates made men imitators of himself. He was a governor of men in the true sense: he made them submit their desires to him, and their avoidances, and their movements toward a thing and away from it.

"Do this. Do not do that. If you disobey, I will throw you into prison." That is not governing men as rational creatures. But I say: act as Zeus has ordained; and if you do not, you will feel the penalty, you will be punished. And what will the punishment be? Nothing but not having done your duty. You will lose the character of a man who is trustworthy, self-respecting, decent. Do not look for heavier penalties than those.
