Chapter 9: To a Lawyer Going Up to Rome for a Lawsuit

A man came to him who was going up to Rome about a lawsuit concerning his rank. Epictetus asked why he was going to Rome, and the man then asked what Epictetus thought about the business. Epictetus replied:

If you are asking me what you will do in Rome — whether you will win or lose — I have no rule about that. But if you ask me how you will fare, I can tell you: if your judgments are right, you will fare well; if they are false, you will fare badly. For in every man the cause of his acting is a judgment.

What was the reason you wanted to be elected governor of the Cnossians? Your judgment. What is the reason you are now going up to Rome? Your judgment. And going in winter, at danger and expense. "I have to go." What tells you that? Your judgment.

Then if judgments are the causes of every action, and a man has bad judgments, the effect will be of the same quality as the cause.

Well then, do we all have sound judgments — you and your opponent both? Then how do you differ? Or do you have sounder ones than he has? Why? You think so. And he thinks his are better. So do madmen. This is a bad test.

Show me instead that you have made some enquiry into your own judgments and taken some trouble over them. You are sailing to Rome now to become governor of the Cnossians, and you are not content to stay at home with the honours you already had; you want something greater and more conspicuous. So when did you ever make a voyage for the purpose of examining your own judgments and throwing out any bad ones? Whom did you go to for that? What time did you set aside for it? What age of your life?

Go over the times of your life on your own, if you are ashamed to do it in front of me. When you were a boy, did you examine your judgments? Did you not do then exactly as you do everything now? And when you had become a youth and were attending the teachers of rhetoric and practising rhetoric yourself, what did you imagine you were short of? And when you were a young man engaged in public business, pleading cases yourself and gaining a reputation, who seemed your equal then? And at what point would you have put up with any man examining you and showing that your judgments were bad?

So what do you want me to say to you?

"Help me in this business."

I have no rule for that. And if that is what you came to me for, you have not come to me as to a philosopher, but as to a greengrocer or a shoemaker.

Then what do philosophers have rules for? For this: that whatever happens, our governing part may be, and go on being, in line with nature. Does that seem a small thing to you?

"No — the greatest thing there is."

Well then: does it take only a short time? Can you snatch it up as you pass by? If you can, snatch it.

Then you will say: "I met Epictetus as I might meet a stone or a statue." You saw me, and that was all. But a man meets a man as a man when he learns his judgments and shows his own in return. Learn my judgments, show me yours, and then say that you have visited me. Let us examine each other. If I have a bad judgment, take it away; if you have one, show it to me. That is what meeting a philosopher means.

"Not at all: this is only a passing call, and while we are hiring the ship we can look in on Epictetus too. Let us see what he has to say." Then you go away and say: "Epictetus was nothing. He made grammatical mistakes and talked like a foreigner." What else did you come as, if not as judges?

Well — but somebody may say to me: if I attend to such matters as you do, I shall have no land, as you have none; no silver cups, as you have none; no fine cattle, as you have none.

Perhaps it is enough to answer: I have no need of such things. But you, who possess a great many things, have need of others; and whether you choose to admit it or not, you are poorer than I am.

"What do I need, then?"

What you have not got: steadiness, a mind in line with nature, freedom from being thrown about.

Whether I have a patron or not, what is that to me? But it is something to you. I am richer than you. I am not anxious about what Caesar will think of me. And so I flatter nobody. This is what I have instead of vessels of silver and gold. Your utensils are gold, but your talk, your judgments, your assents, your pursuits, your desires are earthenware.

And when I have these things in line with nature, why should I not spend my studies on reason as well? I have leisure; my mind is not pulled about. What shall I do, having nothing to distract me? What have I got that suits a man better than this?

When you have nothing to do you are disturbed; you go to the theatre, or wander about with no purpose. Why should a philosopher not work at improving his reason? You busy yourself with crystal vessels, I with the syllogism called the Liar; you with fluorspar vessels, I with the one called the Denying. To you everything you have looks small; to me everything I have looks great. Your desire cannot be satisfied; mine is satisfied already.

It is like children putting a hand into a narrow-necked jar to get figs and nuts. If they fill the hand they cannot get it out, and then they cry. Drop a few and you will get your hand out. And you — part with some of your desires. Do not desire many things, and you will have what you want.
