Chapter 14: Further Miscellaneous Remarks

As bad tragic actors cannot sing alone but only in company with many, so some men cannot walk about alone. Man, if you are anything, walk alone and talk to yourself, and do not hide in the chorus. Examine yourself a little at last; look around; stir yourself up, so that you may know who you are.

When a man drinks water, or does anything else for the sake of training, he tells everybody about it whenever he gets the chance: "I drink water." Is that what you drink water for — for the purpose of drinking water? Man, if it is good for you to drink it, drink. And if not, you are being ridiculous. But if it is good for you and you do drink it, say nothing about it to men who dislike water-drinkers. What — do you want to please those very men?

Of the things men do, some are done for their own sake, some as the occasion arises, some with an eye to circumstances, some to fall in with other people, and some according to a settled plan of life.

There are two things you must root out of men: arrogance and distrust. Arrogance is the opinion that you lack nothing; distrust is the opinion that you cannot be happy with so many circumstances pressing round you. Arrogance is removed by being refuted, and Socrates was the first man to practise that. And to learn that the thing is not impossible, enquire and search. The search will do you no harm; and in a way this is what philosophising is — to look for how it is possible to use desire and avoidance without being blocked.

"I am better than you: my father was a consul." Another says, "I have been a tribune and you have not." If we were horses, would you say: my father was faster? I have plenty of barley and fodder, and elegant harness? And if, while you were saying it, I said: very well, let us race, then. Well — is there nothing in a man corresponding to running in a horse, by which we can tell which is the better and which the worse? Is there not self-respect, good faith, justice? Show yourself better in those, so that you may be better as a man. If you tell me that you can land a heavy kick, I shall tell you that you are proud of what a donkey does.
