Chapter 20: How Everything External Can Be Turned to Advantage

With impressions that come through the eyes, nearly everybody has allowed that good and evil are in us and not in externals. Nobody calls it good that it is day, or bad that it is night, or calls it the greatest evil that somebody thinks three are four. What do men say instead? They say that knowledge is good and error is bad — so that even where falsehood itself is concerned there is a good result: knowing that it is false.

It ought to be the same in life. Is health a good thing and sickness a bad one? No, man. What is it, then? To be healthy, and healthy in the right way, is good; to be healthy in a bad way is bad. So it is possible to get an advantage even out of illness, I tell you.

Is it not possible to get an advantage even out of death? Even out of being maimed? Do you think Menoeceus gained little by dying? Could a man who says so gain as much as Menoeceus gained? Come, man: did he not keep the character of a lover of his country, a man of great spirit, faithful and generous? And if he had gone on living, would he not have lost all of it? Would he not have gained the opposite — the name of coward, ignoble, a hater of his country, a man afraid of death? Well then, do you think he gained little by dying? I suppose not. And did the father of Admetus gain much by dragging his life out so ignobly and miserably? Did he not die afterwards anyway?

Stop, I beg you by the gods, admiring material things. Stop making yourselves slaves — first of things, and then, on account of things, slaves of the men who can give them or take them away.

Can advantage be got out of these things, then? Out of all of them — and out of the man who abuses you. What good does a sparring partner do an athlete before the contest? A very great deal. This man becomes my sparring partner: he trains me in endurance, in keeping my temper, in mildness.

You say no. But the man who grabs my neck and works my loins and shoulders does me good, and the trainer is right when he says, "Lift him with both hands, and the heavier he is, the better for me." And if a man trains me in keeping my temper, does he not do me good?

This is not knowing how to get an advantage out of people. Is my neighbour bad? Bad for himself, good for me: he exercises my good temper and my moderation. Is my father bad? Bad for himself, good for me.

This is the wand of Hermes: touch what you like with it, as the saying goes, and it turns to gold. I say something else: bring what you like and I will turn it into a good. Bring disease, bring death, bring poverty, bring abuse, bring a trial on a capital charge — all of them shall be made profitable by the wand of Hermes.

"What will you do with death?" What else but make it do you honour, or show by means of it what a man is who follows the will of nature? "What will you do with disease?" I will show what it is; I will be at my best in it; I will be steady, I will be happy, I will not flatter the doctor, I will not pray to die.

"What more are you looking for?" Whatever you give me, I will make it happy, fortunate, honoured — a thing a man will go looking for.

You say: no, take care you do not fall ill, it is a bad thing. That is exactly as if you said: take care never to get the impression that three are four, that is bad. Man, how is it bad? If I think about it as I ought, how will it damage me? Will it not even do me good?

So if I think as I ought about poverty, about disease, about holding no office, is that not enough for me? Will it not be an advantage? Then why should I go on looking for good and evil in externals?

And what happens? These doctrines are maintained here, and nobody carries them home. Straight away every man is at war with his slave, with his neighbours, with the men who sneered at him, with the men who laughed at him. Good luck to Lesbius, who proves every day that I know nothing.
