Chapter 25: To Those Who Give Up

Look at the things you set out to do at the start: which you have secured and which you have not; and how pleased you are when you remember the one and how pained about the other. And if it is possible, recover the things you failed at.

For we must not flinch when we are engaged in the greatest of contests; we must take the blows. The contest before us is not in wrestling or in the all-in fight, where both the winner and the loser may have great merit or very little, and may in truth be very lucky or very unlucky. Our contest is for good fortune and happiness themselves.

Well then — even if we have given up the contest for those, nothing stops us starting the fight again. We are not forced to wait another four years for the games at Olympia to come round. As soon as you have recovered and pulled yourself together and put the same keenness into it, you may take up the fight again; and if you give up again, you may take it up again. And if you once win, you are like a man who never gave up at all.

Only do not, out of the habit of giving up, begin to give up with pleasure — and then, like a bad athlete, go the whole circuit of the games after being beaten, like quails running away.

"The sight of a beautiful young girl overpowers me. Well — have I not been overpowered before? An inclination comes on me to find fault with somebody; and have I not found fault before?"

You talk to us as though you had come out of these things unharmed — just as a man might say to the doctor who forbids him to bathe, "Have I not bathed before?" And the doctor can say to him: well, and what happened to you after the bath? Did you not have a fever, did you not have a headache?

And when you found fault with somebody the other day, were you not doing the act of a spiteful man, of a trifling chatterer? Did you not feed the habit in yourself by adding the corresponding acts to it? And when you were overpowered by the girl, did you come off unharmed?

So why do you talk about what you did before? You ought, I think, to remember what you did as slaves remember the blows they have taken, and to keep off the same faults.

But the two cases are not alike. With slaves it is the pain that causes the memory; and with your faults, what is the pain, what is the punishment? When have you ever been in the habit of running from bad acts? Then sufferings of the testing kind are useful to us, whether we choose them or not.
