Chapter 1: On Freedom

(Part 1 of 3)

He is free who lives as he wishes to live; who is subject to no compulsion, no blocking, no force; whose impulses to action are unobstructed, whose desires reach their object, and who does not fall into what he would avoid.

Who chooses to live in error? Nobody. Who chooses to live deceived, liable to mistake, unjust, uncontrolled, discontented, mean? Nobody. So not one bad man lives as he wishes, and therefore not one of them is free.

And who chooses to live in grief, in fear, in envy, in pity, desiring and failing of his desires, trying to avoid something and falling into it? Not one. Then do we find any bad man free of grief and free of fear, who does not fall into what he would avoid and does get what he wants? Not one. So we find no bad man free.

Now if a man who has twice been consul hears this, and you add, "But you are a wise man; this has nothing to do with you," he will forgive you. But if you tell him the truth and say, "As far as not being a slave goes, you differ in nothing from the men who have been sold three times over," what else should you expect but blows?

"What," he says, "I a slave? My father was free, my mother was free. Nobody can buy me. I am of senatorial rank besides, and a friend of Caesar, and I have been consul, and I own a great many slaves."

In the first place, most excellent senator, perhaps your father was a slave in the same kind of servitude, and your mother, and your grandfather, and all your ancestors in a rising line. But even if they were as free as it is possible to be, what is that to you? What if they were of a noble nature and you of a mean one; if they were fearless and you a coward; if they had the power of self-control and you cannot exercise it?

"And what," you may say, "has that to do with being a slave?"

Does it seem to you nothing to do a thing unwillingly, under compulsion, with groans — has that nothing to do with being a slave?

"It is something," you say. "But who is able to compel me, except the master of us all, Caesar?"

Then you have admitted yourself that you have one master. And do not let it console you in the least that he is, as you say, the common master of all; understand instead that you are a slave in a great household. This is how the people of Nicopolis are in the habit of shouting, "By the fortune of Caesar, we are free."

However, let us not speak about Caesar for the present, if you please. Tell me this instead: did you never love anybody, a young girl, or a slave, or a free woman?

"And what has this to do with being a slave or free?"

Were you never ordered by the person you loved to do something you did not want to do? Have you never flattered your little slave girl? Have you never kissed her feet? And yet if a man forced you to kiss Caesar's feet you would think it an insult and outrageous tyranny. So what else is slavery?

Did you never go out at night to a place you did not want to go to? Did you never spend what you did not want to spend? Did you never say things with sighs and groans, and put up with abuse, and with being shut out?

And if you are ashamed to admit your own acts, look at what Thrasonides says and does — a man who has seen more military service than perhaps even you have. First of all he goes out at night, when Geta the slave does not dare go out, and would have made a great outcry if his master had forced him, and gone out lamenting his bitter slavery. And then, what does Thrasonides say? "A worthless girl has enslaved me, whom no enemy ever enslaved."

Unhappy man, to be the slave even of a girl, and a worthless one. Why do you still call yourself free, then? Why do you talk about your service in the army? Then he calls for a sword and is angry with the man who kindly refuses to give it to him; and he sends presents to the woman who hates him, and begs and weeps; and then, having had a little success, he is elated. But even then — was he free enough neither to desire nor to fear?

Now consider how we use the notion of freedom with animals. Men keep tame lions shut up and feed them, and some take them about; and who will say that such a lion is free? Is it not the case that the more comfortably he lives, the more slavish his condition? And who, if he had perception and reason, would want to be one of those lions?

And these birds, when they are caught and shut up — how much do they suffer trying to escape? Some of them starve to death rather than put up with such a life; and those that live, barely live and waste away in suffering; and if they ever find an opening, out they go. So strongly do they want their natural liberty, to be independent and unblocked.

And what harm is there to you in it? What do you say? I am made by nature to fly where I choose, to live in the open air, to sing when I choose; you take all this from me, and then ask what harm it is to me.

For this reason we shall say that only those animals are free which cannot bear captivity, but escape it by dying as soon as they are caught. So Diogenes says somewhere that there is only one road to freedom, and that is to die content. And he writes to the king of Persia: "You cannot enslave the Athenian state any more than you can enslave fish."

How is that? Can I not catch them?

"If you catch them," says Diogenes, "they will leave you at once, as fish do; catch a fish and it dies. And if these men, once caught, are going to die, what use to you is all your preparation for war?"

These are the words of a free man who had examined the matter carefully and, naturally enough, had found the answer. But if you look for it somewhere other than where it is, what wonder if you never find it?

The slave wants to be set free at once. Why? Do you suppose he wants to pay the manumission tax to the collectors? No — but because he imagines that up to now, not having got this, he is blocked and unlucky. "Once I am set free, everything is happiness at once. I take no notice of anybody. I speak to everybody as an equal and a like. I go where I choose, I come from where I choose, I go where I choose."

Then he is set free — and at once, having nowhere to eat, he looks for somebody to flatter, somebody to have dinner with. Then he either works with his body and endures the most dreadful things, and if he can get a manger to feed at he falls into a slavery much worse than his old one; or, even if he becomes rich, being a man with no knowledge of what is good, he falls in love with some little girl and laments in his unhappiness and longs to be a slave again.

"What evil did I suffer as a slave? Somebody else clothed me, somebody else gave me shoes, somebody else fed me, somebody else looked after me when I was ill; and I only did a few services in return. But now, wretched man, what things I suffer, being a slave to many instead of to one. All the same," he says, "if I get the gold rings, then I shall live in prosperity and happiness."

First, to get the rings, he submits to what he deserves; then, having got them, it is all the same again. Then he says, "If I take a commission in the army, I am free of all my troubles." He gets his commission, and suffers as much as a flogged slave — and nevertheless asks for a second commission and a third.

And after that, when he has put the final touch to his career and become a senator, then he becomes a slave by entering the senate house; then he serves the finest and most splendid slavery of all.

Let him stop being a fool and learn what Socrates taught: what the nature of each thing that exists is, and that a man should not fit his preconceptions rashly to particular things. This is the cause of all men's troubles: not being able to fit the general preconceptions to particular cases.

But we hold different opinions about the cause of our troubles. One man thinks he is ill — not so; the fact is that he is fitting his preconceptions wrongly. Another thinks he is poor; another that he has a harsh father or mother; another that Caesar is not favourable to him. All of it is one thing and one only: not knowing how to fit the preconceptions.

Who has not a preconception of what is bad — that it is harmful, that it should be avoided, that it should be guarded against by every means? One preconception is not in conflict with another; the conflict only comes at the point of fitting them.

So what is this evil, this harmful thing to be avoided? He answers: not being Caesar's friend. He has gone wide of the mark; he has missed the fitting; he is in difficulties; he is looking for things that have nothing to do with the matter. For when he has succeeded in becoming Caesar's friend, he has still failed to find what he was looking for.

For what is it that every man is looking for? To live securely, to be happy, to do everything as he wishes, not to be blocked, not to be compelled. When he becomes Caesar's friend, then, is he unblocked? Uncompelled? Is he at peace? Is he happy?

Whom shall we ask? What more trustworthy witness have we than the very man who has become Caesar's friend? Come forward and tell us: when did you sleep more quietly, now or before?

At once you hear the answer: "Stop, I beg you, and do not mock me. You do not know what miseries I suffer. Sleep does not come to me. Somebody comes and says, Caesar is awake already, he is on his way out — and then come the troubles and the cares."

Well — when did you dine with more pleasure, now or before? Hear what he says about that too. If he is not invited he is hurt; and if he is invited he dines like a slave with his master, anxious the whole time not to say or do anything foolish. And what do you suppose he is afraid of? Being flogged like a slave? How could he hope for anything so good. No: as befits so great a man, Caesar's friend, he is afraid of losing his head.

And when did you bathe with less worry, and take your exercise more quietly? In short, which life did you prefer, the one you have now or the one before? I can swear that no man is so stupid or so ignorant of the truth that he does not lament his own misfortunes the closer he stands in friendship to Caesar.

So since neither the men called kings live as they choose, nor the friends of kings, who in the end are the men who are free? Look, and you will find; you have aids from nature for discovering the truth.

But if you are not able by yourself, going only along these roads, to discover what follows, then listen to the men who have made the enquiry. What do they say? Does freedom seem to you a good thing? "The greatest good." Is it possible, then, for a man who has got the greatest good to be unhappy or to fare badly? "No." Then whenever you see men unhappy, unlucky, lamenting, declare confidently that they are not free. "I do declare it."

So now we have got away from buying and selling and all such arrangements about property. If you have rightly agreed to these things, then if the great king is unhappy he cannot be free; nor can a lesser king, nor a man of consular rank, nor a man who has been consul twice. Very well.

Then answer me this question as well: does freedom seem to you something great and noble and valuable? "How could it not?" Then is it possible, when a man has got something so great and valuable and noble, for him to be mean? "It is not."

So whenever you see a man subject to another, or flattering him against his own opinion, declare confidently that this man is not free either — and not only if he does it for a dinner, but if he does it for a province or a consulship. Call the men who do it for small things little slaves, and the men who do it for great things great slaves, as they deserve. "That is admitted too."

Do you think freedom is something independent and self-governing? "Certainly." Then whenever it is in another man's power to block a man and compel him, declare that he is not free. And do not, I beg you, look into his grandfathers and great-grandfathers, or enquire whether he was bought and sold. If you hear him say "Master" from the heart and with feeling, call him a slave, even if twelve lictors walk in front of him. And if you hear him say, "Wretch that I am, how much I suffer," call him a slave. If in the end you see him lamenting, complaining, unhappy, call him a slave, though he wears the purple-bordered toga.

And if he is doing none of these things, do not yet call him free: learn his judgments, and see whether they are subject to compulsion, or can produce blocking, or bad fortune. If you find him so, call him a slave on holiday at the Saturnalia. Say his master is away from home; he will be back soon, and then you will find out what he suffers.

"Who will be back?" Whoever has in himself the power over anything the man wants — to give it to him or to take it away.

"So we have many masters?" We have. Before our present masters we have circumstances as our masters, and the circumstances are many. So the men who have power over any of these circumstances must necessarily be our masters.

No man fears Caesar himself; he fears death, exile, loss of property, prison, disgrace. And no man loves Caesar unless Caesar is a man of great merit; he loves wealth, or the office of tribune, or praetor, or consul. And when we love and hate and fear these things, then the men who have power over them must be our masters.

So we worship them as gods; we think that whatever has the power of conferring the greatest advantage on us is divine. And then we wrongly assume that a particular man has the power of conferring the greatest advantages, and so that he is something divine. For if we wrongly assume that a particular man has that power, the conclusion drawn from those premises must necessarily be false.

What is it, then, that makes a man unblocked and his own master? Wealth does not do it, nor a consulship, nor a provincial governorship, nor royal power. Something else has to be found.

What is it that makes us unblocked and unobstructed when we write? Knowing the art of writing. And in playing the lute? Knowing the science of the lute. So in life too, it is the science of living.

You have heard it in general terms; now examine the thing in its parts as well. Is it possible for a man who desires any of the things that depend on others to be unblocked? No. Is it possible for him to be unobstructed? No. Then he cannot be free.

Consider, then: have we nothing in our own power only? Or have we everything? Or are some things in our own power and others in the power of others?

"What do you mean?"

When you want the body to be sound, is it in your power or not? "It is not." When you want it to be healthy? "That is not in my power either." When you want it to be handsome? "Nor that." Life or death? "That is not in my power either."

So your body belongs to somebody else, subject to every man stronger than you. "It does."

And your estate — is it in your power to have it when you please, and as long as you please, and in the state you please? "No." And your slaves? "No." And your clothes? "No." And your house? "No." And your horses? "Not one of these things." And if you want your children to live by all means, or your wife, or your brother, or your friends — is that in your power? "That is not in my power either."
