Chapter 1: On Freedom

(Part 3 of 3)

"So Socrates did not come off badly?"

No — but his judges and his accusers did.

"And Helvidius at Rome did not come off badly?"

No — but his murderer did.

"How do you mean?"

The same as you mean when you say a cock has not come off badly when he has won and been badly wounded, and that a cock has come off badly when he has been beaten and is unhurt. And you do not call a dog lucky when he neither hunts nor works, but when you see him sweating, when you see him in pain and panting hard after a run.

What paradox are we uttering, if we say that the evil in everything is what is contrary to that thing's nature? Is that a paradox? Do you not say it about everything else? Then why do you think differently about man alone?

But because we say that man's nature is gentle and social and trustworthy, will you not say that this is a paradox? It is not. And is it a paradox to say that a man is not harmed when he is whipped, or chained, or beheaded? If he suffers nobly, does he not come off with an increase of advantage and profit? And is the man not harmed who suffers in the most pitiful and disgraceful way, who instead of a man becomes a wolf, or a viper, or a wasp?

Well then, let us go back over what has been agreed. The man not under restraint is free, the man for whom things are exactly as he wishes them to be; and the man who can be restrained or compelled or blocked, or thrown into some situation against his will, is a slave.

And who is free from restraint? The man who desires nothing that belongs to others. And what belongs to others? Whatever it is not in our power to have or not have, or to have of a certain kind or in a certain way. So the body belongs to another, the parts of the body belong to another, property belongs to another. And if you are attached to any of them as your own, you will pay the penalty a man ought to pay for desiring what belongs to somebody else.

This is the road to freedom; this is the only escape from slavery — to be able to say at last, with your whole soul:

	Lead me, Zeus, and you too, Destiny,
	wherever you have fixed my post.

But what do you say, philosopher? The tyrant summons you to say something that does not become you. Do you say it or not? Answer me.

"Let me consider."

Consider now? And when you were in the school, what was it you used to consider? Did you not study what things are good and what are bad and what are neither? "I did." And what was our conclusion? "That just and honourable acts are good, and unjust and disgraceful ones bad."

Is life a good thing? "No." Is death a bad thing? "No." Is prison? "No." And what did we think about mean and faithless words, and betraying a friend, and flattering a tyrant? "That they are bad."

Well then, you are not considering; you have not considered and you have not deliberated. What is there to consider? Whether it is fitting for me, when it is in my power, to secure the greatest of goods for myself, and not to secure the greatest evils? A fine enquiry indeed, and necessary, and one that calls for much deliberation. Man, why do you mock us? Such an enquiry is never made.

If you really imagined that base things were bad and honourable things good, and that everything else was neither, you would never even have approached this enquiry or come near it. You would have been able to distinguish them at once by the understanding, as you distinguish things by sight. When do you enquire whether black things are white, whether heavy things are light, and fail to grasp the plain evidence of the senses?

How then do you now say that you are considering whether things that are neither good nor bad ought to be avoided more than things that are bad? But you do not hold these judgments. These things do not seem to you neither good nor bad; you think they are the greatest evils. And those other things do not seem evils to you but matters of no concern at all.

That is how you have trained yourself from the beginning. "Where am I? In the school. And is anybody listening to me? I am talking among philosophers." But I have gone out of the school. Away with that talk of scholars and fools.

This is how a friend is crushed by a philosopher's testimony; this is how a philosopher becomes a parasite; this is how he hires himself out for money; this is how a man does not say in the senate what he thinks, while in private he proclaims his opinions.

You are a cold and miserable little opinion, hanging from idle words as from a hair. Keep yourself strong instead, and fit for the uses of life, and initiated by being exercised in action.

How do you take the news — I do not say that your child has died, for how could you bear that — but that your oil has been spilled, your wine drunk up? Do you behave in such a way that a man standing next to you while you are making a great outcry can say just this: "Philosopher, you say something different in the school. Why do you deceive us? Why, when you are only a worm, do you say you are a man?"

I should like to be there when one of the philosophers is in bed with a woman, so that I could see how he exerts himself, and what words he uses, and whether he remembers his title of philosopher and the words he hears and says and reads.

And what has this to do with liberty? Nothing but this: whether you rich men choose it or not.

And who is my evidence for that? Who but yourselves — who have a powerful master, and live at his nod and his gesture, and faint if he so much as looks at you with a scowl; who court old women and old men and say, "I cannot do this, it is not in my power."

Why is it not in your power? Did you not argue with me the other day and say you were free? "But Aprulla stopped me." Then tell the truth, slave. Do not run away from your masters, and do not deny them, and do not dare to produce somebody to assert your freedom, when you have so many proofs of your slavery.

Indeed, when a man is forced by love to do something against his own judgment, and sees the better course at the same time but has not the strength to follow it, one might think him more deserving of excuse, as being held by a certain violent and in a way divine power. But who could put up with you, who fall in love with old women and old men, and wipe the old women's noses and wash them and give them presents, and wait on them like a slave when they are ill — and at the same time wish them dead, and ask the doctors whether they are sick unto death?

And again, when in order to get these great and much-admired offices and honours you kiss the hands of other men's slaves, so that you are not even the slave of free men. And then you walk about in front of me in state, a praetor, a consul. Do I not know how you became a praetor, and by what means you got your consulship, and who gave it to you? I would not even choose to live if I had to live by the help of Felicion and put up with his arrogance and his slavish insolence — because I know what a slave is who is fortunate, as he thinks, and swollen with pride.

"And you," a man may say, "are you free?"

I wish I were, by the gods, and I pray to be; but I am not yet able to face my masters. I still value my poor body; I set great store by keeping it whole, though I do not have it whole.

But I can point out a free man to you, so that you need look no further for an example. Diogenes was free. How was he free? Not because he was born of free parents — he was not — but because he was free himself: because he had thrown off all the handles of slavery, and it was not possible for any man to get at him, and nobody had any means of taking hold of him to enslave him.

Everything about him was loosely tied; everything was merely hanging on him. If you took hold of his property, he would have let it go and be yours rather than follow you for it. If you had taken hold of his leg, he would have let the leg go; if of his whole body, the whole poor body; and the same with his friends, his companions, his country. He knew where he got them from, and from whom, and on what terms.

His true parents, the gods, and his real country he would never have deserted; he would have yielded to no man in obedience to them and their orders; and no man would have died for his country more readily. For he was not in the habit of asking when he should be counted to have done something on behalf of the whole; he remembered that everything that is done comes from there, and is done on behalf of that country, and is commanded by the one who administers it.

So see what Diogenes says and writes himself: "For this reason, Diogenes, it is in your power to speak both with the King of Persia and with Archidamus the king of the Spartans, as you please."

Was it because he was born of free parents? I suppose all the Athenians and all the Spartans, being born of slaves, could not talk with these kings as they wished, but feared them and paid court to them?

Then why does he say it is in his power? Because I do not consider the poor body my own; because I want nothing; because law is everything to me and nothing else is. These were the things that let him be free.

And so that you shall not think I am showing you the example of a solitary man, with no wife and no children, no country, no friends and no family to bend him and pull him different ways, take Socrates. Observe that he had a wife and children, but did not consider them his own; that he had a country, so long as it was fit to have one and in the way it was fit; and friends and family too, but he held all of them subject to law and to the obedience owed to it.

That is why he was the first to go out as a soldier when it was necessary, and in war he exposed himself to danger without sparing himself. And when he was sent by the tyrants to arrest Leon, he did not even deliberate about it, because he thought it a base act, and he knew he must die for refusing, if it came to that. And what difference did that make to him? He meant to preserve something else — not his poor flesh, but his good faith and his honourable character. Those are things that cannot be attacked or brought into subjection.

Then, when he had to speak in defence of his own life, did he behave like a man who had children, who had a wife? No: he behaved like a man who had neither.

And what did he do when he was ordered to drink the poison, and had the power to escape from prison, and Crito said to him, "Escape for the sake of your children"? Did he count the chance of escape as an unexpected gain? Not at all. He considered what was fitting and proper, and did not so much as look at the rest or take it into account. He did not choose, he said, to save his poor body, but to save the thing that is increased and saved by doing what is just and is damaged and destroyed by doing what is unjust.

Socrates will not save his life by a base act — the man who would not put the question to the vote when the Athenians clamoured for it, who refused to obey the tyrants, who talked as he did about virtue and right behaviour. It is not possible to save such a man's life by base acts. He is saved by dying, not by running away. The good actor too preserves his character better by stopping when he ought to stop than by going on acting past the proper time.

What are Socrates' children to do, then? "If I had gone off to Thessaly," said Socrates, "would you have taken care of them? And if I go off to the world below, will there be nobody to take care of them?" See how he gives death a gentle name and makes fun of it.

But if you or I had been in his place we should have answered at once, like philosophers, that men who act unjustly must be paid back in the same coin; and we should have added, "I shall be useful to many men if my life is saved, and if I die I shall be useful to nobody." And if it had been necessary we should have made our escape by slipping through a small hole.

And how should we have been useful to anybody then? Where would they have been staying? And if we were useful to men while we were alive, should we not have been far more useful by dying when we ought to die, and as we ought to die? Now that Socrates is dead, the memory of what he did and said while he lived is no less useful to men — it is more useful.

Think about these things, these judgments, these words. Look at these examples, if you want to be free, if you want the thing at what it is worth.

And what is the wonder if you buy so great a thing at the price of so many great things? For the sake of what is called liberty, some men hang themselves and others throw themselves off cliffs, and sometimes whole cities have perished. And will you not, for the sake of the true and unassailable and secure liberty, give back to God the things he gave you, when he asks for them?

Will you not, as Plato says, practise not only dying but enduring torture and exile and flogging — in a word, giving up everything that is not your own? If you will not, you will be a slave among slaves, though you were consul ten thousand times over; and if you make your way up to the Palace you will be no less a slave. And you will feel that philosophers perhaps say things contrary to common opinion, as Cleanthes said too, but not things contrary to reason.

For you will know by experience that the words are true; that there is no profit to men who have obtained the things that are prized and eagerly chased after; and that to men who have not yet obtained them there is an imagination that when these things come, everything good will come with them. And then, when they have come, the fever is the same, the tossing to and fro is the same, the surfeit, the longing for what is not there.

For freedom is not won by getting full possession of the things you want, but by taking away the wanting.

And so that you may know this is true: as you have laboured for those things, transfer your labour to these. Keep vigil for the sake of acquiring a judgment that will make you free. Pay court to a philosopher instead of to a rich old man. Be seen at a philosopher's door — you will not disgrace yourself by being seen there. You will not go away empty or without profit if you go to the philosopher as you should. And if you do not succeed, at least try. The attempt is nothing to be ashamed of.
