Chapter 2: On Close Friendships

Before everything else you must attend to this: never to be so closely tied to any of your old companions or friends that you come down to doing the same things he does. If you do not keep this rule, you will ruin yourself.

And if the thought comes into your mind, "I shall seem disobliging to him, and he will not feel the same about me," remember that nothing is done without cost, and that it is not possible for a man who stops doing the same things to be the same man he was.

So choose which of the two you will have: to be loved just as much by the people who used to love you, by staying the same as your old self; or to be better, and not get from your friends what you used to get. If the second is better, turn to it at once and do not let other considerations pull you the other way. No man can make progress while he is wavering between opposites; and if you have preferred this one thing to everything else, if you choose to attend to this only and work at this only, then give up everything else.

If you will not do that, your wavering will produce both results: you will neither improve as you ought, nor get what you used to get. For before, by plainly wanting the things that are worth nothing, you pleased your friends.

But you cannot excel in both kinds; and to the extent that you share in the one, you must necessarily fall short in the other. You cannot be as agreeable as you used to be to the men you used to drink with, if you no longer drink with them. So choose whether you will be a hard drinker and pleasant to your old friends, or a sober man and disagreeable to them. You cannot be loved just as much by the men you used to sing with, if you no longer sing with them. So choose in this matter too which of the two you will have.

If it is better to be modest and orderly than to have a man say, "He is a jolly fellow," then give up the rest, renounce it, turn away from it, have nothing to do with such men.

But if that does not suit you, then turn to the opposite altogether: throw away all shame about sex, be an adulterer, act accordingly, and you will get what you want. And jump up in the theatre and bawl your praise of the dancer.

But characters as different as these cannot be mixed. You cannot play both Thersites and Agamemnon. If you mean to be Thersites, you must be humpbacked and bald; if Agamemnon, you must be tall and handsome and love the men placed under your command.
