Chapter 6: Against Those Who Complain of Being Pitied

"I am hurt," a man says, "at being pitied."

Is the fact of your being pitied something that concerns you, or the men who pity you? And is it in your power to stop the pity?

"It is in my power, if I show them I do not need pity."

And are you in the condition of not needing pity, or are you not?

"I think I am not. But these people do not pity me for the things it would be proper to pity me for, if they ought to pity me at all — I mean my faults. They pity me for my poverty, for not holding honourable office, for diseases and deaths and other such things."

Then are you prepared to convince the crowd that not one of these things is an evil, and that it is possible for a man who is poor and holds no office and enjoys no honour to be happy? Or to show yourself to them as rich and powerful?

The second of these belongs to a boastful, silly, good-for-nothing man. And consider by what means the pretence has to be kept up. You will have to hire slaves, and own a few pieces of silver plate, and display them in public if you can — the same pieces over and over, and you will have to try to hide that they are the same. You will need splendid clothes and everything else for show. You will have to appear a man honoured by the great, and try to dine at their houses, or at least to be thought to dine there. And as to your person, you will have to use some mean tricks so as to look handsomer and better born than you are.

These are the things you must contrive if you choose the second road so as not to be pitied. And the first road is both impossible and long: attempting the very thing Zeus has not been able to do, to convince all men what things are good and bad. Is that power given to you? Only this is given to you: to convince yourself. And you have not convinced yourself.

And then I ask you: do you attempt to persuade other men? Who has lived so long with you as you have with yourself? Who has so much power to convince you as you have? Who is better disposed toward you and closer to you than you are to yourself? How is it, then, that you have not yet convinced yourself, so as to learn?

Are things not upside down at the moment? Is this what you have been in earnest about doing — learning to be free of grief and free of disturbance, not to be abject, and to be free? Have you not heard that there is only one road that leads to this end: giving up the things that do not depend on the will, withdrawing from them, and admitting that they belong to others?

So what sort of thing is it for another man to have an opinion about you? A thing outside the will. Then is it nothing to you? It is nothing. And when you are still annoyed and disturbed by it, do you think you are convinced about good and evil?

Will you not leave other men alone, then, and be both pupil and teacher to yourself? Let the rest of mankind see to whether it is in their interest to live in a state contrary to nature; no man is closer to me than myself.

What is the meaning of this, then — that I have listened to the words of the philosophers and I agree with them, and yet in fact I am no more at ease than before? Am I so stupid? And yet in everything else I have taken up I have not turned out very stupid: I learned my letters quickly, and wrestling, and geometry, and how to resolve syllogisms.

Has reason not convinced me, then? And in fact there is nothing I have approved and chosen from the beginning so much as this; and now I read about these things, hear about them, write about them. I have found no stronger reasoning than this so far.

Where am I falling short, then? Have the contrary opinions not been rooted out of me? Have the notions themselves not been exercised, not been put into practice — laid aside like armour and rusted, so that they no longer fit me?

And yet in the wrestling school, and in writing and reading, I am not satisfied with merely learning: I turn the syllogisms that are put to me upside down, and I make others, and trick syllogisms too. But the necessary theorems, working from which a man can become free of grief, fear, passions and blocking, and become a free man — in these I do not exercise myself, and in these I do not do the proper practice. And then I care what other people will say about me, whether I shall look worth noticing to them, whether I shall look happy.

Wretched man, will you not see what you are saying about yourself? What do you look like to yourself — in your judgments, in your desires, in your avoidances, in your impulses, in your preparation, in your plans, and in the other acts that suit a man? And do you trouble yourself about whether other men pity you?

"Yes — but I am pitied when I do not deserve it."

Then are you pained at that? And is a man who is pained an object of pity? "Yes." Then how are you being pitied when you do not deserve it? By the very fact that you suffer over being pitied, you make yourself deserving of it.

And what does Antisthenes say? Have you not heard? "It is a royal thing, Cyrus, to do well and be ill spoken of."

My head is sound and everybody thinks I have a headache. What do I care? I am free of fever, and people sympathise with me as if I had one: "Poor man, you have not been rid of that fever for so long." And I say, with a sorrowful face, "It is true — I have been ill a long time now." And what will come of it? Whatever God pleases. And meanwhile I laugh to myself at the people who are pitying me.

What stops the same thing being done here? I am poor, but I have the right judgment about poverty. Why do I care if they pity me for it? I am not in office, and others are; and I have the judgment I ought to have about having office and not having it. Let the men who pity me look to it. I am neither hungry nor thirsty nor cold; but because they are hungry and thirsty they think I must be too.

What am I to do for them, then? Go about proclaiming, "Do not be mistaken, gentlemen; I am very well. I do not trouble myself about poverty, or lack of power, or in a word about anything but right judgments. I have those unrestricted; I care about nothing else at all"?

What foolish talk is this? How do I possess right judgments, when I am not content with being what I am but am uneasy about what I am taken to be?

But you say: others will get more, and be preferred to me. And what is more reasonable than that men who have laboured at something should have more of the thing they laboured at? They laboured for power, and you laboured at your judgments; they laboured for wealth, and you for the right use of impressions.

See whether they have more than you in the thing you laboured at and they neglected: whether they assent better than you do with respect to the natural measures of things; whether they are less often disappointed in their desires; whether they fall less often than you into what they would avoid; whether in their intentions, in what they set before themselves, in their purposes, in their movements toward an object, they take better aim; whether they keep proper behaviour better, as men, as sons, as parents, and so on through the other names by which we express the relations of life.

But if they hold power and you do not, will you not choose to tell yourself the truth — that you do nothing for the sake of power, and they do everything? It would be most unreasonable for a man who looks after a thing to get less of it than the man who does not.

"Not so. Since I care about right judgments, it is more reasonable for me to have power."

Yes, in the matter you do care about, in judgments. But in the matter they have cared about more than you, give way to them. It is exactly as if you thought that because you have right judgments you ought to hit the mark better with a bow than an archer does, and do better in metalwork than a smith.

Give up your earnestness about judgments, then, and busy yourself with the things you want to get. And then lament if you do not succeed — you will deserve to lament. But as it is, you say that you are occupied with other things, that you are looking after other things; and the crowd say truly that one act has nothing in common with another.

The man who has got up in the morning is looking for whom to salute, whom to say something agreeable to, whom to send a present to, how to please the dancer, how by behaving badly to one man he may please another. When he prays, he prays about these things; when he sacrifices, he sacrifices for them. He takes the saying of Pythagoras — "Let sleep not fall upon your weary eyes" — and applies it to these things. Where have I fallen short in the matter of flattery? What have I done? Anything like a free man? Anything like a man of noble mind? And if he finds anything of the kind, he blames and accuses himself: why did you say that? Was it not in your power to lie? Even the philosophers say there is nothing to stop us telling a lie.

But you, if you really have cared about nothing but the right use of impressions, should reflect as soon as you have got up in the morning: what do I need in order to be free of the passions and free of disturbance? What am I? A poor body, a piece of property, a thing that gets talked about? I am none of these. What am I, then? A rational creature. What is required of me, then?

Go over your acts. Where did I leave out the things that lead to living well? What have I done that was unfriendly or unsociable? What have I failed to do in these matters that I ought to have done?

The difference in desires and actions and wishes being so great, then, would you still have the same share as other men in things you have not laboured at and they have? And are you surprised when they pity you, and annoyed?

But they are not annoyed if you pity them. Why? Because they are convinced that they have what is good, and you are not convinced. That is why you are not satisfied with your own but want what they have; while they are satisfied with theirs and do not want what you have. Because if you were really convinced that where the good is concerned it is you who possess it and they who have missed it, you would not even have given a thought to what they say about you.
