Chapter 9: To a Man Who Had Turned Shameless

When you see another man holding office, set against it the fact that you do not have the desire for office. When you see another man rich, see what you possess instead of riches; because if you possess nothing instead of them, you are miserable, but if you do not have the desire for riches, know that you possess more than he does, and something worth much more.

Another man has a handsome wife: you have the satisfaction of not desiring a handsome wife. Do these things seem small to you? And how much would these very men give — the rich, the powerful, the men who live with handsome women — to be able to despise riches and power and the very women they love and enjoy?

Do you not know what the thirst of a man in a fever is like? It is nothing at all like the thirst of a healthy man. A healthy man stops being thirsty when he has drunk; but the sick man is pleased for a moment and then feels sick, turns the drink into bile, vomits, gets cramps, and is thirstier than before.

That is what it is to desire riches and possess riches, to desire power and possess power, to desire a beautiful woman and sleep with her. Add jealousy to it, and the fear of losing the thing you love, and indecent words, indecent thoughts, unseemly acts.

"And what do I lose?" you will say.

My man, you were modest, and you are not now. Have you lost nothing? Instead of Chrysippus and Zeno you read Aristides and Evenus: have you lost nothing? Instead of Socrates and Diogenes you admire the man who is best at corrupting and seducing women.

You want to look handsome and try to make yourself so, though you are not. You like to show off splendid clothes so as to attract women; and if you find some fine hair oil, you imagine you are happy. But once you never gave a thought to any such thing; you only thought about where there might be decent talk, and a man worth knowing, and a generous idea. And so you slept like a man, walked out like a man, wore a man's dress, and talked in a way that becomes a good man.

And then you say to me, "I have lost nothing"? Do men lose nothing but coin, then? Is self-respect not lost? Is decent behaviour not lost? Has a man who has lost these suffered no loss?

Perhaps you think not one of these is a loss. But there was a time when you counted this the only loss and damage there was, and were anxious that nobody should shift you from those good words and acts.

Notice: you have been shifted from those good words and acts by nobody but yourself. Fight with yourself; restore yourself to decency, to self-respect, to liberty.

If anybody had ever told you this about me — that somebody was forcing me to commit adultery, to wear clothes like yours, to perfume myself with oils — would you not have gone and killed the man who slandered me with your own hand? And now will you not help yourself? And how much easier this help is. There is no need to kill anybody, or put him in chains, or insult him, or go to law: you need only speak to yourself, who will be the most easily persuaded of all, and over whom nobody has more power of persuasion than you have.

First of all, condemn what you are doing; and then, having condemned it, do not despair of yourself, and do not be like those mean-spirited men who, having once given in, surrender completely and are carried off as if by a flood.

See what the trainers of boys do. Has the boy fallen? Get up, they say, and wrestle again until you are made strong. Do something of the same kind yourself — for be assured that nothing is more workable than the human soul. You have only to exercise the will, and the thing is done, it is set right. And on the other hand, only nod off, and the thing is lost; because ruin comes from within, and so does help.

"And then what good do I get?"

And what greater good than this are you looking for? From a shameless man you will become a modest one; from a disorderly man, an orderly one; from a faithless man, a faithful one; from a man of unbridled habits, a sober one. If you are looking for anything more than that, go on doing what you are doing: not even a god can help you now.
