Chapter 10: What We Should Despise and What We Should Value

All men's difficulties are about external things; their helplessness is about externals. What shall I do? How will it be? How will it turn out? Will this happen, or that? These are all the words of men who are turning toward things outside the power of the will.

Who says, "How am I to avoid assenting to what is false? How am I to avoid turning away from the truth?" If a man has a good enough disposition to be anxious about these things, I shall remind him: why are you anxious? The thing is in your own power. Be easy; do not be hasty in assenting before you apply the natural rule.

On the other side, if a man is uneasy about his desire, in case it fails of its purpose and misses its end, and about his avoidance, in case he falls into what he would avoid, then first I shall love him for it, because he throws away the things other men are in a flutter about, and their fears, and turns his thoughts to his own affairs and his own condition.

Then I shall say to him: if you do not choose to desire what you will fail to get, or to try to avoid what you will fall into, then desire nothing that belongs to others and try to avoid nothing that is not in your power. If you do not keep that rule, you must necessarily fail in your desires and fall into what you would avoid.

Where is the difficulty in that? Where is there room for the words "How will it be?" and "How will it turn out?" and "Will this happen or that?"

Now, is what will happen not outside the will? Yes. And is the nature of good and evil not in the things within the power of the will? Yes. Then is it in your power to treat whatever happens according to nature? Can anybody stop you? Nobody.

So do not say to me any longer, "How will it be?" However it may be, you will dispose of it well, and the result will be a fortunate one for you.

What would Hercules have been if he had said, "How am I to keep a great lion from appearing to me — or a great boar, or savage men"? And what do you care about that? If a great boar appears, you will fight a greater fight; if bad men appear, you will rid the earth of bad men.

"Suppose I lose my life that way, then."

You will die a good man, doing a noble act. Since we must certainly die, a man must necessarily be found doing something — following the farmer's work, or digging, or trading, or serving in a consulship, or suffering from indigestion or from dysentery.

What do you want to be doing when death finds you? For my part I should want to be found doing something that belongs to a man: something generous, useful to the common interest, noble. And if I cannot be found doing anything so great, then at least doing the thing I cannot be blocked from doing, the thing that is permitted me: correcting myself, cultivating the capacity that uses impressions, working at freedom from the passions, giving the relations of life their due. And if I get that far, then also touching on the third topic, security in forming judgments about things.

If death catches me busy about these things, it is enough for me that I can stretch out my hands to God and say: the means I received from you for seeing your administration and following it, I have not neglected. I have not dishonoured you by my acts. See how I have used my senses; see how I have used my preconceptions. Have I ever blamed you? Have I ever been discontented with anything that happens, or wished it otherwise? Have I ever wished to break the relations of things? That you gave me life, I thank you for what you gave. As long as I have used what is yours, I am content; take it back and put it wherever you choose, because it was all yours, and you gave it to me.

Is it not enough to depart in that state of mind? And what life is better and more becoming than that of a man in that state of mind? And what end is happier?

But for this to be possible, a man must take on no small things, and the things he must go without are not small either. You cannot both wish to be consul and to have this, and be eager for lands and have this too, and be anxious about slaves and about yourself. If you wish for anything that belongs to another, what is your own is lost.

That is the nature of the thing: nothing is given or had for nothing. And what is surprising in that? If you want to be consul, you must go without sleep, run about, kiss hands, wear yourself out at other men's doors, say and do a great many things unworthy of a free man, send gifts to many and daily presents to some.

And what is the thing you get? Twelve bundles of rods; to sit three or four times on the tribunal; to put on the games in the Circus and give dinners in little baskets. Or if you do not agree, let somebody show me what there is besides these.

And then, in order to secure freedom from the passions, and peace, and sleeping well when you sleep and being really awake when you are awake, and fearing nothing and being anxious about nothing — will you spend nothing and give no labour?

But if something of yours is lost while you are busy at this, or badly wasted, or another man gets what you should have got, will you be annoyed at once at what has happened? Will you not set on the other side of the account what you are getting, and for what — how much for how much?

Do you expect to have things so great for nothing? And how could you? One kind of work has nothing in common with another. You cannot have both external things, after taking care of them, and your own governing part. If you want those, give this up. If you do not, you will have neither the one nor the other, while you are pulled both ways.

The oil will be spilled, the household pots will be smashed — very well; but I shall be free of the passions. There will be a fire when I am not at home, and the books will be destroyed — but I shall treat impressions according to nature.

"Well, but I shall have nothing to eat." If I am so unlucky, death is a harbour. Death is the harbour for everybody; this is the refuge; and that is why nothing in life is difficult. As soon as you choose, you are out of the house, and the smoke does not trouble you any more.

Why are you anxious, then? Why do you lose your sleep? Why do you not say at once, having considered where your good and your evil lie: both of them are in my power. Nobody can deprive me of the good, and nobody can involve me in the bad against my will. Why do I not throw myself down and snore? Everything I have is safe.

As for the things that belong to others, the man who gets them will see to them, as they are handed out by the one who has the power. Who am I to want them this way or that? Was a power of choosing them given to me? Has anybody made me the distributor of them? What I have power over is enough for me: I ought to manage that as well as I can, and let the master of the rest choose about the rest.

When a man has these things before his eyes, does he lie awake and toss about? What would he have, and what does he regret — Patroclus, or Antilochus, or Menelaus? When did he ever suppose that any friend of his was immortal? When did he not have it in front of his eyes that tomorrow or the day after, he or his friend must die?

"Yes," he says, "but I thought he would outlive me and bring up my son."

You were a fool for that, and you were reckoning on what was uncertain. Then why do you not blame yourself, instead of sitting crying like a girl?

"But he used to set my food in front of me."

Because he was alive, you fool; now he cannot. Automedon will set it in front of you, and if Automedon dies too, you will find somebody else. If the pot your meat was cooked in gets broken, must you die of hunger because you have not got the pot you were used to? Do you not send out and buy a new pot?

He says:

	No greater evil than this could fall on me.
	— Iliad xix 321.

Why is this your evil? Then instead of getting rid of it, do you blame your mother for not foretelling it to you, so that you might have gone on grieving from that moment?

What do you think — do you not suppose Homer wrote this so that we might learn that men of the noblest birth, the strongest, the richest, the handsomest, are not prevented from being utterly wretched and unlucky, when they do not hold the judgments they ought to hold?
