# bear 05: text

“The waterfowl made this morning a noise like thunder. A pelican (*Pelecanus onocrotatus*) was killed as he passed by, and many geese and ducks flew over the camp. Descending the river for about three miles in the afternoon, we found a bar to any further travelling in that direction—the stream being spread out in several branches, and covering the low grounds with water, where the miry nature of the bottom did not permit any further advance. We were evidently on the border of the lake, although the rushes and canes which covered the marshes prevented any view; and we accordingly encamped at the little delta which forms the mouth of Bear River; a long arm of the lake stretching up to the north between us and the opposite mountains. The river was bordered with a fringe of willows and canes, among which were interspersed a few plants; and scattered about on the marsh was a species of *Uniola,* closely allied to *U. spicata* of our sea coast. The whole morass was animated with multitudes of waterfowl, which appeared to be very wild—rising for the space of a mile round about at the sound of a gun, with a noise like distant thunder. Several of the people waded out into the marshes, and we had tonight a delicious supper of ducks, geese, and plover.”

A few years later Capt. Howard Stansbury, making a reconnaissance of a new route through the Rocky Mountains, arrived at Bear River Bay on October 22, 1849. It was covered, he wrote, “by immense flocks of wild geese and ducks among which many swans were seen, being distinguishable by their size and the whiteness of their plumage. I had seen large flocks of these birds before, in various parts of our country, and especially upon the Potomac, but never did I behold anything like the immense numbers here congregated together. Thousands of acres, as far as the eye could reach, seemed literally covered with them, presenting a scene of busy, animated cheerfulness, in most graceful contrast with the dreary, silent solitude by which we were immediately surrounded.”

After the fur trappers and the explorers and the gold seekers came permanent colonists. When the Mormon pioneers arrived in the valley of the Great Salt Lake in 1847 and established their settlement, the country was inhabited only by Indians and was part of the region belonging to Mexico. At the close of the Mexican War in 1848 it became part of the United States. The Territory of Utah was established in 1850. In 1869 the rails of the first transcontinental railroad were joined within sight of the present refuge, and the rapid advance of civilization into the wilderness began.

* * *

Water, and conflict for water use, dominate the history of the area. The first need of the permanent settlers was the production of life-sustaining crops. On the valley floor the poorly drained soils contained a high concentration of soluble salts, and cultivation was necessarily restricted to better drained lands near the base of the mountains. Here irrigation was necessary. Although good agricultural land was at a premium, water was even more scarce in these arid lands of the Great Basin.

Little by little, every possible source was utilized to its fullest extent. The Bear River, in its 600-mile course from the Uinta Mountains through parts of Utah, Wyoming, and Idaho to Great Salt Lake, is said to be the most completely utilized river in the world. The Bear River Valley canal and irrigation system, one of the ⟨cont⟩
