# bear 13: text

⟨cont⟩ All along the water margins ducks may be flushed from their nests—gadwalls and redheads, mallards and pintails and cinnamon teal; and in spring the Canada geese pilot their little convoys of goslings up and down the canals and across the ponds.

Many other birds breed there, too. California gulls, the bird that the Mormons honored by erecting a statue, raise six to seven thousand young each year, and from the grass-lined nests of the avocets come two to three thousand young. Other nesters included the western grebe, Wilson’s phalarope, Brewster’s egret, Franklin’s gull, white-faced glossy ibis, black-necked stilt, yellow-headed blackbird, and several terns, grebes, herons, and small shore birds.

In restoring conditions favorable for birds in a great marsh area such as Bear River, it follows that other forms of wildlife will benefit as well. A good duck marsh is also a good muskrat marsh, and these animals are plentiful at Bear River. Local trappers take the surplus under permit. In all about two dozen species of mammals live on the refuge. The weasel is fairly common along the channel banks and over most of the higher marsh area; mice are its principal food. The skunk population is kept in check to prevent loss of waterfowl eggs during the nesting season. There are small numbers of marmots, ground squirrels, and jack rabbits; the cottontail rabbit is common about the headquarters area. Despite the scarcity of willows and other trees, a few pairs of beavers are living along the main channels of the marsh. With patience and persistence, the visitor to the refuge may see still another member of the mammal population—the coyote. Especially in the fall, one of these animals may sometimes be seen running along the dikes or through the marsh.

[PLATE 0.48 0.09 0.91 0.41 | drawing | The white-faced glossy ibis, a bird of open marshes, is widely distributed from Utah and Oregon southward. At Bear River several hundred pairs nest, forming one of the largest conveniently visited colonies in the country.]

* * *

The importance of the Bear River Refuge is far more than local. The millions of feathered visitors that congregate there during migration will spread out widely over the continent. Banding has taught us much about where they go. Out of some 36,000 birds that have been marked with numbered metal bands at Bear River, nearly 3,000 have later been recovered. The returns have come from distant places as well as nearby. Birds from Bear River have gone to Alaska, Canada, Mexico, Honduras, and Palmyra Island in the mid-Pacific. They have been recovered in 29 States, principally west of the Mississippi River.
