# chincoteague 06: text

⟨cont⟩ never more than three miles from shore to shore, lying between Chincoteague Bay and the sea. Seen from the air, as the migrating waterfowl coming in from the north must see it, its eastern border is a wide ribbon of sand that curves around in a long arc at the southern end of the island to form a nearly enclosed harbor.

Back from the beach the sand mounts into low dunes, and the hills of sand are little by little bound and restrained by the beach grasses and the low, succulent, sand-loving dune plants. As the vegetation increases, the dunes fall away into salt marshes, bordering the bay. Like islands standing out of the low marsh areas are the patches of firmer, higher ground, forested with pine and oak and carpeted with thickets of myrtle, bayberry, sumac, rose, and catbriar. Scattered through the marshes are ponds and potholes filled with wigeongrass and bordered with bulrushes and other good food for ducks and geese. This is waterfowl country. This is the kind of country the ducks knew in the old days, before the white man's civilization disturbed the face of the land. This is the kind of country that is rapidly disappearing except where it is preserved in wildlife sanctuaries.

The pattern of the flyways, more than any other fact, determines the location of the waterfowl refuges. A flyway is more than a migration route—it is a whole geographic region. There are four such flyways in the United States: the Atlantic, the Mississippi, the Central, and the Pacific. Although the breeding grounds of the various flyways overlap, each has its own wintering grounds, and a complex system of migration paths leading from winter to summer areas.

It is a peculiar fact of bird biology that waterfowl have a hereditary attachment for one particular flyway, and with rare exceptions never transfer from one to another. This means that each flyway must provide everything the birds need—suitable breeding areas, ample wintering grounds, and safe migration routes connecting them.

The Chincoteague Refuge is an important way station on the Atlantic flyway. It is located at a strategic point, an area where several of the most heavily traveled lanes of waterfowl traffic converge.

One of these routes begins at the very top of the world—the summer home of the greater snow goose and the Atlantic brant in northern Greenland and the islands of the Arctic Sea. As the snow geese and brant come down by this route across northeastern Canada, they are joined by Canada geese and black ducks and other waterfowl from the shores of Hudson Bay and the Maritime Provinces of Canada. Some of these birds come down the coast. Others come via Lake Champlain and the Hudson Valley, still others via the Finger Lakes of New York to the mouth of the Susquehanna and so to the Chesapeake.

In the latitude of the Delaware and Chesapeake Bays, the Atlantic coast route receives an important tributary from the west. This tributary route is like a river that has many different headwaters scattered over a vast territory, for it has its beginnings in the Prairie Provinces of Canada, the Mackenzie Delta, eastern Alaska, Ontario, and the States bordering the Great Lakes. From the Great Lakes region, the route ⟨cont⟩
