# chincoteague 21: text

The wild ponies of Chincoteague have made the name of this small Eastern Shore island familiar to people all over eastern United States. Chincoteague Island itself is no longer inhabited by feral stock; the herds graze on Assateague, Wallops, and a few other uninhabited coastal islands. But on the last week end of July, in the annual wild horse round-up, animals from nearby islands are brought to Chincoteague to be sold, so this island still gives its name to the wild horses of the entire region.

Although historical facts about the origin of the horses are scanty, there is no dearth of legend. Some say they swam ashore from a vessel shipwrecked off this coast long before there were permanent white settlements in the region. Others will have it that pirates, systematically plundering coastwise shipping, used to put their horses ashore to graze on the islands.

From whatever stock the ponies descended, they are a rugged lot. Smaller than an average horse, larger than an average pony, their coats a bit shaggy and long, they bear the stamp of their wild seacoast environment. They live most of their lives within sight or sound of the surf, they crop the sparse marsh grasses, they shelter wherever they can when wild storms sweep up the coast. Once each year, men from Chincoteague Island come ashore, and the annual Chincoteague pony round-up begins. The animals are driven together on the beach; at low tide they are herded across Assateague Channel, swimming through water shoulder high to a man, to Chincoteague Island and into a 20-acre enclosure. There the annual pony sale is held, many of the buyers coming from hundreds of miles. The Chincoteague pony business is now largely in the hands of the town firemen, who own most of the stock, prepare for and manage the annual pony penning carnival and sale.

The establishment of a wildlife refuge on the southern end of Assateague Island did not interfere with the generations-old custom of grazing stock. Permits to graze 300 head of horses and cattle within the refuge property are now held by residents of Chincoteague. One-fourth of the annual rental for this economic use of the refuge land reverts to the counties in which the refuge lies. The presence of these grazing animals is not detrimental to the waterfowl for which the refuge was established. From the standpoint of the owner of the stock, the refuge has proved a better grazing ground than an uninhabited island. The refuge manager, patrolling the grounds, keeps a watchful eye on the stock and more than once has come to the rescue of a pony mired in the marshes, saving it from drowning on the high tide.

* * *

Use of the Chincoteague Refuge for recreational purposes may be arranged through the refuge manager, who will give permission to visit the refuge at any time that the proposed use of the property does not conflict with the needs of the birds.

The establishment of the Chincoteague Refuge has preserved, in a wild and unspoiled state, a stretch of typical Atlantic seacoast for the enjoyment of those who find relaxation and refreshment in wilderness areas.

This refuge is one of the best places on the Middle Atlantic coast for observing the seasonal migrations of shore birds, and is also a good vantage point for seeing migrating hawks and small ⟨cont⟩
