# chincoteague 15: text

⟨cont⟩ help we can give them to maintain their numbers. By providing good feeding grounds along their migration routes, wildlife refuges are important aids in the conservation of the shore birds.

Ornithologists—both amateur and professional—find the Chincoteague Refuge one of the best places in the Middle Atlantic region to enjoy the spectacle of shore bird migration. Between 30 and 40 species have been recorded there during the spring and fall migrations.

Probably the best spot on the refuge to see a great variety of shore birds is along the shores of Assateague Anchorage. Look for curlews—large, rather long-legged brown birds with a distinctive sickle-shaped bill—in the fringes of marsh grass that border the coves, or on the shellfish reefs. The curlews thrust their beaks deep into the holes of the fiddler crabs, or probe the mud of the reefs. Other large shore birds, slightly smaller than the curlews, are willets and yellowlegs (a). These birds feed mostly in muddy places, often on the banks of marsh creeks on the ebb tide. The whistle of the yellowlegs, high and clear but with a peculiarly soft quality, is one of the characteristic sounds of such places. Crow-sized, black and white birds with long red bills are oyster-catchers (b).

The smaller shore birds gather in enormous flocks on the mud flats to feed and rest. A single flock often contains a mixture of many species—the sparrow-sized “peeps” or least (c) and semipalmeted sandpipers (d), the larger red-backed sandpiper (e) with its distinctive black belly, and sometimes the rarer Baird’s, white-rumped (f), western, and buff-breasted sandpipers. Sometimes a highly colored bird stands out among the others—a turnstone (g), unmistakable in its clean, sharp pattern of black, white, and chestnut.

The large black-bellied plover (h), one of the handsomest of the shore birds, with its pale back and black under parts, is more likely to be seen singly or in small parties of its own kind. Even when all the shore birds within sight start up in alarm, wheeling over the flats in one of their indescribably intricate mass flights, the black bellies tend to keep to themselves.

[PLATE 0.00 0.63 1.00 0.95 | drawing | (g) (d) (k) (i) (h) (a)]
