# chincoteague 09: text

⟨cont⟩ these grasses. Once there was an abundance of marsh land along the coast, but much of it has been lost by draining and filling. Unless some natural marsh areas are set apart for the use of wildlife, species like the snow goose cannot survive.

Except for the whistling swan, the snow goose is the largest white bird that will be seen on the refuge. The black wing tips show clearly in flight, contrasting sharply with the snowy white of body and wing. Look for snow geese in season in the Ragged Point marshes, where they are likely to be feeding, pulling out the marsh grass by its roots. At times they may be seen flying over the bay or ocean, often in a triangular formation, close to the surface of the water.

* * *

The American brant, a small goose seldom found far from the sea, is particularly in need of the protection given by waterfowl refuges. Like the snow goose, it breeds in far northern regions and winters on a small section of the Atlantic coast from New Jersey to North Carolina. It migrates chiefly over water, and its distribution within the United States is confined almost entirely to a narrow belt along the coast.

Brant on their fall migration arrive at Chincoteague about November, remaining until the latter part of March. As a rule, between 2,500 and 3,000 winter on the refuge. The Brigantine and Pea Island Refuges also have wintering flocks.

Heavy shooting and draining of marshes are ancient enemies of waterfowl, but a few years ago the brant was faced with a new menace—the complete destruction of its winter forage. Eelgrass has always been the chief winter food of the brant. Heavy growths of the ribbonlike plant formerly covered the tide flats in almost every coastal bay and sound from North Carolina to Nova Scotia. About 1930 a blight suddenly struck the eelgrass all along the coast. Within the space of a year or two most of it had disappeared. This had an immediate and very nearly disastrous effect on the brant. Without their usual food to help them withstand the rigors of winter, the populations of these small geese very rapidly declined.

[PLATE 0.52 0.08 0.98 0.41 | drawing | ]

Reports of ornithologists all along the coast indicated that the status of the brant had become alarming. Counts by Charles Urner illustrate the decline: from 28,800 brant estimated by Urner as the 1927-28 winter population of brant on the New Jersey coast, the birds declined to 5,400 in 1931-32 and to 2,320 in 1932-33. To give protection to the remaining birds, the Federal Government declared a closed season on brant in the Atlantic Coast States in 1933. During recent years the January inventory of waterfowl, taken ⟨cont⟩
