# chincoteague 16: text

On the ocean beaches look for the semipalmated or ringneck plover (i), the sanderling (k), and the semipalmated sandpiper. These birds feed at the very edge of the surf, snatching up the small crustaceans washed out of the sand, always seeming about to be overwhelmed by a breaking wave, but always somehow escaping.

* * *

The changing seasons at Chincoteague are reflected in the changing populations of the birds. The summer months are quiet. Except for a few black ducks and a handful of blue-winged teal, the thousands of waterfowl that wintered on the refuge have gone north. They are now dispersed over an immense area, from Greenland to Alaska. The migratory flights of waterfowl from the south have paused briefly at the refuge and now they, too, are gone.

Up in the marshes around Ragged Point the black ducks have been nesting. In April you might have found their nests here and there under the bayberries; in June the broods of ducklings, with their mothers, begin to appear in the slashes. Around the Levels there are a few broods of the blue-winged teal, making its first slow comeback as a nesting bird in this region after years of scarcity. And early almost any morning of the summer you could see a bittern slinking through the tall salt meadow grass or hear the sharp clatter of the rails.

August passes into September, with its briskly cooler nights and shortening days. Since July the shore birds have been returning from the north, and now the beaches and the mud flats are crowded with them. September brings the first of the returning waterfowl, and toward the end of the month flocks of small land bird migrants appear. One morning tree swallows by the thousand are lined up, wing to wing, on the Coast Guard telephone wires for miles along the beach. Heavy flights of robins and flickers pass through; hawks—mostly the narrow-winged falcons and the accipiters—sweep down the coast toward the south. Then in October, when the marshes are silvered with frost in the mornings, the waterfowl begin to pour in from the north. Crossing the Levels, you see flights of pintails circling the marshes, dropping down into the ponds. After a night of heavy migration, the refuge suddenly takes on new life as flocks of canvasbacks, redheads, teal, and baldpates rise into the air in noisy thousands.

Offshore, beyond the white lines of breakers, great numbers of sea ducks appear. Rafts of scoters parallel the beach from one end of the refuge to the other. Old squaws and goldeneyes congregate in the nearly landlocked harbor of Assateague Anchorage, following the oyster dredgers. These sea ducks flock around the boats so closely they are almost run down, diving for the small sea creatures and plants stirred up by the dredges. Canada geese are increasing day by day, flocking in to the Levels and Toms Cove, a few settling in around the marshes of Ragged Point and Sheep Ridge.

Through October, November, and into December the flights of waterfowl increase. Brant gather in the Anchorage, a few whistling swans appear in the Levels. The snow geese drift in, having made the long flight from Greenland and the islands of the Arctic Sea, with only one or two stops anywhere on the continent of North America.

Some of the waterfowl and all of the shore birds continue south after resting and feeding on the refuge. Other waterfowl remain, some of ⟨cont⟩
