# chincoteague 19: text

Bombay Hook Refuge, Chincoteague’s nearest neighbor to the north, was established in 1937. An initial step in developing the refuge has been the creation of a fresh-water area, 150 acres in extent, known as Raymond’s Pool. Already this area, which represents only a part of the proposed fresh-water impoundments, has proved its worth. It is filled with a luxuriant growth of sago pondweed and other fresh-water duck foods and has become an important concentration point for nesting waterfowl.

Management of the Bombay Hook marshes has increased the use of the area by ducks and geese more than 400 percent over a 10-year period. Records show that approximately 30,000 waterfowl were using this area during the fall months in 1936, just before the refuge was established. By the fall of 1942, this figure had been doubled. By the fall of 1945, more than 137,000 waterfowl were stopping for food at the Bombay Hook Refuge before continuing their journey south or settling down to winter in the area.

Then, too, the development of the Bombay Hook marshes has so improved the area as a nesting ground that the refuge annually adds thousands of young ducks to the waterfowl population. When the refuge was established, only nine pairs of nesting black ducks could be found. By 1941, natural breeding of black ducks in the refuge area had so increased that 6,000 young were produced. Two unexpected patrons of the refuge as nesters are the shoveler and gadwall, western ducks that have found suitable nesting conditions within the Bombay Hook Refuge and now regularly produce broods of young there.

* * *

Economic uses of the land included within the Chincoteague Wildlife Refuge continue as before the establishment of the refuge.

* * *

The famous shellfish country of the Eastern Shore of the Chesapeake surrounds the Chincoteague Wildlife Refuge. Chincoteague oysters have a widespread reputation for quality; perhaps the fact that they grow in water that is almost as salty as the open ocean accounts for their distinctive flavor. Although the region is best known for its oysters, clamming, carried on throughout the year, probably brings a larger income to local fishermen than the oysters do.

The establishment of a wildlife refuge has not interfered with the use of the area for shellfishing. The refuge itself contains about 250 acres of shellfish grounds. These consist of a narrow strip of flats between the tide lines, running in a long arc around the inside of Assateague Anchorage, and bordering the channel between the islands.

[PLATE 0.10 0.77 0.83 0.88 | drawing | ]
