# chincoteague 08: text

⟨cont⟩ crosses the mountains of Pennsylvania and strikes the Atlantic coast in the vicinity of the Delaware and Chesapeake Bays. This is the migration path followed by the majority of the ducks of the Atlantic flyway. Among them are scaups, redheads, pintails, baldpates, teal, canvasbacks, old squaws, some black ducks, some Canada geese. For many of these birds, Chincoteague is the first refuge encountered on the long transcontinental journey.

* * *

The conservation of the greater snow goose is one of the purposes of the Chincoteague Refuge. Estimates vary, but probably there are not more than twenty or thirty thousand of these beautiful white geese in the world. This entire population spends the winter months on a narrow strip of the Atlantic seacoast from New Jersey to North Carolina.

[PLATE 0.11 0.50 0.52 0.88 | drawing | ]

Few birds have a more northern breeding ground than this goose, which nests along the northern coast of Greenland and in Ellsmere Land, far beyond the boundaries of the continent. From this remote territory, visited only occasionally by explorers, the birds migrate south, probably across Baffin Land and the Province of Quebec, to the St. Lawrence Valley. The birds habitually stop in the vicinity of San Joachim on the St. Lawrence. Between this point and Fortescue, New Jersey, their known landfalls are few. With increasing frequency of late years, however, they have been reported during migration in New England and New York.

Chincoteague Bay has a long history as one of the major winter concentration points for the snow goose. It has been used more consistently, and for a longer period of time each winter than any other known area between Fortescue and Pea Island in North Carolina. Since the Chincoteague Refuge was established its marshes have held several thousand snow geese each winter.

Although the greater snow goose is legal game in Canada, it is under complete protection within the United States. As an added safeguard, the related species, the lesser snow goose, may not be shot on the Atlantic coast because it is impossible for hunters to distinguish between the species in flight.

Protection against shooting is not enough in itself to insure the welfare of the populations of snow geese. The birds must also find abundant food within their restricted winter range. Their pastures are the salt meadows—the acres upon acres of tough rooted salt marsh hay or cordgrass, Spartina. The geese feed on the roots of ⟨cont⟩
