# chincoteague 18: text

[PLATE 0.10 0.08 0.52 0.32 | drawing | ]

Bird banding, an important activity at many Federal waterfowl refuges, helps trace the intricate pattern of bird migration. In the short time since the Chincoteague Refuge was established, banding done on this refuge has revealed many interesting and useful facts about the birds. These records are supplemented by the results of earlier banding in this area, carried on chiefly by John H. Buckalew, manager of the refuge.

Many different methods, all of them harmless, are used to capture birds for banding. Waterfowl usually are taken in a large, cagelike trap baited with corn. Once captured, the bird is banded by placing a numbered aluminum band around its leg. The band carries an inscription: “Notify Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, D. C.”

So far, most of the birds banded at Chincoteague have been black ducks and pintails. But during the winter of 1945-46, ten different species of ducks, totaling 1,617 individuals, were banded on the refuge.

How migrating waterfowl make use of the chain of refuges along their flyways is clearly illustrated at Chincoteague—first, by recoveries of birds banded there, second, by recoveries at Chincoteague of birds banded elsewhere. These recoveries so far link Chincoteague with the following Federal waterfowl refuges: Parker River, Mass.; Bombay Hook, Del.; Mattamuskeet, N. C.; and Cape Romain, S. C.

Banding of black ducks has showed us how the migrating birds come down from Canada and New England (page 8); it has also given interesting information about the way the ducks move about during the winter. Apparently they roam about over an area with a radius of a hundred miles or more. For instance, two black ducks banded at Chincoteague in December 1945 were recovered the following month, one in Salem County, N. J., more than 100 miles away, the other at Chesapeake City, Md., a distance of 115 miles.

As for the pintails, banding shows that the migrants that stop over at Chincoteague may continue all the way down the Atlantic coast. Pintails banded at the refuge have been recovered from North and South Carolina and Florida.

The most distant recoveries so far of any Chincoteague-banded birds are these: a common tern recovered in Puerto Rico, and a black duck at Tracadie, Nova Scotia.

* * *

As management of its marsh lands increases the production of waterfowl foods, creates more potholes and other water areas for the dabbling ducks, and improves nesting areas, Chincoteague will become increasingly useful as a refuge. About 10 years are needed before the results of management can be fairly evaluated. To see what can be accomplished by management, then, it is necessary to turn to refuges older than Chincoteague.
