# chincoteague 20: text

[PLATE 0.10 0.12 0.55 0.35 | drawing | ]

About 184 acres of these grounds are under cultivation. Before the refuge was established, the shellfish area was leased from the former owner of the property. It is now leased from the United States Government. One-fourth of the rental is paid to Accomac County, in which the refuge lies. The balance goes into the United States treasury.

* * *

Cultivation of oysters as it is practiced in the Chincoteague area consists of bringing in small, “seed” oysters, planting them on leased grounds, protecting them from natural enemies, harvesting the oysters when they have reached good market size. Fishermen go “down the bay” to dredge the seed oysters from public oyster rocks, then bring back barge loads of the baby oysters and sell them to growers in the Chincoteague area. After getting the best price they can for their load, the fishermen then plant the oysters for the purchaser, on whatever part of his grounds he directs. These planting operations begin in the spring, continue all summer and into the fall. Fishermen spend many days—sometimes several weeks—dredging a saleable quantity of oysters. During the spring and fall they run the risk that a sudden freeze may kill their barge loads of oysters before they have disposed of them.

* * *

Clamming is practically a year round occupation in the Chincoteague area. At low tide the clammers work the exposed mud flats in the marshes and scattered through the channels between the islands. The clams lie buried in the mud, in warm weather only a short distance beneath the surface.

Common methods of clamming during the summer are “signing”—watching for the signs of a clam’s presence in the mud and quickly digging it out with a short-handled, pronged hoe—and wading. An experienced wader, working in water neck-deep, feels a clam under foot, quickly slides it up his leg, and tosses it into his sack. During the winter clams are taken by tonging.

Cultivation of clams is simple. Clam dealers who lease growing grounds save the smallest sizes—called “buttons”—out of each load they buy. They plant these small clams, allowing them to grow before marketing them. Clam culture does not require planting of shells and elaborate protection against enemies as oyster culture does; on the whole, therefore, it is less expensive and the returns to the grower are larger.
