# chincoteague 11: text

⟨cont⟩ Labrador, and Newfoundland, also in northeastern United States. Apparently the black ducks that winter at Chincoteague or migrate through this area use three principal routes in traveling from the northern breeding grounds to their winter quarters. These routes have been revealed by the actual recoveries of banded birds, and the comparison of the place of banding with the place of recovery.

One of the migration paths comes down from the vicinity of Lake Ontario across eastern Pennsylvania to the head of the Chesapeake and Delaware Bays. Another comes from the valley of the St. Lawrence down Lake Champlain to Long Island and thence down the coast. The third and apparently the most traveled route comes down the Atlantic coast from eastern Canada and New England. (See map.) Returns from south of Chincoteague have come from North and South Carolina.

These facts seem to mean that the majority of the black ducks that use the Chincoteague Refuge have been produced in eastern Canada and probably Maine, and that they travel through most of the Atlantic Coastal States to reach their wintering grounds. This is a graphic illustration of the fact that waterfowl conservation is a cooperative problem, and that a waterfowl refuge benefits not only the State in which it is located but many other States as well.

Hardy, wary, always adaptable, the black duck has held its own rather better than most other species. When drought ruined the breeding grounds of central Canada, most of the prairie-nesting ducks found themselves in serious trouble; the black, which nests over a vast territory east of the prairie country, was little affected.

On the other hand, the black duck, like many other waterfowl, has felt keenly the loss of the eelgrass. It is true that the eelgrass itself did not form an important part of the black duck’s diet. But the many small sea animals—mussels, crustacea, worms, and the like—that lived on and among these plants were welcome variations in the predominant vegetable diet of the black duck. These were, of course, lost along with the eelgrass.

Fortunately, Chincoteague provides other foods for the ducks. Wigeongrass, which fills every pond and water hole on the refuge in the fall, is one of the best duck foods.

The Chincoteague Refuge also provides good nesting cover, with a minimum of interference from man and predatory animals. Although near the southern limit of the breeding range, the refuge adds more than a hundred young black ducks to the population each year.

* * *

Of other waterfowl at Chincoteague, the pintail and the baldpate (locally called wigeon) are among the most abundant. During an average spring season, for example, about 9,000 pintails use the refuge and about half as many baldpates. Other ducks that may be seen on the refuge marshes or feeding in its ponds are the greater and lesser scaup, green-winged teal, blue-winged teal, mallard, shoveler, gadwall, hooded merganser, ringneck, ruddy duck, and wood duck. Offshore there are thousands of scoters each winter. Smaller numbers of old squaws, buffleheads, American goldeneyes, and red-breasted mergansers appear regularly in the waters near the refuge.

Because Chincoteague is on one of the principal goose flight lanes of the Atlantic coast, large ⟨cont⟩
