# chincoteague 14: text

[PLATE 0.09 0.07 0.50 0.25 | drawing | (b)]

⟨cont⟩ concentrations of Canada geese occur here during the spring and fall migrations. A thousand or more remain over winter.

Besides waterfowl, most of the common eastern birds have been reported from the Chincoteague area, and the field ornithologist can always count on running up an interesting list. Some 240 species have been identified on the refuge or in its immediate vicinity.

* * *

Shore birds as a group travel farther in their annual migrations, see more sunlight and less darkness than almost any other birds. Some of them nest near the northernmost limits of land; some winter in the most southern parts of South America. In the course of their annual flight between summer and winter homes, they visit our coasts, their migrations in general following the shore lines.

During the 1800’s and early 1900’s the shore birds were all but destroyed by heavy shooting. They were a favorite target of the sportsmen of that generation; they were also the quarry of market gunners, who shot them for the morsels of food their small bodies yielded. In the 1880’s and later, the craze for feathers to adorn women’s hats played its part in the slaughter.

Today the shore birds are protected by Federal law. Their habits make them particularly vulnerable: they raise a single brood in a season, lay on an average only four eggs, nest on the ground, and travel in dense flocks over the open seacoast. They could not long withstand the pressure of modern shooting.

While the nesting grounds of most shore birds are in remote areas, as yet little disturbed by modern civilization, this is not true of the wintering grounds. The Hudsonian curlew, several of the plovers, and many others winter in the grassy plains of Brazil, Argentina, and Peru. There agricultural developments have greatly reduced the areas suitable for the birds. Then, too, many of the shore birds are still subjected to heavy shooting in the West Indies and South America. For these reasons, they need all the ⟨cont⟩

[PLATE 0.00 0.73 1.00 0.97 | drawing | (h) (c) (e) (f) (g)]
