# guarding 45: text

Fearing that the same pattern of overfishing and depletion would be repeated in the Antarctic, and that the remaining profitable grounds in other parts of the world would become exhausted, the world’s leading whaling nations took action in the early 1930’s. The League of Nations called together a committee to consider international regulation of the whaling industry. From this action, several international conventions have set forth regulations for whaling, the first in 1932, another in 1937, upon which, with subsequent protocols and agreements, the present whaling regulations are chiefly based.

These regulations prescribe seasons for whaling, establish the minimum legal size for whales of each species, and prohibit the killing of females accompanied by calves, and of any whales of certain species. The regulations also require the fullest possible use of each whale taken. The participating nations, which include most of the important whaling countries, share responsibility for enforcement.

* * *

Halibut.—The history of the world’s natural resources has many examples of their misuse and destruction. In a few cases the course of depletion has been halted and even reversed before it was too late. The story of the Pacific halibut is an example of such a conservation effort.

The halibut is a giant flounder of northern oceans, found on both coasts of North America and in the Arctic Ocean. Being a slow-growing fish, maturing at the age of 12, it is especially subject to depletion.

The exploitation of this resource ran a swift and destructive course. From a small, local enterprise on the Pacific coast of the United States, the fishery extended its operations along 2,000 miles of coastline, from California to Bering Sea. Aided by gasoline and Diesel power and by mechanical fishing devices, it grew more and more intensive. Stocks of fish began to decline. Fishermen found they had to work longer and harder to fill their holds, and despite their efforts the total catch fell.

The halibut fishery was exploited by two nations, the United States and Canada. Moved by evidence of alarming depletion, these two countries in 1924 joined in a conservation program. Under an international treaty a commission was established to study the biology of the halibut and formulate sound principles of conservation. Later the international convention was renegotiated to provide powers of regulation.

Years of biological study have revealed the facts concerning migrations, spawning, growth, and survival upon which a successful management program is now being carried out.

Under international regulation, the abundance of halibut has increased markedly on all grounds. The resource is now yielding an annual catch 10 million pounds larger than under unrestricted fishing immediately before regulation.
