# guarding 49: text

[PLATE 0.48 0.02 0.96 0.32 | photo | Some species of white-winged doves are migratory, spending part of the year in the southwestern parts of the U. S. A., migrating in winter as far south as Guatemala and El Salvador.]

Other fishery missions were carried out in Venezuela in 1943 and 1947, in Chile in 1944 and 1945, and in Panama in 1948. In each instance the Government requesting the technical assistance bore the expenses of the mission and cooperated actively in the project. In 1945, the United States, at the request of the Government of Nicaragua, detailed a biologist to survey potential trout streams in that country. Nicaragua was interested in developing better fishing, not only for its own citizens, but as a tourist attraction.

Extending beyond fisheries to include bird and mammal resources within its scope, a mission to Guatemala in 1946 and 1947 made an inventory of the natural biological resources of that country and drew up a suggested conservation program. This program included migratory birds, and, if adopted, would make its effects felt in other American Republics north and south of Guatemala.

On the invitation of the Cuban Government, the Fish and Wildlife Service assigned a party of three ornithologists in 1948 to a survey of the migratory bird fauna of Cuba. Many birds which spend the summer on the continent of North America winter in Cuba, or pass through that country during the spring and autumn migrations. For this reason their conservation is important to all the countries within their range.

The decline of valuable pearl oyster fisheries in Panama led that country to ask for the services of a specialist to discover causes for the depletion of the oyster reefs. Early in 1948, the Fish and Wildlife Service sent an expert in shellfish biology to Panama to make a detailed survey of conditions on the reefs and recommend conservation measures.

These cooperative programs reflect the ever-increasing need and desire for international cooperation in conserving and developing the natural resources of the Western Hemisphere.
