# guarding 06: text

⟨cont⟩ tected if we are to continue to enjoy its benefits. The present generation has seen the awakening of a vital conservation sentiment. Aroused by the spectacle of critically depleted resources, the public at last demanded action. The year 1903 brought the beginning of a movement to create national sanctuaries for wildlife—a movement that has by now resulted in approximately 300 such refuges, totaling nearly 18 million acres of land. Beginning in 1916, a series of international treaties and national legislation recognized the obligation of the national government to conserve migratory species—especially birds—that move freely over State and International boundaries. Other legislation followed to finance and otherwise assist constructive conservation efforts.

In 1872 a national agency had been created to carry on the research needed to guide conservation of the fisheries, and a few years later an agency with similar responsibilities regarding birds and mammals was established. These agencies today are merged in the Fish and Wildlife Service. In addition to conducting research, the Service enforces conservation laws relating to migratory birds and, in Alaska, administers laws for the conservation of all wildlife, including game and commercial fishes.

Each of the States now has its own conservation agency, since the chief responsibility for conserving resident birds, mammals, and fishes belongs to the States. Through appropriate laws, they regulate the seasons of hunting and fishing, establish bag and creel limits, and control commercial fishing.

While the enforcement of laws to protect and foster wildlife must remain a governmental responsibility, conservation in the United States owes much of its effectiveness to the interest and participation of individuals and private organizations. Some of these groups sponsor research, some acquire and maintain lands for sanctuaries, others actively work to restore and improve wildlife habitats. By their advocacy of constructive measures and their opposition to waste and destruction of our natural resources, these organizations collectively represent a powerful force for conservation.

The pages that follow tell briefly the story of wildlife conservation in North America, with examples chosen largely from the United States. They describe the difficulties and discouragements of attempting to preserve our wildlife in a modern world, in which the advance of civilization is too often a destructive one. These problems are not confined to the United States; they are met, with differences only of detail and degree, wherever a nation is fighting to preserve its natural resources.

Like the resource it seeks to protect, wildlife conservation must be dynamic, changing as conditions change, seeking always to become more effective. We in the United States have much to accomplish before we can feel assured of passing on to future generations a land as richly endowed in natural wealth as the one we live in.
