# guarding 09: text

⟨cont⟩ Preservation. While indicating the interest of the signatory countries in conservation, this instrument is very general with no provision for active measures. There is, therefore, a need for additional treaties similar to those between the United States and Great Britain and Mexico, aimed specifically at the protection of migratory birds.

Shore birds perform some of the most remarkable of all migrations. Many of this group, which includes the snipes, sandpipers, plovers, and other less known forms, breed on the Arctic tundras of Canada and Alaska, some on the most northern islands, only a short distance from the North Pole. Some of these species winter as far south as Argentina and Chile, traveling seven to eight thousand miles twice each year.

During the early 1900's the shore birds came close to extinction from heavy shooting. One, indeed, the Eskimo curlew, may have been exterminated. Throughout the spring and fall migrations up and down the coastlines, they were shot by market gunners and hunters. Their habits make them particularly unable to withstand overshooting: they raise a single, small brood in a season, and during migrations they travel in dense flocks over open coasts.

Today the shore birds are protected in North America under the Migratory Bird Treaties; here the shooting of the migrants has been outlawed. Practically all of the species have shown some increase in numbers since the negotiation of the Treaties, but they are still subjected to heavy shooting in parts of the West Indies and South America. Also, the birds face certain other dangers. Those whose normal breeding grounds are in southern Canada and the United States need more undisturbed areas of marsh and prairie. Those that winter on the grassy plains of Argentina, Brazil, and Peru—including the Hudsonian curlew, the golden plover, the upland plover, and others—are menaced by agricultural developments, which have reduced the areas suitable for them.

The migratory song and insectivorous birds include a great variety of species, most of them directly beneficial to man. The natural role of these birds in the control of insects is so important to human society that they deserve the highest degree of protection that can be afforded them. In North America, the group is protected under the Migratory Bird Treaties. Cutting of virgin forests and drainage of swamps have caused local changes in abundance and distribution, but for many species the activities of man have not proved harmful, the birds having adjusted themselves to civilization with marvelous adaptability.

The interesting birds of lakes and marshes, including the grebes, herons, rails, gulls, terns, and others, also migrate freely over international boundaries and in North America are included under the protection of the Migratory Bird Treaties.
