# guarding 11: text

Waterfowl.—The large group of migratory game birds which consists chiefly of ducks and geese is especially valued in the United States and Canada as one of our most important game resources. About two million licensed waterfowl hunters depend on these birds for sport each year during the fall hunting season. Probably no other resource has so many persons keenly and directly interested in its welfare, for the entire group of waterfowl hunters, individually and through organizations, are alert throughout the year to reports on the state of the waterfowl populations and prospects for the fall flights.

The conservation of waterfowl is, to an important degree, an international problem. Examination of the map opposite will show why this is true. The most extensive breeding areas of the North American waterfowl are in Canada, Alaska, and northern United States. The wintering grounds, on the other hand, are in southern United States, the West Indies, Mexico, Central America, and the northern countries of South America.

Most of the waterfowl that go south of the borders of the United States during the winter months are those that migrate across the western half of the country. Many of these western ducks spend the winter season in Texas and California, but in some years large numbers seek winter feeding grounds in the coastal waters and river valleys of Mexico, and along both coastlines of Central America. The chief South American wintering areas for this group of waterfowl are in Colombia and Venezuela, although banded ducks have been recovered also in British Guiana, Ecuador, and Peru.

South America also has its own populations of waterfowl which breed in the southern hemisphere and migrate from country to country, but the nature and extent of these migrations have not been fully determined.

Much of our information about the migratory routes of waterfowl and other birds, and about the relative importance of various nesting and wintering areas, has been learned by bird banding. Audubon, the famous painter of North American birds, probably was the first person in the Western Hemisphere to attempt to mark birds in order to trace their migrations. Later, interest in this activity by many persons led to the establishment of the American Bird Banding Association. The project soon became too large to be handled by a private agency, and is now conducted by the Fish and Wildlife Service, having been assumed by a predecessor agency in 1920. The Dominion Wildlife Service of Canada has cooperated actively in this work. There are now about 500 active cooperators in the United States and Canada, each working under permit, who annually place identifying bands on thousands of birds. Each band carries a number and instructions for its return by the finder to the Fish and Wildlife Service in Washington, D. C. Since bird banding was un- ⟨cont⟩
