# mattamuskeet 20: text
[PLATE 0.08 0.09 0.50 0.53 | drawing | One of the most colorful summer residents of the marshes is the yellow-headed blackbird.]

The success of the program may be judged by the visitor as he looks out over the refuge from the tower or drives along the roadways on the dikes. Everywhere he looks there are birds. From the headquarters building he may watch the snowy egrets, in gleaming white plumage, fishing near the dam that spans the river. Almost any time a party of western grebes may be seen swimming up and down the canals, suddenly vanishing from sight, and as mysteriously reappearing. A flock of avocets may be moving over a shallow mud flat, swinging their long, upcurved beaks from side to side like so many wielders of scythes, providing one of the greatest shows of the refuge. Stately lines of pelicans, rising and dipping, move over the marshes, their bodies white against the blue background of the mountains. But for sheer numbers all others are eclipsed by the waterfowl whose flocks dot the water or, in flight, form shifting patterns against the sky.

* * *

Migrant waterfowl move into the marshes beginning in August. By the end of the month or in early September the Bear River Refuge is host to a million and a half to two million waterfowl. Among them is one of the largest concentrations of whistling swan to be found in the United States; flocks totaling 15,000 frequently are seen. Thousands of geese, both the Canada and snow, visit the refuge during migration. There are also a number of records of the rare Ross’ goose. Predominating in the fall flights are pintails, whose numbers often exceed a half-million birds. The green-winged teal is nearly as abundant. As many as 100,000 canvasbacks have visited the refuge.

Many of these birds remain into the winter, leaving the refuge only as cold weather freezes over the water areas. Upon leaving Bear River, about half of the birds migrate west into California, some move south to Arizona and New Mexico, while others move eastward into Colorado, Texas and Mexico. With the spring they return, but the concentrations of birds then are smaller, and their stay shorter. Courtship activities are often seen among the migrants, and the nesting of some species, particularly the Canada goose, begins early.

These marshes are teeming with life even in the summer, the quieter season between migrations. Of the 198 species of birds recorded on the refuge, about 60 are known to nest there. The Bear River marshes are among the greatest producers of waterfowl in the United States.
