# mattamuskeet 26: text
In the great system of waterfowl flyways, Bear River stands on the borderline between the Central and the Pacific, and contributes birds to each. A flyway is much more than a migration route; it may be defined as “a vast geographic region that has extensive breeding grounds and wintering grounds connected with each other by a system of migration routes.” The Central flyway lies east of the Rocky Mountains and includes most of the Great Plains. The Pacific flyway includes the Rocky Mountains and the Pacific Coast.

Although most of their birds belong to the Pacific flyway, the Bear River marshes also produce many ducks for the Central. When these broods reach maturity they join the ducks moving down this flyway by two routes: one eastward through the Green River Valley of Wyoming, another southeastward through the San Luis Valley of Colorado, thence to wintering grounds along the coasts of Texas and Mexico.

The long Pacific flyway, that extends from Alaska and the Aleutians all the way to Central America and the northern countries of South America, claims most of the ducks and geese of the Bear River Refuge. Migrants that have come down from the north stop there in the fall for food and to rest from the long flight, then they move on, most of them, to the west and south. Some will provide targets for the guns of hunters in Nevada, California, and Arizona. Among those that survive many will spend the winter in the great interior valleys of California, where the Sacramento and other National Wildlife Refuges provide rice and other food plants especially grown for their benefit. Others will continue south to the Salton Sea National Wildlife Refuge or into the marshy valleys of Mexico to feed until once more the migratory urge calls them northward.

* * *

The refuge headquarters are located near the mouth of the Bear River about 15 miles west of the town of Brigham and near the center of Bear River Valley, with the Promontory Mountains on the west and the Wasatch Range on the east. These mountains rise abruptly from the valley floor, which is at an elevation of 4,200 feet above sea level, and extend upward to 9,700 feet at the highest peaks.

Located at the headquarters are an administration building, a research laboratory, four residences, a combination garage and storage building, a service building, a boathouse, a building for housing a water-filtering system and a power plant, and a steel observation tower 100 feet in height.

Visitors may reach the refuge headquarters, which are open to the public daily from 9 a. m. to 5 p. m., by traveling due west from Brigham, Utah, over a hard-surfaced road. This city has a population of 6,000, has available hotel and auto court accommodations, and is located on U. S. Highways 30-S and 91.

After free registration at the refuge headquarters, a panoramic view of the refuge may be had from the tower. Visitors are permitted to drive their cars around Unit No. 2, one of the five large artificial lakes and marsh areas. This is a trip of 12 miles over a gravel road constructed on top of the artificial dikes that impound and distribute the waters from the Bear River.

This refuge offers unusual photographic opportunities. The abundance of birds, their lack of any fear of people, and the opportunity of ⟨cont⟩
