# mattamuskeet 18: text
[PLATE 0.02 0.06 1.00 0.40 | drawing | Although less abundant than the redhead, gadwall, or mallard, shovellers are seen in small numbers and may be recognized instantly by their large bills, highly specialized for surface feeding. Shovellers winter chiefly in the Southern States and Mexico.]

⟨cont⟩ largest diversions of water from the Bear River, was completed in 1891 and the first water was diverted from the river the following spring. This and later diversions greatly reduced the summer flow, and after a few years little remained of the once extensive marsh areas.

Irrigation took its heavy toll of available water; drainage, drought, and power projects took more. The watersheds were overgrazed by sheep and cattle. Ponds, sloughs, and potholes fluctuated, became temporary, and finally dried away.

The loss of waterfowl habitat was one enemy of the waterfowl; the market gunner was another. Residents of the Valley probably contributed unwittingly to the destruction of their valuable wildlife resource. To the early settlers it must have seemed that the millions of waterfowl and other forms of wildlife that had congregated there through the ages would forever remain sufficiently abundant to satisfy all demands. From 1877 to 1900 more than 200,000 ducks were killed annually on the Bear River marshes for eastern markets. The great flocks of the waterfowl began to dwindle.

Disease was still another menace. Following the reduction of water levels and the crowding of great concentrations of birds into smaller areas, losses from botulism, a disease resembling food poisoning, were first noticed about 1900. More and more ducks sickened as the epidemic spread over the stagnant waters of the shallow alkali flats and in 1910 about half a million died around the mouth of the Bear River and in the Willard Spur area during the late summer.

* * *

The first efforts to save the waterfowl were made by sportsmen. Several duck clubs organized around the turn of the century acted to save at least scattered remnants of the once vast marsh area. They purchased or leased a large part of the remaining marshes around the mouth of the river. The Bear River Club, which was organ- ⟨cont⟩
