# mattamuskeet 19: text
[PLATE 0.07 0.02 0.46 0.40 | drawing | ]

⟨cont⟩ ized in 1901, owns approximately 8,000 acres of choice marshland in the area known as the North Bay. This club, its membership made up of sportsmen from all parts of the country, has aided waterfowl conservation by preserving areas where the birds can nest and feed.

Other, larger, areas had to be added, however, and steps taken control disease. Through efforts of the Utah Fish and Game Commission, western sportsmen’s organizations, and Federal officials who had studied the situation, a program of attack was developed in 1926 that ultimately led to the establishment of the Bear River Migratory Bird Refuge by a special act of Congress on April 23, 1928. The nearly 65,000 acres acquired under this act were to be “maintained as a refuge and breeding place for migratory birds included in the terms of the convention between the United States and Great Britain for the protection of migratory birds, concluded August 16, 1916.” The act provided that “at no time shall less than 60 per centum of the total acreage of the said refuge be maintained as an inviolate sanctuary for such migratory birds.”

The refuge so established embarked on a triple program: to devise means of curbing the heavy loss of bird life from botulism; to provide a suitable resting and feeding area for the birds during spring and fall migrations; and to give food and shelter to birds that breed in the locality.

Today any visitor at the refuge can see some of the means by which this program was translated into action. Near the headquarters a dam across the river helps distribute and regulate the variable water supply. Canals lead off across the marshes, delivering the limited water supply to the higher ground and to the various marsh areas on the refuge. Nearly 40 miles of earthen dikes with gravel beach lines, most of them topped with roadways, divide the refuge into five impoundment areas, each comprising about 5,000 acres. The dikes exclude the salty waters of the lake and impound fresh water from the river. They have also brought about the drying of extensive shallow waters and mud flats beyond the dikes—areas which were centers for outbreaks of botulism.

The water of mountain streams brought down by the Bear River freshened the marshes once they were cut off from the salty lake. Favorite duck foods were planted in the bays impounded by the dikes, and food and cover plants were established along the banks. A small “duck hospital” was established; there sick ducks by the thousand were treated by the injection of an antitoxin, were banded, and released. A striking example of recovery from botulism was provided by one “patient.” A pintail, after treatment for botulism, was released August 15, 1942. It was found 83 days later at Palmyra Island, a tiny pinprick on a map of the Pacific Ocean, 3,600 miles from Bear River.
