# mattamuskeet 05: text

⟨cont⟩ Fishes caught most abundantly are crappie, white perch, carp, and black bass. Fishing is permitted all year except during the hunting season, when it is restricted to Sundays.

Because the refuge is an excellent place to see many wild creatures native to the Atlantic coastal region, bird clubs and general nature study groups, classes in conservation, scouts and conservation-minded hunters are visiting Mattamuskeet more and more often to observe its wildlife.

Deer are plentiful on the refuge. Often you hear them splashing as they make off through the marshes, frightened by your approach. At night, emboldened, they roam about the refuge lawns, where you may surprise them in the beam of your flashlight. Bear occur in small numbers in the region; foxes, raccoons, opossums, mink, and some other small mammals are abundant. A good many muskrat houses are to be seen in the marshes, but this little furbearer saves himself a great deal of labor by often tunneling into the canal banks.

Alligators, which give the nearby Alligator River its name, sometimes swim lazily in the canal near the lodge. Snakes native to the coastal swamps—cottonmouth and water moccasins, copperheads, black snakes, and others—occur but are not often seen in winter. Frogs are very abundant in the swamps and a throbbing amphibian chorus fills the night air even in midwinter when the weather is mild.

* * *

For visitors to Mattamuskeet, a modern and comfortable lodge is operated by a concessionaire throughout the year. The lodge has space for 45 to 50 people, accommodations ranging from single or double rooms with private bath to 4-bed rooms. Meals are served in the lodge dining room. Advance reservations and all arrangements for accommodations should be made with the Manager, Mattamuskeet Lodge, New Holland, N. C.

Because of the great demand for space during the hunting season, reservations for this period need to be made far in advance. The most satisfactory time for bird clubs to visit the refuge is during the fall before the hunting season opens, and again in winter and spring after the hunting season. There are comparatively few birds at the refuge during the summer.

[PLATE 0.46 0.68 0.90 0.90 | drawing | Mattamuskeet Lodge]
