# parker 18: text

To the waterfowl hunter, a wildlife refuge is an investment. Let us say that 5,000 acres of marsh are “invested” in waterfowl conservation by converting them into a refuge. It is true that this area is withdrawn from hunting, just as money you invest in stocks is no longer in your pocket to spend. In a few years, however, the refuge investment begins to pay the sportsmen dividends.

These dividends may come in several ways. Almost immediately hunting in areas near the refuge improves. The birds are held in the area longer; the hunting season, as a result, is lengthened. Birds moving in and out of the refuge area provide hunting in nearby marshes. This is common experience. It is acknowledged by many Massachusetts gunners at Parker River. Black ducks that formerly were frightened out to sea by the first shots of the hunting season now stay in and about the refuge. Shooting in the marshes immediately north and south of the refuge was better in 1946 than for a number of years.

The most substantial dividends on the refuge investment come after a period of 5 to 10 years has passed. Then it will be found that waterfowl use has increased several hundred percent or more. Such increases at well-established Federal refuges are a matter of record. The Bombay Hook Refuge in Delaware is a good example. Here the number of waterfowl using the area has increased more than 400 percent since the refuge was established in 1937. Official reports show that it was used by 30,000 wildfowl in the fall of 1937, by 60,000 in 1942, and by 137,000 in 1945. When this happens, the sportsman understands the wisdom of the investment he and his fellow citizens have made. Instead of interfering with his sport, the refuge has increased it and made its future more secure.

* * *

Preserving the economic uses of the land for the community in which it lies is a principle that is carefully observed by the Fish and Wildlife Service in the development of Federal refuges. The economic values inherent in the land at Parker River are those of a typical northern seacoast region consisting of extensive salt marshes and dune country—the natural products of the salty waters, the salt marshes, and the sandy soil: shellfish, cranberries, beach plums, salt hay.

The Plum Island flats yield an important commercial product, the soft-shelled clam. For more than 200 years, the men of the coastal towns have made a living by digging clams, a poor living in years of clam scarcity, a good living when clams are abundant. According to the New England tradition, these fisheries have been managed by the towns.

In establishing the refuge, the Fish and Wildlife Service has made it clear that there would be no interference with the clam industry. The local towns continue to manage the fishery. Diggers from nearby towns like Newbury, Newburyport, Byfield, and Rowley work the clam beds as in past years with no restrictions by the Service.

In years when clams are abundant, a skilled digger averages about 6 bushels of clams on a tide—some 3 hours’ digging. In years of clam scarcity, he may get only 2. He digs by marking out a section of bottom about 12 inches square with three quick thrusts of the fork, then ⟨cont⟩
