# parker 15: text

⟨cont⟩ nesting site. She collects grass stems and in a dense patch of meadowsweet or bayberry she fashions a nest, carefully lining it with down. The first broods of ducklings appear at Parker River about May 15. The males do not take part in incubation; during the nesting season they gather in bachelor clubs, congregating in ponds and open water.

Barring molestation by enemies or other disaster, each nest produces a brood of about 10 ducklings. The youngsters take to the water almost immediately. In company with their mother they feed in shallow water, sheltered by overhanging grasses and water plants. As the season advances, enemies thin the broods of young ducks until, by late summer, the average family is 3 or 4.

By August the young ducks have exchanged their down for feathers, have tested them in flight, and now spend much time a-wing. Another month and they are ready, when the big migrations pass over Parker River, to take their place in the southward flights of the waterfowl.

* * *

Canada geese move in their long wavering V’s over the coastal marshes of Essex County, spring and fall. Only a few years ago, flocks of several thousand of these magnificent waterfowl visited Newburyport Harbor during March. Fall flights along the northeastern coast are usually somewhat smaller than the spring flights.

Reports of the refuge managers at Parker River give a good idea of the habits of the Canadas while in this area. In 1943, for example, the manager reported that a few Canada geese were present all through the winter, and that migrants from the south appeared by the time most of the ice was out of the marshes and tidal areas. Many of the geese congregated in the lower Merrimack around Woodbridge Island; others worked down Plum Island. On the flood tides they came high into the marshes to rest or eat the new shoots of the tall marsh grass. As soon as the fresh-water areas lost their ice, the geese tended to separate into smaller flocks and move to small outlying ponds, where they could be seen tipping up and feeding.

[PLATE 0.03 0.65 1.00 0.89 | drawing | ]
