# parker 21: text

⟨cont⟩ the beach, unsuspicious and unafraid. The richly colored killdeers along the road deserve color photography. Where clam shells, not long out of the shucking houses, have been dumped on the road, herring gulls hover above them in a cloud, so intent on picking the fragments of meat from the shells that they scarcely notice the approach of people.

In the meadows and on the mud flats the shore birds can be approached rather closely. One can always see curlews in the fall, standing like tall brown sentinels in the marsh; yellowlegs are a common sight as they wade the salt pools or chase minnows over a barely flooded flat. In September 1946 a rare species of shore bird appeared on Plum Island—the Hudsonian godwit.

Look carefully out over the marshes and you are sure to be rewarded with some sort of heron, standing motionless in the manner of herons—a good camera shot if you have a telescopic lens. There may be an American egret, a great blue heron, more rarely a bittern. Where the marsh hay is harvested, the stakes driven into the marsh to form the “straddles” for the hay stacks are favorite roosting places of the black-crowned night herons. Seen in early morning sunlight, their white breasts make them conspicuous for long distances.

Plum Island, Joppa Flats, and Plum Island breakwater seem to attract more than their share of rare species, and the hope of surprising an ornithological rarity gives zest to often repeated visits.

When the snowy owls periodically invade New England, birders visit Plum Island with reasonable assurance of finding one or more of these spectacular birds perched atop a salt hay stack. A few years ago, visitors came from places many miles distant to see the rare western grebe. At another time, a flock of 82 Lapland longspurs fed on the Plum Island meadows—probably the largest flock ever seen in the State. The first king eiders recorded for Essex County were seen off Plum Island. The blue goose and the greater snow goose, both considered rare transients, are occasionally seen on the refuge, the latter with increasing frequency. Birding on the Joppa Flats or about the breakwater at the northern tip of the island may yield such rare fowl as the European wigeon.

Botanists find many interesting plants among the dunes, thickets, and marshes. A fine record of the wild flowers, fruits, and berries of seaside New England can be made by any photographer who will visit the refuge at intervals with color film in his camera.

* * *

Recreational facilities that may be enjoyed by people who visit the Parker River refuge are—in addition to Plum Island’s exceptional facilities for nature study—those that might be expected on a New England coast little spoiled by civilization. A wide beach, its beauty heightened by the roaring surf, forms the entire eastern border of the refuge. Certain sections of the beach, especially about the rocky ledges known as Bar Head or at Emerson Rocks, are considered good places for surf casting in the fall when the striped bass are running. Persons who wish to enjoy ocean bathing may do so from a public bathing beach at the northern end of Plum Island, outside the boundaries of the refuge. Here also arrangements may be made ⟨cont⟩
