# parker 06: text

⟨cont⟩ ally. About 70 birds of other species make regular use of the refuge and many others occur as transients.

The Essex County marshes are within the Atlantic flyway, which is one of four great geographic divisions into which the North American continent may be divided according to the ways of waterfowl. The term “flyway” as ornithologists use it today includes the breeding and wintering grounds and most of the migratory paths that connect them. Birds have a hereditary attachment for one particular flyway and as a rule never transfer from one to another.

A striking fact about the Atlantic flyway—a fact which dominates the conservation problem—is the extremely limited area of its winter range compared with the vast extent of its breeding grounds. The nesting area extends from Greenland across much of northern Canada; the wintering grounds are confined to a narrow strip of coastal marshes along the east coast of the United States. A map of the flyway looks like a huge, distorted funnel with a long slender stem. Imagine that for one-half of the year all the contents of the funnel have to be contained within the stem and you can understand the compression of birds within their winter range. This fact makes wildlife refuges especially important on the Atlantic flyway.

Parker River is the only Federal refuge operated principally for waterfowl on the northern part of the Atlantic flyway. It lies in the path of a great many of the ducks and geese that fly south in the fall from the eastern Canadian Provinces and from northern New England. Some of these birds follow a route roughly corresponding to the outlines of the seacoast; others fly overland from inland breeding grounds and make their first contact with the coast in the vicinity of Parker River.

These facts have in recent times been substantiated by bird banding. Recoveries of banded birds are demonstrating clearly the pattern of migration. The general route of the waterfowl has been known for generations, however, and has been fully recorded in many publications by New England ornithologists. Dr. Charles Townsend pointed out as early as 1905 that Essex County (site of Parker River) lay “in one of the great highways of bird migration.” Dr. John Phillips rated Plum Island worth a visit to see “all sorts of migrants.” Edward Forbush years ago declared it “the most important region on our coast” in which to locate a bird sanctuary. In the early 1930’s the Massachusetts Audubon Society acted upon this advice, acquired some 1,600 acres in the central portion of the island, and converted it into a sanctuary. This former Audubon Society sanctuary is now part of the National Wildlife Refuge.

Parker River is a link in the chain of refuges established at carefully chosen intervals on the Atlantic flyway, so that the migrating waterfowl may find sanctuary and food at least every few hundred miles of their journey within the United States. Of the coastal refuges of the flyway, the migrations of the birds link Parker River toward the north with Moosehorn, near Calais, Maine, and toward the south with Brigantine on the ocean coast of New Jersey, and Bombay Hook, almost directly west on the shores of Delaware Bay. Then come Blackwater in Maryland; Chincoteague and Back Bay, Virginia; Pea Island and Mattamuskeet in ⟨cont⟩
