# parker 09: text

⟨cont⟩ duck present in large enough numbers to maintain hunting for any considerable number of gunners. A serious reduction in the population of black ducks would mean the end of waterfowl hunting for the majority of the New England sportsmen.

For many years, even in the famous “duck depression” of the 1930’s, the black duck held its own better than the ducks that breed in the central prairies of Canada and northern United States, then stricken by drought. However, it did not respond so dramatically to restorative efforts as some other species. In recent years there have been danger signals. Massachusetts observers, including outstanding ornithologists of the region, began as early as 1943 to report a scarcity of black ducks. Again in 1944 the blacks were reported as having fallen off sharply; in 1945 the flight was described as a “complete failure”; in 1946 observers warned that the species was “notably down in numbers.”

We need to know more about the biology of this species to understand fully what has happened to the black duck, normally a hardy and adaptable species, and once so abundant. But this much we know: many areas in northeastern United States where black ducks once nested have been drained out of existence as breeding grounds. Innumerable pot holes have been filled for suburban residential sites and for industrial use. Also, conditions in recent years have been unfavorable in the Maritime Provinces of Canada, now one of the most important black duck nesting areas. Heavy spring rains there flooded out many duck nests in 1945 and 1946.

The present reduced population of black ducks needs the help of wildlife refuges. Parker River and other refuges can to some extent help restore nesting territory within the United States. Refuges south of New England provide necessary wintering areas. The greatest value of the Parker River Refuge lies in the preservation of a natural waterfowl marsh where the birds may break the long migratory flight for rest and food.

* * *

Black ducks are to be found at Parker River any month of the year, but in September and October, almost more than any other time, you begin to get the feel of real black duck country as you tramp through the salt marshes of Plum Island. After the lull of midsummer, when only a few ducks are to be found here, migrants are coming in from the north. The great Joppa Flats in Newburyport Harbor are an early rallying point for them as they swing down from Labrador, Nova Scotia, Ontario, Maine, or wherever they may have summered. As you drive out from the town to Plum Island, you can see them gathering in the harbor, small black forms riding the outgoing tide, bobbing like boats at anchor. Today perhaps there are a thousand. Tomorrow morning there may be five thousand; next week as many more.

[PLATE 0.54 0.69 0.92 0.88 | drawing | ]
