# parker 16: text

On the refuge, several patches of land have now been sown to rye as a source of food for migrating geese.

* * *

The blue-winged teal, among other waterfowl transients, should benefit from fresh-water dykes on the marshes at Parker River. This small and beautiful duck formerly nested in all the middle and northern States east of the Rocky Mountains. But gradually it was driven from the Eastern States as a breeding bird. Even in the prairie regions of northern United States and Canada, encroaching agriculture menaced it and widespread drought destroyed its broods.

Recent reports, extending over the past 10 years, show that some of the teal are returning now to their former breeding grounds in the East. Every year they breed in the general vicinity of the refuge. A number of broods have been raised in recent years on a tributary of the Parker River. At other salt-marsh refuges maintained by the Fish and Wildlife Service, blue-winged teal have increased greatly in numbers as the refuges have provided them with the conditions they need. It seems highly probable that this experience will be repeated at Parker River as the refuge is developed.

[PLATE 0.10 0.64 0.52 0.88 | drawing | ]

* * *

Sea ducks of several kinds—especially the scaups, scoters, goldeneye, bufflehead, old squaw, and mergansers—endure the rigorous winter climate of the northern Massachusetts coast.

The greater scaup is one of the most abundant wintering ducks in the Parker River area. Only the black duck is more numerous there in the bitter midwinter period. From one to two thousand greater scaups were present during the winter of 1945–46. In the spring, migrants swell the winter numbers. In 1945, local ornithologists reported “a continued increase over recent years, with a maximum of 11,500 at Newburyport April 8, the highest count ever recorded.”

Along with the black duck and the scaup, the goldeneye is part of the dominant waterfowl population during the season when cold, storms, and ice have driven all less hardy fowl to the south. The goldeneyes first appear in the refuge waters about the middle of November. In recent years, Christmas censusers have reported one to two thousand goldeneyes off Plum Island in the surf.

Then there are always a few hundred buffleheads, old squaws, and scoters that linger over winter. They come during November. The scoters like the rock jetties near Bar Head, where they may often be seen diving near the rocks, even when heavy seas are rolling. The buffleheads and old squaws mingle with them.

* * *

Improving the land for wildlife means, first of all, increasing the natural food supplies, providing more cover, adjusting the water levels, improving conditions for breeding.
