# parker 10: text

Soon the ducks spread out into the nearby marshes. Seeds of the salt-meadow plants—arrowgrass, bulrushes, tidemarsh waterhemp, pondweeds—are choice duck foods, abundant in the marshes through which Parker River and half a dozen other creeks and small rivers cut their paths to the sea. As the late summer days pass and autumn comes, many ducks gather in the marsh pot holes south of the Cross farm.

In the days when there was no refuge here, the first roar of guns at the opening of the hunting season would send the ducks out to sea. They were safe there from the barrage of lead. But the open ocean provides little or no food for a black duck and for that reason it was a poor sanctuary.

Now the onset of the hunting season tends to concentrate the ducks in the refuge, where experience has quickly taught them they can find both safety and food. Hunters now find better shooting in the marshes on the mainland than before the refuge was established, and the good hunting lasts longer because the ducks are not driven immediately from the vicinity. So, by a seeming paradox, the refuge has improved hunting even while it has helped conserve the ducks.

The tide of black duck migration runs strong through October and November. By December most of the migrants have passed through to the south. These ducks, as we know from the returns of banded birds, winter in southern New England, on the New Jersey coast, in Chesapeake and Delaware Bays, some even as far south as Georgia. But some of the blacks stay at Parker River over winter, defying blizzards, freezing marshes, ice, and snow. The earliest ornithological records of the area report wintering black ducks, suggesting that this is a deep seated, instinctive behavior.

In a severe winter, duck food is scarce on the northern Massachusetts coast. The coastal marshes often lie under a deep covering of snow and ice. As the highest tides break up the ice, the ducks find some food on the top of the marsh and along the creek banks. At low tide they search the patches of open water. When the cold is at its bitterest, they subsist on mussels, snails, scuds, minnows—all the varied life of the salt marshes. They grow thin, sometimes losing as much as a pound—a third or more of their total weight—over winter. Some actually die of starvation.

[PLATE 0.55 0.47 0.94 0.60 | drawing | ]

By the time the ice has left the salt marshes—usually in March—many of the ducks are paired off. You can see them on the high tides in every little gut and puddle. As fast as freshwater areas open up, blacks appear on them.

As the season advances, the paired birds go north to the nesting grounds in loosely organized flocks. A few pairs stay in the vicinity.

About mid-April the female begins to search the thickets about the marsh edges for a likely ⟨cont⟩
