# parker 17: text

Within a wildlife refuge, if it is a successful one, there is a much heavier concentration of birds and animals than in the surrounding country. Seasonally, as the migrations pass, the facilities of a refuge often are taxed to provide for the large number of transients that seek accommodations. In order to provide enough food, water, cover, and nesting areas for its patrons, a wildlife refuge must be a small, separate world in which all these things exist in greater abundance than in the world outside—a wildlife Utopia. To bring about these ideal conditions is the aim of refuge management.

The marshes of Parker River are being developed for two purposes: to increase the production of waterfowl foods, and to provide a greater area suitable for nesting by the black duck.

During the late summer and early fall the food of the black duck on the salt marsh consists largely of the maturing seeds of the various salt-meadow plants—particularly arrowgrass, tidemarsh waterhemp, cordgrass or thatch, various bulrushes, and pondweeds. From August or early September until the winter freeze-up of the marshes, the seeds of these plants are easily available and so furnish food for the ducks during the fall migration.

To increase the production of food plants, a system of shallow flowages will be created in the marshes by impounding the water behind dykes. From small, experimental beginnings, these bodies of fresh or brackish water, about a foot and a half deep, will eventually become an important part of the Parker River refuge. In early summer some of the ponds will be drawn down, and plantings made. In the fall the ponds will be flooded again to make large quantities of seeds and tubers available to the ducks.

Many places in the northeastern part of the country that once were good breeding grounds for the black duck have been spoiled by drainage. To make up for part of these areas, as much nesting territory as possible must be provided within the refuges. To do this at Parker River, wildlife technicians have had to solve special problems, not met at more southern coastal refuges. Parker River lies in a region of very high tides. At Newburyport the average height of the high tides is about 9 feet, while the highest tides of the year are nearly 12. These great tides come in April, May, and June—the time when the black ducks are nesting and bringing out their broods of young—and again in the fall. They completely flood most of the marsh areas and would destroy any nests within their range. This misfortune the ducks can avoid by nesting in the thickets along the central ridge of the island. But more and far better nesting territory is needed than the thickets can provide.

The refuge staff at Parker River is trying an interesting experiment in the management of a northern coastal marsh—building up potential nesting sites in the marshes by creating artificial “islands” which will rise above the level of the highest tides. These are constructed of marsh sod, then planted with waterfowl food plants. It is hoped that the ducks will utilize these mounds as nesting sites, but another year or two will be needed to judge the success of this experiment.
