# parker 07: text

⟨cont⟩ North Carolina; Cape Romain in South Carolina; and Savannah on the border between South Carolina and Georgia.

* * *

Waterfowl sanctuaries must be located in the kind of country that attracts birds, provides proper food for them, gives them suitable places to rest before making the next hop on the long migratory flight. Parker River is this kind of country .

Plum Island, the heart of the refuge, is a long, narrow, coastal island. It begins where the Merrimack pours its waters into the Atlantic and ends about 9 miles to the south at Ipswich Bay. To get a panoramic view of Plum Island, climb one of the highest sand dunes—the dune topped by the Army Observation Tower is one of the best lookout points. As your eyes range from east to west, you see five totally different kinds of country as the birds would classify it, five different zones of life each containing a different community of animal life. These regions are the ocean beach, the dunes, the thickets, the salt meadows, and the tidal flats of the salt marsh creeks.

Eastward from our observation point is the immensity of the Atlantic, nothing but water between you and Spain. Outlined by the white surf lines, a sandy beach runs the length of the island. The large grains of the Plum Island sand do not pack to a hard surface; for this reason driving on the beach is difficult and should be indulged in only by those who know local conditions and are experienced in driving on sand.

On the landward edge of the beach, where the beachgrass *Ammophila* and the silvery-leaved dusty-miller have begun to anchor the shifting grains, the dunes begin. Their contours are often steep, and as you look southward over the expanse of sand hills you see that the dune zone is pitted with many sandy depressions like bomb craters, their conical sides almost bare of plant growth. Except in these places, the dunes are widely covered with a low, sage-green carpet of the plant *Hudsonia,* helping to hold the shifting sand and prevent the sea beach from engulfing the land. A scattered growth of bayberry and poison-ivy begins midway across the dunes, gradually becomes more dense, and merges with the thickets that run down the center of the island. Cranberries grow abundantly in the low, wet places among the sand hills.

The shrubs, vines, and small trees that form the zone of thickets—the midrib of the island—are the home of the small land birds and give excellent cover and food for the pheasants. Probably the island supports from 60 to 75 pheasants—the only upland game bird on the island. Deer find good browsing here, as well as places of concealment from the casual eye. Most abundant plants are wild rose, sumac, beach plum, bayberry, black alder, choke cherry, pitch pine, aspen, and the ever present greenbrier.

Lying to the west, almost like another vast green sea, are the salt meadows. The winding Plum Island River, the lower reaches of the Parker, and all their small, meandering tributaries traverse the marshes with an intricate series of open-water canals. Scattered ponds or pot holes bring down the migrating wildfowl to feed on the water plants that grow in them.
