# parker 19: text

⟨cont⟩ rapidly turning over the clod and removing the clams.

Over the years, abundance of clams and consequently the prosperity of the clam industry have fluctuated greatly. At present the causes of cycles of abundance and scarcity in the clam populations are not understood. Perhaps in some years their natural enemies, such as periwinkles and sand-collar snails, are more abundant and destructive. Perhaps changes in the saltiness and temperature of the water are important. Until science has discovered why clams are scarce, little can be done to make the yield of this fishery more stable.

With this in mind, the Fish and Wildlife Service has sent several of its shell-fish biologists to Parker River to make surveys on the clam flats, and in 1947 it established a small laboratory at the refuge headquarters for continuing studies. Through these efforts Parker River is becoming, on a small scale, an experimental laboratory which may develop new principles of clam culture. These principles will apply not only to the Essex County clam flats but wherever the soft-shell clam grows on the northern New England coast.

Cranberries and beach plums, although less valuable than clams, are nevertheless an economic asset that has been carefully preserved at Parker River. Free use permits to pick beach plums and rake cranberries on the refuge property are issued by the refuge manager to persons who apply at his office, 65 State Street, Newburyport. About 100 such permits are requested in a season. Each permit allows the bearer “and party” to harvest the fruits, so that the actual number of persons who visit the refuge for such purposes is probably 300 to 400 annually.

Picking of beach plums begins about the middle of August; the first cranberries are ready for raking about the middle of September. The season for harvesting both fruits ends with the first hard frosts.

Salt-marsh hay is another product of the extensive salt meadows of the refuge. Neighboring farmers find it profitable to harvest the hay, which they use as bedding and to some extent as food for their stock. An acre of salt meadow yields nearly a ton of hay per year. The refuge manager issues permits for cutting, giving preference to former owners of the land.

From the standpoint of wildlife conservation, cutting the grass on the meadows has great value. Shore birds flock into these cut-over areas. Among the short stubble all the small food animals of the marshes are more easily found and captured. Cutting the hay on the salt meadows just before or during the fall shore bird migration greatly increases the natural food supply for these birds at a time when they particularly need it. Some of the scarcer east coast shore birds can be seen feeding on these hay meadows in August and September. The black-bellied plover is especially attracted to them.

Although Plum Island once contained a number of summer camps and cottages, most of these properties had lapsed into an uninhabitable state of decay and delapidation before the Government bought the property for a wildlife refuge. Access to all but the northern end of the island is extremely difficult. The road that makes its tortuous way between the dunes and ⟨cont⟩
