In Which Passepartout's Nose Grows Enormously Long

The next morning Passepartout — worn out, starving — told himself that he had to eat, no matter what, and the sooner the better. He did have the option of selling his watch, but he would sooner have died of hunger. Now, if ever, was the moment for this good fellow to make use of the strong, if not exactly melodious, voice that nature had granted him.

He knew a few tunes from France and England, and he resolved to try them out. The Japanese, surely, must be lovers of music, since everything they did was done to the sound of cymbals, gongs, and drums; they could hardly fail to appreciate the gifts of a European virtuoso.

But perhaps it was a little early in the day to be putting on a concert, and the music lovers, roused out of bed without warning, might not pay their singer in coin stamped with the Mikado's likeness.

So Passepartout decided to wait a few hours. As he wandered along, though, it struck him that he was rather too well dressed for a strolling street performer, and the idea came to him of trading his clothes for some cast-off outfit better suited to his situation. The swap ought to leave a little cash in the bargain besides — cash he could put straight toward quieting his appetite.

Decision made, all that remained was to carry it out. It was only after a long search that Passepartout turned up a local secondhand dealer, to whom he explained what he wanted. The European suit took the dealer's fancy, and soon enough Passepartout came out got up in an old Japanese robe, a sort of ribbed turban faded with age perched on his head — but, in exchange, a few small silver coins jingled in his pocket.

"Good," he thought. "I'll just imagine it's carnival time!"

The first thing Passepartout did, now that he was thoroughly "Japan-ized," was to step into a modest-looking teahouse, where, on the remains of a fowl and a few handfuls of rice, he breakfasted like a man for whom dinner was still a problem waiting to be solved.

"Now," he said to himself, once he had eaten his fill, "the thing is to keep a level head. I can't very well sell this getup for one that's still more Japanese. So I'd better figure out how to get out of this Land of the Rising Sun as quickly as I can — I'll carry nothing away from it but a miserable memory!"

Passepartout then thought of visiting the steamers bound for America. He meant to offer himself as a cook or a servant, asking nothing in return but passage and food. Once at San Francisco, he'd find some way out of his troubles. The important thing was to cross those four thousand seven hundred miles of Pacific that stretch between Japan and the New World.

Passepartout, never a man to let an idea languish, headed for the port of Yokohama. But the nearer he drew to the docks, the more his plan — which had seemed so simple the moment he thought of it — struck him as impossible to pull off. Why would anyone need a cook or a servant aboard an American steamer, and what confidence would he inspire, rigged out the way he was? What recommendations could he offer? What references could he give?

As he was turning this over, his eye fell on an enormous poster that a kind of clown was carrying through the streets of Yokohama. The poster read, in English:

JAPANESE ACROBATIC TROUPE
OF THE HONORABLE WILLIAM BATULCAR
— FINAL PERFORMANCES —
Before Their Departure for the United States of America
OF THE LONG NOSES — LONG NOSES
UNDER THE DIRECT PATRONAGE OF THE GOD TINGOU
Great Attraction!

"The United States of America!" cried Passepartout. "That's just the thing for me!"

He followed the walking billboard, and behind the man was soon back in the Japanese quarter of town. A quarter of an hour later he came to a halt before a large hall crowned with several clusters of streamers, its outer walls painted — with no attempt at perspective, but in violent colors — with a whole band of jugglers.

This was the establishment of the honorable Batulcar, a sort of American Barnum, manager of a troupe of tumblers, jugglers, clowns, acrobats, tightrope-walkers, and gymnasts who, according to the poster, were giving their final performances before leaving the Empire of the Sun for the United States.

Passepartout went in under a portico that fronted the hall and asked for Mr. Batulcar. Mr. Batulcar appeared in person.

"What do you want?" he said to Passepartout, taking him at first for a local.

"Do you need a servant?" Passepartout asked.

"A servant!" cried the Barnum, stroking the thick gray tuft that sprouted beneath his chin. "I've got two — obedient, faithful, never left my side, and they work for nothing, so long as I feed them. Here they are," he added, holding up two brawny arms laced with veins as thick as the strings of a double bass.

"So there's nothing I can do for you?"

"Nothing."

"The devil! And it would have suited me so well to travel with you."

"Ah, now," said the honorable Batulcar. "You're about as Japanese as I'm a monkey! Why are you dressed like that, then?"

"A man dresses as best he can!"

"True enough. You're a Frenchman, are you?"

"Yes, a Parisian of Paris."

"In that case, you must know how to pull faces?"

"Well now," Passepartout answered, nettled to see his nationality prompt such a question, "we French do know how to pull faces, it's true — but no better than the Americans!"

"Fair. Well then, if I can't take you on as a servant, I can take you on as a clown. You see, my good man, in France they show off foreign clowns, and abroad they show off French ones!"

"Ah!"

"You're strong, besides?"

"Especially when I've just got up from the table."

"And you can sing?"

"Yes," answered Passepartout, who in his day had done his part in a few street concerts.

"But can you sing standing on your head, with a top spinning on the sole of your left foot and a saber balanced on the sole of your right?"

"By Jove!" answered Passepartout, remembering the exercises of his early youth.

"You see, that's the whole of it!" replied the honorable Batulcar.

The bargain was struck then and there.

At last, Passepartout had found a position. He was hired to do anything and everything in the famous Japanese troupe. It was hardly flattering, but within a week he'd be on the road to San Francisco.

The performance, trumpeted with a great flourish by the honorable Batulcar, was to begin at three o'clock, and soon the fearsome instruments of a Japanese orchestra — drums and gongs — were thundering at the door. Passepartout, of course, had had no chance to study a part, but he was to lend the support of his sturdy shoulders to the great feat of the "human cluster," performed by the Long Noses of the god Tingou. This "great attraction" was to close the program.

Before three o'clock, the spectators had filled the vast hall. Europeans and locals, Chinese and Japanese, men, women, and children crowded onto the narrow benches and into the boxes facing the stage. The musicians had come back inside, and the full orchestra — gongs, drums, clackers, flutes, tambourines, and bass drums — was going at it with a fury.

The performance was what all such acrobatic exhibitions are. But it must be admitted that the Japanese are the finest balancers in the world. One, armed with his fan and little scraps of paper, gave the graceful "butterflies and flowers" routine. Another, with the fragrant smoke of his pipe, quickly traced in the air a string of bluish words that spelled out a compliment to the audience. A third juggled with lit candles, snuffing them one after another as they passed his lips and relighting each from the last, never once breaking off his dazzling display. Yet another reproduced, with spinning tops, the most improbable combinations; under his hand those whirring machines seemed to take on a life of their own in their endless spinning — they ran along pipe stems, along the edges of saber blades, along wires stretched thin as hairs from one side of the stage to the other; they circled great crystal vases, climbed bamboo ladders, scattered into every corner, producing strange harmonic effects as their various tones blended together. The jugglers juggled with them, and still they spun in the air; they flung them like shuttlecocks with wooden rackets, and still they spun; they stuffed them into their pockets, and when they drew them out, still they spun — until a released spring sent them bursting open in a spray of fireworks!

There's no need to describe here the prodigious feats of the troupe's acrobats and gymnasts. The tricks with the ladder, the pole, the ball, the barrels, and the rest were carried off with remarkable precision. But the main draw of the show was the exhibition of those "Long Noses," astonishing balancers still unknown in Europe.

These Long Noses form a special guild placed under the direct patronage of the god Tingou. Dressed like medieval heralds, they wore a splendid pair of wings at their shoulders. But what set them apart most of all was that long nose adorning each face — and above all the use they made of it. These noses were nothing less than bamboo poles, five, six, ten feet long, some straight, some curved, some smooth, some knobbed. And it was on these firmly fixed appendages that all their balancing feats were performed. A dozen of these devotees of the god Tingou lay down on their backs, and their comrades came to frolic on their noses — raised like lightning rods — leaping and vaulting from one to the next, and pulling off the most improbable stunts.

To finish, the public had been specially promised the human pyramid, in which some fifty Long Noses were to form the "Car of Juggernaut." But instead of building the pyramid by using their shoulders as the point of support, the honorable Batulcar's performers were to link together by their noses alone. Now, one of the men who formed the base of the car had left the troupe, and since all that was needed was strength and agility, Passepartout had been chosen to take his place.

To be sure, the worthy fellow felt thoroughly wretched when — a sad reminder of his youth — he had donned his medieval costume, trimmed with its many-colored wings, and a six-foot nose had been fitted to his face! But in the end, that nose was his bread and butter, and he made the best of it.

Passepartout went on stage and took his place among the colleagues who were to form the base of the Car of Juggernaut. They all stretched out on the ground, noses pointed at the sky. A second section of balancers came to settle on those long appendages, a third tier mounted above them, then a fourth, and on these noses that touched only at their tips a human monument soon rose to the very rafters of the theater.

Now, the applause was swelling and the instruments of the orchestra were bursting like so many thunderclaps, when the pyramid swayed, the balance broke, one of the noses at the base gave way, and the whole monument tumbled down like a house of cards —

The fault lay with Passepartout, who — abandoning his post, clearing the footlights without the help of his wings, and clambering up to the right-hand gallery — dropped at the feet of a spectator, crying out:

"Ah! My master! My master!"

"You?"

"Me!"

"Well, in that case — to the steamer, my boy!"

Mr. Fogg, Aouda, who was with him, and Passepartout rushed out through the corridors of the hall. But there they came upon the honorable Batulcar, furious, demanding damages for "the breakage." Phileas Fogg soothed his rage by tossing him a handful of banknotes. And at half past six, just as the steamer was about to leave, Mr. Fogg and Aouda set foot on the American vessel, followed by Passepartout — wings on his back, and on his face that six-foot nose he had not yet managed to tear loose!
