In Which Inspector Fix Takes Phileas Fogg's Interests Very Seriously

Phileas Fogg was twenty hours behind. Passepartout, the unwitting cause of that delay, was in despair. He had ruined his master, no two ways about it!

Just then the inspector came up to Mr. Fogg and looked him squarely in the face.

"In all seriousness, sir," he asked, "are you in a hurry?"

"In all seriousness," Phileas Fogg replied.

"Let me press the point," Fix went on. "You have a real stake in reaching New York by the eleventh, before nine in the evening — the hour the Liverpool steamer sails?"

"A very great stake."

"And if your journey had not been broken by that attack, you would have reached New York on the eleventh, first thing in the morning?"

"Yes — twelve hours ahead of the steamer."

"Good. So you're twenty hours behind. The gap between twenty and twelve is eight. That's eight hours to make up. Do you want to try?"

"On foot?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"No — by sledge," Fix answered. "A wind-sledge. A man offered me the ride."

It was the man who had spoken to the detective in the night, and whose offer Fix had turned down.

Phileas Fogg made no answer to Fix; but when Fix pointed out the man in question, strolling in front of the station, the gentleman went over to him. A moment later Phileas Fogg and this American — named Mudge — stepped into a shed built at the foot of Fort Kearney.

There Mr. Fogg examined a rather curious vehicle: a kind of frame set on two long beams, turned up a little at the front like the runners of a sled, with room aboard for five or six people. A third of the way along the frame, toward the front, rose a very tall mast, and on it a huge mainsail was bent. This mast, held firm by wire shrouds, carried an iron stay from which a large jib could be hoisted. At the stern, a sort of scull-oar rudder served to steer the thing.

It was, as you can see, a sledge rigged like a sloop. In winter, out on the frozen plain, when the trains are stopped by the snows, these vehicles make astonishingly fast crossings from one station to the next. They carry a prodigious spread of canvas — more even than a racing cutter, which risks capsizing — and, running before the wind, they skim over the prairie at a speed equal to that of an express train, if not greater.

In a few minutes a deal was struck between Mr. Fogg and the skipper of this land-craft. The wind was good. It was blowing hard out of the west. The snow was packed and hard, and Mudge was confident he could get Mr. Fogg to the Omaha station in a matter of hours. There the trains were frequent and the lines many, running on to Chicago and New York. It was not impossible that the lost time could be recovered. There was no reason, then, to hesitate over the venture.

Mr. Fogg, not wanting to expose Aouda to the miseries of a crossing in the open air — in a cold that speed would only make more unbearable — offered to leave her at the Kearney station in Passepartout's care. The good fellow would see to bringing the young woman back to Europe by a better route and under more tolerable conditions.

Aouda refused to be parted from Mr. Fogg, and Passepartout was very glad of her decision. For nothing in the world would he have left his master, since Fix was to go along too.

As for what the detective was thinking just then, that would be hard to say. Had his conviction been shaken by Phileas Fogg's return? Or did he still take him for an extremely cool scoundrel who, his tour of the world complete, would suppose himself perfectly safe once back in England? Perhaps Fix's opinion of Phileas Fogg really had shifted. But he was no less resolved to do his duty, and — more impatient than any of them — to press the return to England with all his might.

By eight o'clock the sledge was ready to start. The travelers — one is tempted to say the passengers — took their places and wrapped themselves tightly in their traveling blankets. The two great sails were hoisted, and, driven by the wind, the vehicle went flying over the hardened snow at forty miles an hour.

The distance separating Fort Kearney from Omaha is, in a straight line — as the bee flies, as the Americans say — two hundred miles at most. If the wind held, that distance could be covered in five hours. Barring any mishap, the sledge would reach Omaha by one in the afternoon.

What a crossing it was! The travelers, pressed close against one another, could not speak. The cold, sharpened by their speed, would have cut the words off. The sledge slid over the surface of the plain as lightly as a boat slides over water — minus the swell. When the breeze came skimming low across the ground, it seemed to lift the sledge clear off the earth by its sails, vast wings of enormous span. Mudge, at the helm, held to a straight course, and with a flick of the scull-oar he corrected the yawing the craft was inclined to. Every stitch of canvas was drawing. The jib had been pushed out and was no longer blanketed by the mainsail. A topmast was hoisted, and a topsail, stretched to the wind, added its thrust to that of the other sails. There was no measuring it exactly, but certainly the sledge could not have been making less than forty miles an hour.

"If nothing breaks," said Mudge, "we'll get there!"

And Mudge had every reason to get there on time, for Mr. Fogg, true to his system, had baited him with a handsome bonus.

The prairie, which the sledge cut straight across, was as flat as a sea. It looked like one enormous frozen pond. The railroad serving this part of the territory ran up from southwest to northwest, by Grand Island, by Columbus — an important Nebraska town — by Schuyler, by Fremont, and so on to Omaha. All along its course it followed the right bank of the Platte River. The sledge, cutting the route short, took the string of the arc the railway described. Mudge had no fear of being stopped by the Platte River, at the little bend it makes just before Fremont, since its waters were frozen. The way ahead was entirely clear of obstacles, and so Phileas Fogg had only two things to dread: some damage to the craft, or a shift or a dying of the wind.

But the breeze did not slacken. Quite the opposite. It blew hard enough to bend the mast, which the iron shrouds held firmly in place. These metal cables, like the strings of an instrument, hummed as though a bow had set them vibrating. The sledge swept along in the midst of a plaintive music, unusually intense.

"Those strings are sounding the fifth and the octave," said Mr. Fogg.

And those were the only words he spoke during the whole crossing. Aouda, carefully bundled in the furs and traveling blankets, was kept as far as possible from the reach of the cold.

As for Passepartout, his face as red as the sun's disk when it sets in the mist, he drank in the biting air. With the bottom of imperturbable confidence he had in him, he had begun to hope again. Instead of reaching New York in the morning, they would reach it in the evening — but there was still some chance it would be before the Liverpool steamer sailed.

Passepartout had even felt a strong urge to shake the hand of his ally Fix. He had not forgotten that it was the inspector himself who had procured the wind-sledge, and therefore the only means there was of reaching Omaha in time. But, by some presentiment he could not have named, he kept to his usual reserve.

One thing, at any rate, Passepartout would never forget: the sacrifice Mr. Fogg had made, without a moment's hesitation, to tear him out of the hands of the Sioux. For that, Mr. Fogg had risked his fortune and his life. No! His servant would never forget it!

While each of the travelers gave himself up to reflections so different, the sledge flew on over the boundless carpet of snow. If it crossed a few creeks, tributaries and sub-tributaries of the Little Blue River, no one noticed. Fields and watercourses vanished under one uniform whiteness. The plain was utterly deserted. Lying between the Union Pacific Road and the branch line that is to link Kearney with St. Joseph, it formed a kind of great uninhabited island. Not a village, not a station, not so much as a fort. Now and then some grimacing tree flashed past, its white skeleton writhing in the wind. Sometimes flocks of wild birds took flight all together. Sometimes, too, packs of prairie wolves — lean, starving, driven by a savage hunger, and running in great numbers — raced the sledge for speed. Then Passepartout, revolver in hand, stood ready to fire on the nearest of them. If some accident had stopped the sledge just then, the travelers, set upon by these ferocious brutes, would have run the gravest risk. But the sledge held firm; it was not long in pulling ahead, and soon the whole howling pack was left behind.

At noon Mudge recognized, by a few signs, that he was passing the frozen course of the Platte River. He said nothing, but he was already sure that twenty miles farther on he would have reached the Omaha station.

And in fact it was not yet one o'clock when this skillful guide, letting go of the tiller, sprang to the halyards and hauled the sails down in a heap, while the sledge, carried on by its irresistible momentum, ran another half mile under bare poles. At last it stopped, and Mudge, pointing to a cluster of snow-white roofs, said:

"We're here."

Here indeed! Arrived at that station which, by way of its many trains, is in daily communication with the eastern United States!

Passepartout and Fix had jumped down and were shaking the numbness out of their limbs. They helped Mr. Fogg and the young woman out of the sledge. Phileas Fogg settled generously with Mudge, whose hand Passepartout shook as he would a friend's, and they all rushed for the Omaha station.

It is at this important city of Nebraska that the Pacific Railroad proper comes to an end — the line that puts the Mississippi basin in touch with the great ocean. To go from Omaha to Chicago, the railroad, under the name of the Chicago–Rock Island Road, runs due east, serving fifty stations along the way.

A through train was ready to leave. Phileas Fogg and his companions had just time to fling themselves into a car. They had seen nothing of Omaha, but Passepartout admitted to himself that there was no cause for regret, and that seeing the sights was not the object.

With tremendous speed the train ran across the state of Iowa, by Council Bluffs, Des Moines, and Iowa City. During the night it crossed the Mississippi at Davenport, and by way of Rock Island it entered Illinois. The next day, the tenth, at four in the afternoon, it reached Chicago — already risen from its ruins, and seated more proudly than ever on the shores of its lovely Lake Michigan.

Nine hundred miles separate Chicago from New York. Trains were not lacking at Chicago. Mr. Fogg passed straight from one to another. The spirited locomotive of the Pittsburgh–Fort Wayne–Chicago Railroad set off at full speed, as though it understood that the honorable gentleman had no time to lose. It flashed like lightning across Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey, passing through towns with ancient-sounding names, some of which had streets and streetcars but no houses yet. At last the Hudson came into view, and on the eleventh of December, at a quarter past eleven in the evening, the train stopped in the station on the right bank of the river, before the very pier of the Cunard line steamers — otherwise known as the British and North American Royal Mail Steam Packet Co.

The China, bound for Liverpool, had sailed forty-five minutes earlier!
