In Which Phileas Fogg Joins Direct Battle with Bad Luck

When the China steamed away, it seemed to carry off Phileas Fogg's last hope with it.

For none of the other liners that run direct between America and Europe could serve the gentleman's plans — not the French transatlantic boats, not the ships of the White Star Line, not the steamers of the Inman Company, not the Hamburg line, not any of them.

The Pereire, of the French Transatlantic Company — whose splendid vessels match in speed and surpass in comfort every ship of every other line without exception — did not sail until the day after next, the 14th of December. And in any case, like the Hamburg boats, she went not to Liverpool or London but to Le Havre, and that extra crossing from Le Havre to Southampton would have delayed Phileas Fogg and undone his last efforts.

As for the Inman steamers, one of which, the City of Paris, put to sea the very next day, there was no point even thinking of it. Those ships are given over chiefly to carrying emigrants; their engines are weak, they sail as much under canvas as under steam, and their speed is poor. They took longer on the run from New York to England than Mr. Fogg had time left to win his wager.

The gentleman took all of this in perfectly as he consulted his Bradshaw, which laid out the transoceanic sailings for him day by day.

Passepartout was crushed. To have missed the steamer by forty-five minutes — it was killing him. And it was his own fault. Instead of helping his master, he had done nothing but strew obstacles across his path! And when he ran back over every incident of the journey in his mind, when he tallied up all the money spent to no purpose and on his account alone, when he thought that this enormous wager, together with the crushing expense of a trip now made useless, would ruin Mr. Fogg completely, he heaped abuse on himself.

Mr. Fogg, however, made him no reproach whatever. Leaving the transatlantic pier, he said only these words:

"We'll see about it tomorrow. Come along."

Mr. Fogg, Aouda, Fix, and Passepartout crossed the Hudson in the Jersey City ferryboat and climbed into a cab, which took them to the St. Nicholas Hotel on Broadway. Rooms were made ready for them, and the night went by — short for Phileas Fogg, who slept a perfect sleep, but very long for Aouda and her companions, whose agitation would not let them rest.

The next day was the 12th of December. From seven in the morning on the 12th to a quarter to nine in the evening on the 21st, there remained nine days, thirteen hours, and forty-five minutes. Had Phileas Fogg left the day before aboard the China, one of the best sailers of the Cunard line, he would have reached Liverpool, and then London, in good time!

Mr. Fogg left the hotel alone, after instructing his servant to wait for him and to warn Aouda to be ready to leave at any moment.

Mr. Fogg made his way to the banks of the Hudson, and among the ships moored to the quays or anchored out in the river, he searched carefully for any that were about to sail. Several vessels had their departure pennants flying and were making ready to put to sea on the morning tide, for in that vast and magnificent port of New York not a day passes without a hundred ships setting out for every corner of the globe; but most of them were sailing ships, and they would not do for Phileas Fogg.

The gentleman seemed bound to fail in this last attempt, when he caught sight of a vessel moored off the Battery, a cable's length away at most — a trading steamer with a propeller and trim lines, its funnel throwing off great rolls of smoke, a sure sign that it was getting ready to weigh anchor.

Phileas Fogg hailed a boat, jumped in, and with a few strokes of the oars found himself at the gangway of the Henrietta, an iron-hulled steamer with all her upper works in wood.

The captain of the Henrietta was on board. Phileas Fogg went up on deck and asked for him. The man appeared at once.

He was about fifty, a sort of sea dog, a grumbler who plainly would not be easy to deal with. Big eyes, a complexion like oxidized copper, red hair, a thick neck — nothing of the gentleman about him.

"The captain?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"That's me."

"I'm Phileas Fogg, of London."

"And I'm Andrew Speedy, of Cardiff."

"You're about to sail?"

"In an hour."

"You're bound for—?"

"Bordeaux."

"And your cargo?"

"Stones in the belly. No freight. I'm sailing in ballast."

"You have passengers?"

"No passengers. Never any passengers. Cargo that gets underfoot and talks back."

"Your ship's a good sailer?"

"Eleven to twelve knots. The Henrietta's well known."

"Will you carry me to Liverpool — me and three others?"

"To Liverpool? Why not to China?"

"I said Liverpool."

"No!"

"No?"

"No. I'm bound for Bordeaux, and to Bordeaux I go."

"No matter the price?"

"No matter the price."

The captain had spoken in a tone that allowed no reply.

"But the Henrietta's owners—" Phileas Fogg began.

"The owner is me," the captain answered. "The ship is mine."

"I'll charter her from you."

"No."

"I'll buy her from you."

"No."

Phileas Fogg did not so much as blink. Still, the situation was grave. This was not Hong Kong, and the captain of the Henrietta was not the skipper of the Tankadère. Until now the gentleman's money had always carried the day against every obstacle. This time, money failed.

And yet a way had to be found to cross the Atlantic by ship — short of crossing it by balloon, which would have been a wildly risky business, and in any case impossible.

It seems, however, that Phileas Fogg hit on an idea, for he said to the captain:

"Well then, will you take me to Bordeaux?"

"No, not if you paid me two hundred dollars!"

"I offer you two thousand."

"Apiece?"

"Apiece."

"And there are four of you?"

"Four."

Captain Speedy began to scratch his forehead as if he meant to peel the skin off it. Eight thousand dollars to be earned without altering his voyage — that was well worth setting aside his pronounced distaste for passengers of every kind. Besides, passengers at two thousand dollars a head are no longer passengers; they are precious cargo.

"I sail at nine o'clock," said Captain Speedy simply, "and if you and yours are here—?"

"At nine o'clock we'll be aboard!" Mr. Fogg answered, no less simply.

It was half past eight. To step off the Henrietta, get into a carriage, drive to the St. Nicholas Hotel, and bring back Aouda, Passepartout, and even the inseparable Fix — to whom he graciously offered the passage — was all accomplished by the gentleman with that calm which never once deserted him.

By the time the Henrietta weighed anchor, all four were aboard.

When Passepartout learned what this last crossing would cost, he let out one of those long, drawn-out "Oh!"s that slide down every step of the descending scale.

As for Inspector Fix, he told himself that the Bank of England would most decidedly not come out of this affair unscathed. By the time they arrived, and assuming that Mr. Fogg didn't fling a few more handfuls of it into the sea, more than seven thousand pounds would be missing from the banknote bag!
