BOOK I

THE SOCIAL CONTRACT

OR

PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL

RIGHT

Fœderis æquas

Dicamus leges. (Vergil, _Æneid_ XI.)




FOREWORD

This little treatise is part of a longer work which I began years ago
without realising my limitations, and long since abandoned. Of the
various fragments that might have been extracted from what I wrote,
this is the most considerable, and, I think, the least unworthy of
being offered to the public. The rest no longer exists.

I mean to inquire if, in the civil order, there can be any sure and
legitimate rule of administration, men being taken as they are and laws
as they might be. In this inquiry I shall endeavour always to unite
what right sanctions with what is prescribed by interest, in order that
justice and utility may in no case be divided.

I enter upon my task without proving the importance of the subject. I
shall be asked if I am a prince or a legislator, to write on politics.
I answer that I am neither, and that is why I do so. If I were a prince
or a legislator, I should not waste time in saying what wants doing; I
should do it, or hold my peace.

As I was born a citizen of a free State, and a member of the Sovereign,
I feel that, however feeble the influence my voice can have on public
affairs, the right of voting on them makes it my duty to study them:
and I am happy, when I reflect upon governments, to find my inquiries
always furnish me with new reasons for loving that of my own country.




CHAPTER I

SUBJECT OF THE FIRST BOOK


Man is born free; and everywhere he is in chains. One thinks himself
the master of others, and still remains a greater slave than they. How
did this change come about? I do not know. What can make it legitimate?
That question I think I can answer.

If I took into account only force, and the effects derived from it, I
should say: "As long as a people is compelled to obey, and obeys, it
does well; as soon as it can shake off the yoke, and shakes it off,
it does still better; for, regaining its liberty by the same right
as took it away, either it is justified in resuming it, or there was
no justification for those who took it away." But the social order is
a sacred right which is the basis of all other rights. Nevertheless,
this right does not come from nature, and must therefore be founded on
conventions. Before coming to that, I have to prove what I have just
asserted.





CHAPTER II

THE FIRST SOCIETIES


The most ancient of all societies, and the only one that is natural
is the family: and even so the children remain attached to the father
only so long as they need him for their preservation. As soon as this
need ceases, the natural bond is dissolved. The children, released from
the obedience they owed to the father, and the father, released from
the care he owed his children, return equally to independence. If they
remain united, they continue so no longer naturally, but voluntarily;
and the family itself is then maintained only by convention.

This common liberty results from the nature of man. His first law is
to provide for his own preservation, his first cares are those which
he owes to himself; and, as soon as he reaches years of discretion,
he is the sole judge of the proper means of preserving himself, and
consequently becomes his own master.

The family then may be called the first model of political societies:
the ruler corresponds to the father, and the people to the children;
and all, being born free and equal, alienate their liberty only for
their own advantage. The whole difference is that, in the family, the
love of the father for his children repays him for the care he takes of
them, while, in the State, the pleasure of commanding takes the place
of the love which the chief cannot have for the peoples under him.

Grotius denies that all human power is established in favour of the
governed, and quotes slavery as an example. His usual method of
reasoning is constantly to establish right by fact.[1] It would be
possible to employ a more logical method, but none could be more
favourable to tyrants.

It is then, according to Grotius, doubtful whether the human race
belongs to a hundred men, or that hundred men to the human race: and,
throughout his book, he seems to incline to the former alternative,
which is also the view of Hobbes. On this showing, the human species is
divided into so many herds of cattle, each with its ruler, who keeps
guard over them for the purpose of devouring them.

As a shepherd is of a nature superior to that of his flock, the
shepherds of men, _i.e._ their rulers, are of a nature superior to
that of the peoples under them. Thus, Philo tells us, the Emperor
Caligula reasoned, concluding equally well either that kings were gods,
or that men were beasts.

The reasoning of Caligula agrees with that of Hobbes and Grotius.
Aristotle, before any of them, had said that men are by no means equal
naturally, but that some are born for slavery, and others for dominion.

Aristotle was right; but he took the effect for the cause. Nothing
can be more certain than that every man born in slavery is born for
slavery. Slaves lose everything in their chains, even the desire of
escaping from them: they love their servitude, as the comrades of
Ulysses loved their brutish condition.[2] If then there are slaves by
nature, it is because there have been slaves against nature. Force made
the first slaves, and their cowardice perpetuated the condition.

I have said nothing of King Adam, or Emperor Noah, father of the three
great monarchs who shared out the universe, like the children of
Saturn, whom some scholars have recognised in them. I trust to getting
due thanks for my moderation; for, being a direct descendant of one
of these princes, perhaps of the eldest branch, how do I know that a
verification of titles might not leave me the legitimate king of the
human race? In any case, there can be no doubt that Adam was sovereign
of the world, as Robinson Crusoe was of his island, as long as he
was its only inhabitant; and this empire had the advantage that the
monarch, safe on his throne, had no rebellions, wars, or conspirators
to fear.


[1] "Learned inquiries into public right are often only the history of
past abuses; and troubling to study them too deeply is a profitless
infatuation" (_Essay on the Interests of France in Relation to its
Neighbours_, by the Marquis d'Argenson). This is exactly what Grotius
has done.

[2] See a short treatise of Plutarch's entitled "That Animals Reason."




CHAPTER III

THE RIGHT OF THE STRONGEST


The strongest is never strong enough to be always the master, unless
he transforms strength into right, and obedience into duty. Hence the
right of the strongest, which, though to all seeming meant ironically,
is really laid down as a fundamental principle. But are we never to
have an explanation of this phrase? Force is a physical power, and I
fail to see what moral effect it can have. To yield to force is an act
of necessity, not of will--at the most, an act of prudence. In what
sense can it be a duty?

Suppose for a moment that this so-called "right" exists. I maintain
that the sole result is a mass of inexplicable nonsense. For, if force
creates right, the effect changes with the cause: every force that
is greater than the first succeeds to its right. As soon as it is
possible to disobey with impunity, disobedience is legitimate; and, the
strongest being always in the right, the only thing that matters is
to act so as to become the strongest. But what kind of right is that
which perishes when force fails? If we must obey perforce, there is no
need to obey because we ought; and if we are not forced to obey, we are
under no obligation to do so. Clearly, the word "right" adds nothing to
force: in this connection, it means absolutely nothing.

Obey the powers that be. If this means yield to force, it is a good
precept, but superfluous: I can answer for its never being violated.
All power comes from God, I admit; but so does all sickness: does that
mean that we are forbidden to call in the doctor? A brigand surprises
me at the edge of a wood: must I not merely surrender my purse on
compulsion; but, even if I could withhold it, am I in conscience bound
to give it up? For certainly the pistol he holds is also a power.

Let us then admit that force does not create right, and that we are
obliged to obey only legitimate powers. In that case, my original
question recurs.




CHAPTER IV

SLAVERY


Since no man has a natural authority over his fellow, and force creates
no right, we must conclude that conventions form the basis of all
legitimate authority among men.

If an individual, says Grotius, can alienate his liberty and make
himself the slave of a master, why could not a whole people do the same
and make itself subject to a king? There are in this passage plenty
of ambiguous words which would need explaining; but let us confine
ourselves to the word _alienate_. To alienate is to give or to sell.
Now, a man who becomes the slave of another does not give himself; he
sells himself, at the least for his subsistence: but for what does a
people sell itself? A king is so far from furnishing his subjects with
their subsistence that he gets his own only from them; and, according
to Rabelais, kings do not live on nothing. Do subjects then give their
persons on condition that the king takes their goods also? I fail to
see what they have left to preserve.

It will be said that the despot assures his subjects civil
tranquillity. Granted; but what do they gain, if the wars his
ambition brings down upon them, his insatiable avidity, and the
vexatious conduct of his ministers press harder on them than their
own dissensions would have done? What do they gain, if the very
tranquillity they enjoy is one of their miseries? Tranquillity is found
also in dungeons; but is that enough to make them desirable places to
live in? The Greeks imprisoned in the cave of the Cyclops lived there
very tranquilly, while they were awaiting their turn to be devoured.

To say that a man gives himself gratuitously, is to say what is absurd
and inconceivable; such an act is null and illegitimate, from the mere
fact that he who does it is out of his mind. To say the same of a whole
people is to suppose a people of madmen; and madness creates no right.

Even if each man could alienate himself, he could not alienate his
children: they are born men and free; their liberty belongs to them,
and no one but they has the right to dispose of it. Before they come to
years of discretion, the father can, in their name, lay down conditions
for their preservation and well-being, but he cannot give them,
irrevocably and without conditions: such a gift is contrary to the ends
of nature, and exceeds the rights of paternity. It would therefore be
necessary, in order to legitimise an arbitrary government, that in
every generation the people should be in a position to accept or reject
it; but, were this so, the government would be no longer arbitrary.

To renounce liberty is to renounce being a man, to surrender the rights
of humanity and even its duties. For him who renounces everything no
indemnity is possible. Such a renunciation is incompatible with man's
nature; to remove all liberty from his will is to remove all morality
from his acts. Finally, it is an empty and contradictory convention
that sets up, on the one side, absolute authority, and, on the other,
unlimited obedience. Is it not clear that we can be under no obligation
to a person from whom we have the right to exact everything? Does not
this condition alone, in the absence of equivalence or exchange, in
itself involve the nullity of the act? For what right can my slave have
against me, when all that he has belongs to me, and, his right being
mine, this right of mine against myself is a phrase devoid of meaning?

Grotius and the rest find in war another origin for the so-called right
of slavery. The victor having, as they hold, the right of killing
the vanquished, the latter can buy back his life at the price of his
liberty; and this convention is the more legitimate because it is to
the advantage of both parties.

But it is clear that this supposed right to kill the conquered is by no
means deducible from the state of war. Men, from the mere fact that,
while they are living in their primitive independence, they have no
mutual relations stable enough to constitute either the state of peace
or the state of war, cannot be naturally enemies. War is constituted by
a relation between things, and not between persons; and, as the state
of war cannot arise out of simple personal relations, but only out of
real relations, private war, or war of man with man, can exist neither
in the state of nature, where there is no constant property, nor in the
social state, where everything is under the authority of the laws.

Individual combats, duels and encounters, are acts which cannot
constitute a state; while the private wars, authorised by the
Establishments of Louis IX, King of France, and suspended by the Peace
of God, are abuses of feudalism, in itself an absurd system if ever
there was one, and contrary to the principles of natural right and to
all good polity.

War then is a relation, not between man and man, but between State and
State, and individuals are enemies only accidentally, not as men, nor
even as citizens,[1] but as soldiers; not as members of their country,
but as its defenders. Finally, each State can have for enemies only
other States, and not men; for between things disparate in nature there
can be no real relation.

Furthermore, this principle is in conformity with the established
rules of all times and the constant practice of all civilised peoples.
Declarations of war are intimations less to powers than to their
subjects. The foreigner, whether king, individual, or people, who robs,
kills or detains the subjects, without declaring war on the prince,
is not an enemy, but a brigand. Even in real war, a just prince,
while laying hands, in the enemy's country, on all that belongs to
the public, respects the lives and goods of individuals: he respects
rights on which his own are founded. The object of the war being the
destruction of the hostile State, the other side has a right to kill
its defenders, while they are bearing arms; but as soon as they lay
them down and surrender, they cease to be enemies or instruments of the
enemy, and become once more merely men, whose life no one has any right
to take. Sometimes it is possible to kill the State without killing
a single one of its members; and war gives no right which is not
necessary to the gaining of its object. These principles are not those
of Grotius: they are not based on the authority of poets, but derived
from the nature of reality and based on reason.

The right of conquest has no foundation other than the right of the
strongest. If war does not give the conqueror the right to massacre the
conquered peoples, the right to enslave them cannot be based upon a
right which does not exist No one has a right to kill an enemy except
when he cannot make him a slave, and the right to enslave him cannot
therefore be derived from the right to kill him. It is accordingly an
unfair exchange to make him buy at the price of his liberty his life,
over which the victor holds no right. Is it not clear that there is a
vicious circle in founding the right of life and death on the right of
slavery, and the right of slavery on the right of life and death?

Even if we assume this terrible right to kill everybody, I maintain
that a slave made in war, or a conquered people, is under no obligation
to a master, except to obey him as far as he is compelled to do so.
By taking an equivalent for his life, the victor has not done him
a favour; instead of killing him without profit, he has killed him
usefully. So far then is he from acquiring over him any authority in
addition to that of force, that the state of war continues to subsist
between them: their mutual relation is the effect of it, and the usage
of the right of war does not imply a treaty of peace. A convention has
indeed been made; but this convention, so far from destroying the state
of war, presupposes its continuance.

So, from whatever aspect we regard the question, the right of slavery
is null and void, not only as being illegitimate, but also because it
is absurd and meaningless. The words _slave_ and _right_ contradict
each other, and are mutually exclusive. It will always be equally
foolish for a man to say to a man or to a people: "I make with you a
convention wholly at your expense and wholly to my advantage; I shall
keep it as long as I like, and you will keep it as long as I like."


[1] The Romans, who understood and respected the right of war more
than any other nation on earth, carried their scruples on this head
so far that a citizen was not allowed to serve as a volunteer without
engaging himself expressly against the enemy, and against such and
such an enemy by name. A legion in which the younger Cato was seeing
his first service under Popilius having been reconstructed, the elder
Cato wrote to Popilius that, if he wished his son to continue serving
under him, he must administer to him a new military oath, because, the
first having been annulled, he was no longer able to bear arms against
the enemy. The same Cato wrote to his son telling him to take great
care not to go into battle before taking this new oath. I know that the
siege of Clusium and other isolated events can be quoted against me;
but I am citing laws and customs. The Romans are the people that least
often transgressed its laws; and no other people has had such good ones.



CHAPTER V

THAT WE MUST ALWAYS GO BACK TO A FIRST CONVENTION


Even if I granted all that I have been refuting, the friends of
despotism would be no better off. There will always be a great
difference between subduing a multitude and ruling a society. Even if
scattered individuals were successively enslaved by one man, however
numerous they might be, I still see no more than a master and his
slaves, and certainly not a people and its ruler; I see what may be
termed an aggregation, but not an association; there is as yet neither
public good nor body politic. The man in question, even if he has
enslaved half the world, is still only an individual; his interest,
apart from that of others, is still a purely private interest. If this
same man comes to die, his empire, after him, remains scattered and
without unity, as an oak falls and dissolves into a heap of ashes when
the fire has consumed it.

A people, says Grotius, can give itself to a king. Then, according
to Grotius, a people is a people before it gives itself. The gift
is itself a civil act, and implies public deliberation. It would be
better, before examining the act by which a people gives itself to a
king, to examine that by which it has become a people; for this act,
being necessarily prior to the other, is the true foundation of society.

Indeed, if there were no prior convention, where, unless the election
were unanimous, would be the obligation on the minority to submit
to the choice of the majority? How have a hundred men who wish for
a master the right to vote on behalf of ten who do not? The law of
majority voting is itself something established by convention, and
presupposes unanimity, on one occasion at least.




CHAPTER VI

THE SOCIAL COMPACT


I suppose men to have reached the point at which the obstacles in the
way of their preservation in the state of nature show their power of
resistance to be greater than the resources at the disposal of each
individual for his maintenance in that state. That primitive condition
can then subsist no longer; and the human race would perish unless it
changed its manner of existence.

But, as men cannot engender new forces, but only unite and direct
existing ones, they have no other means of preserving themselves than
the formation, by aggregation, of a sum of forces great enough to
overcome the resistance. These they have to bring into play by means of
a single motive power, and cause to act in concert.

This sum of forces can arise only where several persons come together:
but, as the force and liberty of each man are the chief instruments of
his self-preservation, how can he pledge them without harming his own
interests, and neglecting the care he owes to himself? This difficulty,
in its bearing on my present subject, may be stated in the following
terms--

"The problem is to find a form of association which will defend and
protect with the whole common force the person and goods of each
associate, and in which each, while uniting himself with all, may
still obey himself alone, and remain as free as before." This is
the fundamental problem of which the _Social Contract_ provides the
solution.

The clauses of this contract are so determined by the nature of the act
that the slightest modification would make them vain and ineffective;
so that, although they have perhaps never been formally set forth,
they are everywhere the same and everywhere tacitly admitted and
recognised, until, on the violation of the social compact, each regains
his original rights and resumes his natural liberty, while losing the
conventional liberty in favour of which he renounced it.

These clauses, properly understood, may be reduced to one--the total
alienation of each associate, together with all his rights, to the
whole community for, in the first place, as each gives himself
absolutely, the conditions are the same for all; and, this being so, no
one has any interest in making them burdensome to others.

Moreover, the alienation being without reserve, the union is as perfect
as it can be, and no associate has anything more to demand: for, if
the individuals retained certain rights, as there would be no common
superior to decide between them and the public, each, being on one
point his own judge, would ask to be so on all; the state of nature
would thus continue, and the association would necessarily become
inoperative or tyrannical.

Finally, each man, in giving himself to all, gives himself to nobody;
and as there is no associate over whom he does not acquire the same
right as he yields others over himself, he gains an equivalent for
everything he loses, and an increase of force for the preservation of
what he has.

If then we discard from the social compact what is not of its essence,
we shall find that it reduces itself to the following terms--

_"Each of us puts his person and all his power in common under the
supreme direction of the general will, and, in our corporate capacity,
we receive each member as an indivisible part of the whole._"

At once, in place of the individual personality of each contracting
party, this act of association creates a moral and collective body,
composed of as many members as the assembly contains votes, and
receiving from this act its unity, its common identity, its life and
its will. This public person, so formed by the union of all other
persons, formerly took the name of _city_,[1] and now takes that of
_Republic_ or _body politic_; it is called by its members _State_ when
passive, _Sovereign_ when active, and _Power_ when compared with others
like itself. Those who are associated in it take collectively the name
of _people_, and severally are called _citizens_, as sharing in the
sovereign power, and _subjects_, as being under the laws of the State.
But these terms are often confused and taken one for another: it is
enough to know how to distinguish them when they are being used with
precision.


[1] The real meaning of this word has been almost wholly lost in
modern times; most people mistake a town for a city, and a townsman
for a citizen. They do not know that houses make a town, but citizens
a city. The same mistake long ago cost the Carthaginians dear. I
have never read of the title of citizens being given to the subjects
of any prince, not even the ancient Macedonians or the English of
to-day, though they are nearer liberty than any one else. The French
alone everywhere familiarly adopt the name of citizens, because,
as can be seen from their dictionaries, they have no idea of its
meaning; otherwise they would be guilty in usurping it, of the crime
of _lèse-majesté_: among them, the name expresses a virtue, and not
a right. When Bodin spoke of our citizens and townsmen, he fell into
a bad blunder in taking the one class for the other. M. d'Alembert
has avoided the error, and, in his article on Geneva, has clearly
distinguished the four orders of men (or even five, counting mere
foreigners) who dwell in our town, of which two only compose the
Republic. No other French writer, to my knowledge, has understood the
real meaning of the word citizen.




CHAPTER VII

THE SOVEREIGN


This formula shows us that the act of association comprises a mutual
undertaking between the public and the individuals, and that each
individual, in making a contract, as we may say, with himself, is bound
in a double capacity; as a member of the Sovereign he is bound to the
individuals, and as a member of the State to the Sovereign. But the
maxim of civil right, that no one is bound by undertakings made to
himself, does not apply in this case; for there is a great difference
between incurring an obligation to yourself and incurring one to a
whole of which you form a part.

Attention must further be called to the fact that public deliberation,
while competent to bind all the subjects to the Sovereign, because of
the two different capacities in which each of them may be regarded,
cannot, for the opposite reason, bind the Sovereign to itself; and
that it is consequently against the nature of the body politic for the
Sovereign to impose on itself a law which it cannot infringe. Being
able to regard itself in only one capacity, it is in the position of an
individual who makes a contract with himself; and this makes it clear
that there neither is nor can be any kind of fundamental law binding
on the body of the people--not even the social contract itself. This
does not mean that the body politic cannot enter into undertakings with
others, provided the contract is not infringed by them; for in relation
to what is external to it, it becomes a simple being, an individual.

But the body politic or the Sovereign, drawing its being wholly from
the sanctity of the contract, can never bind itself, even to an
outsider, to do anything derogatory to the original act, for instance,
to alienate any part of itself, or to submit to another Sovereign.
Violation of the act by which it exists would be self-annihilation; and
that which is itself nothing can create nothing.

As soon as this multitude is so united in one body, it is impossible to
offend against one of the members without attacking the body, and still
more to offend against the body without the members resenting it. Duty
and interest therefore equally oblige the two contracting parties to
give each other help; and the same men should seek to combine, in their
double capacity, all the advantages dependent upon that capacity.

Again, the Sovereign, being formed wholly of the individuals who
compose it, neither has nor can have any interest contrary to theirs;
and consequently the sovereign power need give no guarantee to its
subjects, because it is impossible for the body to wish to hurt all
its members. We shall also see later on that It cannot hurt any in
particular. The Sovereign, merely by virtue of what it is, is is always
what it should be.

This, however, is not the case with the relation of the subjects to the
Sovereign, which, despite the common interest, would have no security
that they would fulfil their undertakings, unless it found means to
assure itself of their fidelity.

In fact, each individual, as a man, may have a particular will
contrary or dissimilar to the general will which he has as a citizen.
His particular interest may speak to him quite differently from the
common interest: his absolute and naturally independent existence may
make him look upon what he owes to the common cause as a gratuitous
contribution, the loss of which will do less harm to others than the
payment of it is burdensome to himself; and, regarding the moral person
which constitutes the State as a persona ficta, because not a man, he
may wish to enjoy the rights of citizenship without being ready to
fulfil the duties of a subject. The continuance of such an injustice
could not but prove the undoing of the body politic.

In order then that the social compact may not be an empty formula, it
tacitly includes the undertaking, which alone can give force to the
rest, that whoever refuses to obey the general will shall be compelled
to do so by the whole body. This means nothing less than that he will
be forced to be free; for this is the condition which, by giving each
citizen to his country, secures him against all personal dependence. In
this lies the key to the working of the political machine; this alone
legitimizes civil undertakings, which, without it, would be absurd,
tyrannical, and liable to the most frightful abuses.




CHAPTER VIII

THE CIVIL STATE


The passage from the state of nature to the civil state produces a very
remarkable change in man, by substituting justice, for instinct in his
conduct, and giving his actions the morality they had formerly lacked.
Then only, when the voice of duty takes the place of physical impulses
and right of appetite, does _man_, who so far had considered only
himself, find that he is forced to act on different principles, and
to consult his reason before listening to his inclinations. Although,
in this state, he deprives himself of some advantages which he got
from nature, he gains in return others so great, his faculties are
so stimulated and developed, his ideas so extended, his feelings so
ennobled, and his whole soul so uplifted, that, did not the abuses of
this new condition often degrade him below that which he left, he would
be bound to bless continually the happy moment which took him from it
for ever, and, instead of a stupid and unimaginative animal, made him
an intelligent being and a man.

Let us draw up the whole account in terms easily commensurable.
What man loses by the social contract in his natural liberty and
an unlimited right to everything he tries to get and succeeds in
getting; what he gains is civil liberty and the proprietorship of all
he possesses. If we are to avoid mistake in weighing one against the
other, we must clearly distinguish natural liberty, which is bounded
only by the strength of the individual, from civil liberty, which is
limited by the general will; and possession, which is merely the effect
of force or the right of the first occupier, from property, which can
be founded only on a positive title.

We might, over and above all this, add, to what man acquires in the
civil state, moral liberty, which alone makes him truly master of
himself; for the mere impulse of appetite is slavery, while obedience
to a law which we prescribe to ourselves is liberty. But I have already
said too much on this head, and the philosophical meaning of the word
liberty does not now concern us.




CHAPTER IX

REAL PROPERTY


Each member of the community gives himself to it, at the moment of
its foundation, just as he is, with all the resources at his command,
including the goods he possesses. This act does not make possession, in
changing hands, change its nature, and becomes property in the hands
of the Sovereign; but, as the forces of the city are incomparably
greater than those of an individual, public possession is also, in
fact, stronger and more irrevocable, without being any more legitimate,
at any rate from the point of view of foreigners. For the State, in
relation to its members, is master of all their goods by the social
contract, which, within the State, is the basis of all rights; but,
in relation to other powers, it is so only by the right of the first
occupier, which it holds from its members.

The right of the first occupier, though more real than the right of the
strongest, becomes a real right only when the right of property has
already been established. Every man has naturally a right to everything
he needs; but the positive act which makes him proprietor of one thing
excludes him from everything else. Having his share, he ought to keep
to it, and can have no further right against the community. This is why
the right of the first occupier, which in the state of nature is so
weak, claims the respect of every man in civil society. In this right
we are respecting not so much what belongs to another as what does not
belong to ourselves.

In general, to establish the right of the first occupier over a plot of
ground, the following conditions are necessary: first, the land must
not yet be inhabited; secondly, a man must occupy only the amount he
needs for his subsistence; and, in the third place, possession must be
taken, not by an empty ceremony, but by labour and cultivation, the
only sign of proprietorship that should be respected by others, in
default of a legal title.

In granting the right of first occupancy to necessity and labour,
are we not really stretching it as far as it can go? Is it possible
to leave such a right unlimited? Is it to be enough to set foot on a
plot of common ground, in order to be able to call yourself at once
the master of it? Is it to be enough that a man has the strength to
expel others for a moment, in order to establish his right to prevent
them from ever returning? How can a man or a people seize an immense
territory and keep it from the rest of the world except by a punishable
usurpation, since all others are being robbed, by such an act, of
the place of habitation and the means of subsistence which nature
gave them in common? When Nuñez Balbao, standing on the sea-shore,
took possession of the South Seas and the whole of South America in
the name of the crown of Castille, was that enough to dispossess all
their actual inhabitants, and to shut out from them all the princes of
the world? On such a showing, these ceremonies are idly multiplied,
and the Catholic King need only take possession all at once, from
his apartment, of the whole universe, merely making a subsequent
reservation about what was already in the possession of other princes.

We can imagine how the lands of individuals, where they were contiguous
and came to be united, became the public territory, and how the right
of Sovereignty, extending from the subjects over the lands they held,
became at once real and personal. The possessors were thus made more
dependent, and the forces at their command used to guarantee their
fidelity. The advantage of this does not seem to have been felt
by ancient monarchs, who called themselves King of the Persians,
Scythians, or Macedonians, and seemed to regard themselves more as
rulers of men than as masters of a country. Those of the present
day more cleverly call themselves Kings of France, Spain, England,
etc.: thus holding the land, they are quite confident of holding the
inhabitants.

The peculiar fact about this alienation is that, in taking over the
goods of individuals, the community, so far from despoiling them, only
assures them legitimate possession, and changes usurpation into a true
right and enjoyment into proprietorship. Thus the possessors, being
regarded as depositaries of the public good, and having their rights,
respected by all the members of the State and maintained against
foreign aggression by all its forces, have, by a cession which benefits
both the public and still more themselves, acquired, so to speak,
all that they gave up. This paradox may easily be explained by the
distinction between the rights which the Sovereign and the proprietor
have over the same estate, as we shall see later on. It may also happen
that men begin to unite one with another before they possess anything,
and that, subsequently occupying a tract of country which is enough for
all, they enjoy it in common, or share it out among themselves, either
equally or according to a scale fixed by they Sovereign. However the
acquisition be made, the right which each individual has to his own
estate is always subordinate to the right which the community has over
all: without this, there would be neither stability in the social tie,
nor real force in the exercise of Sovereignty.

I shall end this chapter and this book by remarking on a fact on
which the whole social system should rest: _i.e._ that, instead of
destroying natural inequality, the fundamental compact substitutes,
for such physical inequality as nature may have set up between men, an
equality that is moral and legitimate, and that men, who may be unequal
in strength or intelligence, become every one equal by convention and
legal right.[1]
