BOOK II
(PART 1 OF 2)

CHAPTER I

THAT SOVEREIGNTY IS INALIENABLE


The first and most important deduction from the principles we have
so far laid down is that the general will alone can direct the State
according to the object for which it was instituted, _i.e._ the
common good: for if the clashing of particular interests made the
establishment of societies necessary, the agreement of these very
interests made it possible. The common element in these different
interests is what forms the social tie; and, were there no point of
agreement between them all, no society could exist. It is solely on the
basis of this common interest that every society should be governed.

I hold then that Sovereignty, being nothing less than the exercise of
the general will, can never be alienated, and that the Sovereign, who
is no less than a collective being, cannot be represented except by
himself: the power indeed may be transmitted, but not the will.

In reality, if it is not impossible for a particular will to agree on
some point with the general will, it is at least impossible for the
agreement to be lasting and constant; for the particular will tends,
by its very nature, to partiality, while the general will tends to
equality. It is even more impossible to have any guarantee of this
agreement; for even if it should always exist, it would be the effect
not of art, but of chance. The Sovereign may indeed say: "I now will
actually what this man wills, or at least what he says he wills"; but
it cannot say: "What he wills tomorrow, I too shall will" because it is
absurd for the will to bind itself for the future, nor is it incumbent
on any will to consent to anything that is not for the good of the
being who wills. If then the people promises simply to obey, by that
very act it dissolves itself and loses what makes it a people; the
moment a master exists, there is no longer a Sovereign, and from that
moment the body politic has ceased to exist.

This does not mean that the commands of the rulers cannot pass for
general wills, so long as the Sovereign, being free to oppose them,
offers no opposition. In such a case, universal silence is taken to
imply the consent of the people. This will be explained later on.


[1] Under bad governments, this equality is only apparent and illusory:
it serves only to keep the pauper in his poverty and the rich man in
the position he has usurped. In fact, laws are always of use to those
who possess and harmful to those who have nothing: from which it
follows that the social state is advantageous to men only when all have
something and none too much.



CHAPTER II

THAT SOVEREIGNTY IS INDIVISIBLE


Sovereignty, for the same reason as makes it inalienable, is
indivisible; for will either is, or is not, general;[1] it is the
will either of the body of the people, or only of a part of it. In
the first case, the will, when declared, is an act of Sovereignty and
constitutes law: in the second, it is merely a particular will, or act
of magistracy--at the most a decree.

But our political theorists, unable to divide Sovereignty in
principle, divide it according to its object: into force and will;
into legislative power and executive power; into rights of taxation,
justice and war; into internal administration and power of foreign
treaty. Sometimes they confuse all these sections, and sometimes they
distinguish them; they turn the Sovereign into a fantastic being
composed of several connected pieces: it is as if they were making man
of several bodies, one with eyes, one with arms, another with feet,
and each with nothing besides. We are told that the jugglers of Japan
dismember a child before the eyes of the spectators; then they throw
all the members into the air one after another, and the child falls
down alive and whole. The conjuring tricks of our political theorists
are very like that; they first dismember the body politic by an
illusion worthy of a fair, and then join it together again we know not
how.

This error is due to a lack of exact notions concerning the Sovereign
authority, and to taking for parts of it what are only emanations from
it. Thus, for example, the acts of declaring war and making peace have
been regarded as acts of Sovereignty; but this is not the case, as
these acts do not constitute law, but merely the application of a law,
a particular act which decides how the law applies, as we shall see
clearly when the idea attached to the word _law_ has been defined.

If we examined the other divisions in the same manner, we should find
that, whenever Sovereignty seems to be divided, there is an illusion:
the rights which are taken as being part of Sovereignty are really all
subordinate, and always imply supreme wills of which they only sanction
the execution.

It would be impossible to estimate the obscurity this lack of exactness
has thrown over the decisions of writers who have dealt with political
right, when they have used the principles laid down by them to pass
judgment on the respective rights of kings and peoples. Every one can
see, in Chapters III and IV of the First Book of Grotius, how the
learned man and his translator, Barbeyrac, entangle and tie themselves
up in their own sophistries, for fear of saying too little or too
much of what they think, and so offending the interests they have to
conciliate. Grotius, a refugee in France, ill-content with his own
country, and desirous of paying his court to Louis XIII, to whom his
book is dedicated, spares no pains to rob the peoples of all their
rights and invest kings with them by every conceivable artifice. This
would also have been much to the taste of Barbeyrac, who dedicated his
translation to George I of England. But unfortunately the expulsion
of James II, which he called his "abdication," compelled him to use
all reserve, to shuffle and to tergiversate, in order to avoid making
William out a usurper. If these two writers had adopted the true
principles, all difficulties would have been removed, and they would
have been always consistent; but it would have been a sad truth for
them to tell, and would have paid court for them to no-one save the
people. Moreover, truth is no road to fortune, and the people dispenses
neither ambassadorships, nor professorships, nor pensions.


[1] To be general, a will need not always be unanimous; but every
vote--must be counted: any exclusion is a breach of generality.




CHAPTER III

WHETHER THE GENERAL WILL IS FALLIBLE


It follows from what has gone before that the general will is always
right and tends to the public advantage; but it does not follow that
the deliberations of the people are always equally correct. Our will
is always for our own good, but we do not always see what that is;
the people is never corrupted, but it is often deceived, and on such
occasions only does it seem to will what is bad.

There is often a great deal of difference between the will of all and
the general will; the latter considers only the common interest, while
the former takes private interest into account, and is no more than a
sum of particular wills: but take away from these same wills the pluses
and minuses that cancel one another,[1] and the general will remains as
the sum of the differences.

If, when the people, being furnished with adequate information, held
its deliberations, the citizens had no communication one with another,
the grand total of the small differences would always give the general
will, and the decision would always be good. But when factions arise,
and partial associations are formed at the expense of the great
association, the will of each of these associations becomes general
in relation to its members, while it remains particular in relation
to the State: it may then be said that there are no longer as many
votes as there are men, but only as many as there are associations.
The differences become less numerous and give a less general result.
Lastly, when one of these associations is so great as to prevail over
all the rest, the result is no longer a sum of small differences, but a
single difference; in this case there is no longer a general will, and
the opinion which prevails is purely particular.

It is therefore essential, if the general will is to be able to express
itself, that there should be no partial society within the State,
and that each citizen should think only his own thoughts:[2] which
was indeed the sublime and unique system established by the great
Lycurgus. But if there are partial societies, it is best to have as
many as possible and to prevent them from being unequal, as was done by
Solon, Numa and Servius. These precautions are the only ones that can
guarantee that the general will shall be always enlightened, and that
the people shall in no way deceive itself.


[1] "Every interest," says the Marquis d'Argenson, "has different
principles. The agreement of two particular interests is formed by
opposition to a third." He might have added that the agreement of all
interests is formed by opposition to that of each. If there were no
different interests, the common interest would be barely felt, as it
would encounter no obstacle; all would go on of its own accord, and
politics would cease to be an art.

[2] "In fact," says Macchiavelli, "there are some divisions that are
harmful to a Republic and some that are advantageous. Those which
stir up sects and parties are harmful; those attended by neither are
advantageous. Since, then, the founder of a Republic cannot help
enmities arising, he ought at least to prevent them from growing into
sects" (_History of Florence,_ Book vii). Rousseau quotes the Italian.




CHAPTER IV

THE LIMITS OF THE SOVEREIGN POWER


If the State is a moral person whose life is in the union of its
members, and if the most important of its cares is the care for its
own preservation, it must have a universal and compelling force, in
order to move and dispose each part as may be most advantageous to the
whole. As nature gives each man absolute power over all his members,
the social compact gives the body politic absolute power over all its
members also; and it is this power which, under the direction of the
general will, bears, as I have said, the name of Sovereignty.

But, besides the public person, we have to consider the private persons
composing it, whose life and liberty are naturally independent of it.
We are bound then to distinguish clearly between the respective rights
of the citizens and the Sovereign,[1] and between the duties the former
have to fulfil as subjects, and the natural rights they should enjoy as
men.

Each man alienates, I admit, by the social compact, only such part of
his powers, goods and liberty as it is important for the community to
control; but it must also be granted that the Sovereign is sole judge
of what is important.

Every service a citizen can render the State he ought to render as soon
as the Sovereign demands it; but the Sovereign, for its part, cannot
impose upon its subjects any fetters that are useless to the community,
nor can it even wish to do so; for no more by the law of reason than by
the law of nature can anything occur without a cause.

The undertakings which bind us to the social body are obligatory only
because they are mutual; and their nature is such that in fulfilling
them we cannot work for others without working for ourselves. Why is it
that the general will is always in the right, and that all continually
will the happiness of each one, unless it is because there is not a
man who does not think of "each" as meaning him, and consider himself
in voting for all? This proves that equality of rights and the idea
of justice which such equality creates originate in the preference
each man gives to himself, and accordingly in the very nature of man.
It proves that the general will, to be really such, must be general
in its object as well as its essence; that it must both come from all
and apply to all; and that it loses its natural rectitude when it is
directed to some particular and determinate object, because in such
a case we are judging of something foreign to us, and have no true
principle of equity to guide us.

Indeed, as soon as a question of particular fact or right arises on
a point not previously regulated by a general convention, the matter
becomes contentious. It is a case in which the individuals concerned
are one party, and the public the other, but in which I can see neither
the law that ought to be followed nor the judge who ought to give the
decision. In such a case, it would be absurd to propose to refer the
question to an express decision of the general will, which can be
only the conclusion reached by one of the parties and in consequence
will be, for the other party, merely an external and particular will,
inclined on this occasion to injustice and subject to error. Thus, just
as a particular will cannot stand for the general will, the general
will, in turn, changes its nature, when its object is particular, and,
as general, cannot pronounce on a man or a fact. When, for instance,
the people of Athens nominated or displaced its rulers, decreed
honours to one, and imposed penalties on another, and, by a multitude
of particular decrees, exercised all the functions of government
indiscriminately, it had in such cases no longer a general will in the
strict sense; it was acting no longer as Sovereign, but as magistrate.
This will seem contrary to current views; but I must be given time to
expound my own.

It should be seen from the foregoing that what makes the will general
is less the number of voters than the common interest uniting them;
for under this system, each necessarily submits to the conditions he
imposes on others; and this admirable agreement between interest and
justice gives to the common deliberations an equitable character which
at once vanishes when any particular question is discussed, in the
absence of a common interest to unite and identify the ruling of the
judge with that of the party.

From whatever side we approach our principle, we reach the same
conclusion, that the social compact sets up among the citizens an
equality of such a kind, that they all bind themselves to observe the
same conditions and should therefore all enjoy the same rights. Thus,
from the very nature of the compact, every "act of Sovereignty", _i.e._
every authentic act of the general will, binds or favours all the
citizens equally; so that the Sovereign recognises only the body of the
nation, and draws no distinctions between those of whom it is made up.
What, then, strictly speaking is an act of Sovereignty? It is not a
convention between a superior and an inferior, but a convention between
the body and each of its members. It is legitimate, because based on
the social contract, and, equitable, because common to all; useful,
because it can have no other object than the general good, and stable,
because guaranteed by the public force and the supreme power. So long
as the subjects have to submit only to conventions of this sort, they
obey no-one but their own will; and to ask how far the respective
rights of the Sovereign and the citizens extend, is to ask up to what
point the latter can enter into undertakings with themselves, each with
all, and all with each.

We can see from this that the sovereign power, absolute, sacred and
inviolable as it is, does not and cannot exceed the limits of general
conventions, and that every man may dispose at will of such goods and
liberty as these conventions leave him; so that the Sovereign never has
a right to lay more charges on one subject than on another, because, in
that case, the question becomes particular, and ceases to be within its
competency.

When these distinctions have once been admitted, it is seen to be so
untrue that there is, in the social contract, any real renunciation
on the part of the individuals, that the position in which they find
themselves as a result of the contract is really preferable to that in
which they were before. Instead of a renunciation, they have made an
advantageous exchange: instead of an uncertain and precarious way of
living they have got one that is better and more secure; instead of
natural independence they have got liberty, instead of the power to
harm others security for themselves, and instead of their strength,
which others might overcome, a right which social union makes
invincible. Their very life, which they have devoted to the State,
is by it constantly protected; and when they risk it in the State's
defence, what more are they doing than giving back what they have
received from it? What are they doing that they would not do more often
and with greater danger in the state of nature, in which they would
inevitably have to fight battles at the peril of their lives in defence
of that which is the means of their preservation? All have indeed to
fight when their country needs them; but then no one has ever to fight
for himself. Do we not gain something by running, on behalf of what
gives us our security, only some of the risks we should have to run for
ourselves, as soon as we lost it?


[1] Attentive readers, do not, I pray, be in a hurry to charge me with
contradicting myself. The terminology made it unavoidable, considering
the poverty of the language; but wait and see.




CHAPTER V

THE RIGHT OF LIFE AND DEATH


The question is often asked how individuals, having no right to dispose
of their own lives, can transfer to the Sovereign a right which they
do not possess. The difficulty of answering this question seems to me
to lie in its being wrongly stated. Every man has a right to risk his
own life in order to preserve it. Has it ever, been said that a man
who throws himself out of the window to escape from a fire is guilty
of suicide? Has such a crime ever been laid to the charge of him who
perishes in a storm because, when he went on board, he knew of the
danger?

The social treaty has for its end the preservation of the contracting
parties. He who wills the end wills the means also, and the means must
involve some risks, and even some losses. He who wishes to preserve
his life at others expense should also, when it is necessary, be
ready to give it up for their sake. Furthermore, the citizen is no
longer the judge of the dangers to which the law desires him to expose
himself; and when the prince says to him: "It is expedient for the
State that you should die," he ought to die, because it is only on that
condition that he has been living in security up to the present, and
because his life is no longer a mere bounty of nature, but a gift made
conditionally by the State.

The death-penalty inflicted upon criminals may be looked on in much the
same light: it is in order that we may not fall victims to an assassin
that we consent to die if we ourselves turn assassins. In this treaty,
so far from disposing of our own lives, we think only of securing
them, and it is not to be assumed that any of the parties then expects
to get hanged.

Again, every malefactor, by attacking social rights, becomes on forfeit
a rebel and a traitor to his country; by violating its laws he ceases
to be a member of it; he even makes war upon it. In such a case the
preservation of the State is inconsistent with his own, and one or the
other must perish; in putting the guilty to death, we slay not so much
the citizen as an enemy. The trial and the judgment are the proofs
that he has broken the social treaty, and is in consequence no longer
a member of the State. Since, then, he has recognised himself to be
such by living there, he must be removed by exile as a violator of the
compact, or by death as a public enemy; for such an enemy is not a
moral person, but merely a man; and in such a case the right of war is
to kill the vanquished.

But, it will be said, the condemnation of a criminal is a particular
act. I admit it: but such condemnation is not a function of the
Sovereign; it is a right the Sovereign can confer without being able
itself to exert it. All my ideas are consistent, but I cannot expound
them all at once.

We may add that frequent punishments are always a sign of weakness
or remissness on the part of the government. There is not a single
ill-doer who could not be turned to some good. The State has no right
to put to death, even for the sake of making an example, any one whom
it can leave alive without danger.

The right of pardoning or exempting the guilty from a penalty imposed
by the law and pronounced by the judge belongs only to the authority
which is superior to both judge and law, _i.e._ the Sovereign;
even its right in this matter is far from clear, and the cases for
exercising it are extremely rare. In a well-governed State, there
are few punishments, not because there are many pardons, but because
criminals are rare; it is when a State is in decay that the multitude
of crimes is a guarantee of impunity. Under the Roman Republic, neither
the Senate nor the Consuls ever attempted to pardon; even the people
never did so, though it sometimes revoked its own decision. Frequent
pardons mean that crime will soon need them no longer, and no-one can
help seeing whither that leads. But I feel my heart protesting and
restraining my pen; let us leave these questions to the just man who
has never offended, and would himself stand in no need of pardon.




CHAPTER VI

LAW


By the social compact we have given the body politic existence and
life: we have now by legislation to give it movement and will. For the
original act by which the body is formed and united still in no respect
determines what it ought to do for its preservation.

What is well and in conformity with order is so by the nature of
things and independently of human conventions. All justice comes from
God, who is its sole source; but if we knew how to receive so high an
inspiration, we should need neither government nor laws. Doubtless,
there is a universal justice emanating from reason alone; but this
justice, to be admitted among us, must be mutual. Humanly speaking, in
default of natural sanctions, the laws of justice are ineffective among
men: they merely make for the good of the wicked and the undoing of
the just, when the just man observes them towards everybody and nobody
observes them towards him. Conventions and laws are therefore needed to
join rights to duties and refer justice to its object. In the state of
nature, where everything is common, I owe nothing to him whom I nave
promised nothing; I recognise as belonging to others only what is of no
use to me. In the state of society all rights are fixed by law, and the
case becomes different.

But what, after all, is a law? As long as we remain satisfied with
attaching purely metaphysical ideas to the word, we shall go on arguing
without arriving at an understanding; and when we have defined a law of
nature, we shall be no nearer the definition of a law of the State.

I have already said that there can be no general will directed to a
particular object. Such an object must be either within or outside the
State. If outside, a will which is alien to it cannot be, in relation
to it, general; if within, it is part of the State, and in that case
there arises a relation between whole and part which makes them two
separate beings, of which the part is one, and the whole minus the part
the other. But the whole minus a part cannot be the whole; and while
this relation persists, there can be no whole, but only two unequal
parts; and it follows that the will of one is no longer in any respect
general in relation to the other.

But when the whole people decrees for the whole people, it is
considering only itself; and if a relation is then formed, it is
between two aspects of the entire object, without there being any
division of the whole. In that case the matter about which the decree
is made is, like the decreeing will general. This act is what I call a
law.

When I say that the object of laws is always general, I mean that
law considers subjects _en masse_ and actions in the abstract, and
never a particular person or action. Thus the law may indeed decree
that there shall be privileges, but cannot confer them on anybody by
name. It may set up several classes of citizens, and even lay down
the qualifications for membership of these classes, but it cannot
nominate such and such persons as belonging to them; it may establish a
monarchical government and hereditary succession, but it cannot choose
a king, or nominate a royal family. In a word, no function which has a
particular object belongs to the legislative power.

On this view, we at once see that it can no longer be asked whose
business it is to make laws, since they are acts of the general will:
nor whether the prince is above the law, since he is a member of the
State; nor whether the law can be unjust, since no one is unjust to
himself; nor how we can be both free and subject to the laws since they
are but registers of our wills.

We see further that, as the law unites universality of will with
universality of object, what a man, whoever he be, commands of his
own motion cannot be a law; and even what the Sovereign commands with
regard to a particular matter is no nearer being a law, but is a
decree, an act, not of sovereignty, but of magistracy.

I therefore give the name 'Republic' to every State that is governed by
laws, no matter what the form of its administration may be: for only
in such a case does the public interest govern, and the _res publica_
rank as a _reality_. Every legitimate government is republican;[1] what
government is I will explain later on.

Laws are, properly speaking, only the conditions of civil association.
The people, being subject to the laws, ought to be their author:
the conditions of the society ought to be regulated solely by those
who come together to form it. But how are they to regulate them? Is
it to be by common agreement, by a sudden inspiration? Has the body
politic an organ to declare its will? Who can give it the foresight to
formulate and announce its acts in advance? Or how is it to announce
them in the hour of need? How can a blind multitude, which often does
not know what it wills, because it rarely knows what is good for it,
carry out for itself so great and difficult an enterprise as a system
of legislation? Of itself the people wills always the good, but of
itself it by no means always sees it. The general will is always in
the right, but the judgment which guides it is not always enlightened.
It must be got to see objects as they are, and sometimes as they ought
to appear to it; it must be shown the good road it is in search of,
secured from the seductive influences of individual wills, taught to
see times and spaces as a series, and made to weigh the attractions
of present and sensible advantages against the danger of distant and
hidden evils. The individuals see the good they reject; the public
wills the good it does not see. All stand equally in need of guidance.
The former must be compelled to bring their wills into conformity with
their reason; the latter must be taught to know what it wills. If that
is done, public enlightenment leads to the union of understanding and
will in the social body: the parts are made to work exactly together,
and the whole is raised to its highest power. This makes a legislator
necessary.


[1] I understand by this word, not merely an aristocracy or a
democracy, but generally any government directed by the general will,
which is the law. To be legitimate, the government must be, not one
with the Sovereign, but its minister. In such a case even a monarchy is
a Republic. This will be made clearer in the following book.




CHAPTER VII

THE LEGISLATOR


In order to discover the rules of society best suited to nations,
a superior intelligence beholding all the passions of men without
experiencing any of them would be needed. This intelligence would have
to be wholly unrelated to our nature, while knowing it through and
through; its happiness would have to be independent of us, and yet
ready to occupy itself with ours; and lastly, it would have, in the
march of time, to look forward to a distant glory, and, working in one
century, to be able to enjoy in the next.[1] It would take gods to give
men laws.

What Caligula argued from the facts, Plato, in the dialogue called the
_Politicus_, argued in defining the civil or kingly man, on the basis
of right. But if great princes are rare, how much more so are great
legislators? The former have only to follow the pattern which the
latter have to lay down. The legislator is the engineer who invents
the machine, the prince merely the mechanic who sets it up and makes
it go. "At the birth of societies," says Montesquieu, "the rulers of
Republics establish institutions, and afterwards the institutions mould
the rulers."[2]
