BOOK II
(PART 2 OF 2)

He who dares to undertake the making of a people's institutions ought
to feel himself capable, so to speak, of changing human nature, of
transforming each individual, who is by himself a complete and solitary
whole, into part of a greater whole from which he in a manner receives
his life and being; of altering man's constitution for the purpose of
strengthening it; and of substituting a partial and moral existence
for the physical and independent existence nature has conferred on
us all. He must, in a word, take away from man his own resources and
give him instead new ones alien to him, and incapable of being made
use of without the help of other men. The more completely these
natural resources are annihilated, the greater and the more lasting
are those which he acquires, and the more stable and perfect the new
institutions; so that if each citizen is nothing and can do nothing
without the rest, and the resources acquired by the whole are equal
or superior to the aggregate of the resources of all the individuals,
it may be said that legislation is at the highest possible point of
perfection.

The legislator occupies in every respect an extraordinary position
in the State. If he should do so by reason of his genius, he does so
no less by reason of his office, which is neither magistracy, nor
Sovereignty. This office, which sets up the Republic, nowhere enters
into its constitution; it is an individual and superior function, which
has nothing in common with human empire; for if he who holds command
over men ought not to have command over the laws, he who has command
over the laws ought not any more to have it over men; or else his laws
would be the ministers of his passions and would often merely serve to
perpetuate his injustices: his private aims would inevitably mar the
sanctity of his work.

When Lycurgus gave laws to his country, he began by resigning
the throne. It was the custom of most Greek towns to entrust the
establishment of their laws to foreigners. The Republics of modern
Italy in many cases followed this example; Geneva did the same and
profited by it.[3] Rome, when it was most prosperous, suffered a
revival of all the crimes of tyranny, and was brought to the verge of
destruction, because it put the legislative authority and the sovereign
power into the same hands.

Nevertheless, the decemvirs themselves never claimed the right to pass
any law merely on their own authority. "Nothing we propose to you,"
they said to the people, "can pass into law without your consent.
Romans, be yourselves the authors of the laws which are to make you
happy."

He, therefore, who draws up the laws has, or should have, no right of
legislation, and the people cannot, even if it wishes, deprive itself
of this incommunicable right, because, according to the fundamental
compact, only the general will can bind the individuals, and there
can be no assurance that a particular will is in conformity with the
general will, until it has been put to the free vote of the people.
This I have said already; but it is worth while to repeat it.

Thus in the task of legislation we find together two things which
appear to be incompatible: an enterprise too difficult for human
powers, and, for its execution, an authority that is no authority.

There is a further difficulty that deserves attention. Wise men, if
they try to speak their language to the common herd instead of its
own, cannot possibly make themselves understood. There are a thousand
kinds of ideas which it is impossible to translate into popular
language. Conceptions that are too general and objects that are too
remote are equally out of its range: each individual, having no taste
for any other plan of government than that which suits his particular
interest, finds it difficult to realise the advantages he might hope
to draw from the continual privations good laws impose. For a young
people to be able to relish sound principles of political theory and
follow the fundamental rules of statecraft, the effect would have to
become the cause; the social spirit, which should be created by these
institutions, would have to preside over their very foundation; and men
would have to be before law what they should become by means of law.
The legislator therefore, being unable to appeal to either force or
reason, must have recourse to an authority of a different order capable
of constraining without violence and persuading without convincing.

This is what has, in all ages, compelled the fathers of nations to
have recourse to divine intervention and credit the gods with their
own wisdom, in order that the peoples, submitting to the laws of the
State as to those of nature, and recognising the same power in the
formation of the city as in that of man, might obey freely, and bear
with docility the yoke of the public happiness.

This sublime reason, far above the range of the common herd, is that
whose decisions the legislator puts into the mouth of the immortals,
in order to constrain by divine authority those whom human prudence
could not move.[4] But it is not anybody who can make the gods speak,
or get himself believed when he proclaims himself their interpreter.
The great soul of the legislator is the only miracle that can prove
his mission. Any man may grave tablets of stone, or buy an oracle; or
feign secret intercourse with some divinity, or train a bird to whisper
in his ear, or find other vulgar ways of imposing on the people. He
whose knowledge goes no further may perhaps gather round him a band of
fools; but he will never found an empire, and his extravagances will
quickly perish with him. Idle tricks form a passing tie; only wisdom
can make it lasting. The Judaic law, which still subsists, and that
of the child of Ishmael, which, for ten centuries, has ruled half the
world, still proclaim the great men who laid them down; and, while the
pride of philosophy or the blind spirit of faction sees in them no more
than lucky impostures, the true political theorist admires, in the
institutions they set up, the great and powerful genius which presides
over things made to endure.

We should not, with Warburton, conclude from this that politics and
religion have among us a common object, but that, in the first periods
of nations, the one is used as an instrument for the other.


[1] A people becomes famous only when its legislation begins to
decline. We do not know for how many centuries the system of Lycurgus
made the Spartans happy before the rest of Greece took any notice of it.

[2] Montesquieu, _The Greatness and Decadence of the Romans_, ch. i.

[3] Those who know Calvin only as a theologian much underestimate the
extent of his genius. The codification of our wise edicts, in which
he played a large part, does him no less honour than his _Institute_.
Whatever revolution time may bring in our religion, so long as the
spirit of patriotism and liberty still lives among us, the memory of
this great man will be for ever blessed.

[4] "In truth," says Macchiavelli, "there has never been, in any
country, an extraordinary legislator who has not had recourse to God;
for otherwise his laws would not have been accepted: there are, in
fact, many useful truths of which a wise man may have knowledge without
their having in themselves such clear reasons for their being so as
to be able to convince others" (_Discourses on Livy_, Bk. v, ch. xi).
(Rousseau quotes the Italian.)




CHAPTER VIII

THE PEOPLE


As, before putting up a large building, the architect surveys and
sounds the site to see if it will bear the weight, the wise legislator
does not begin by laying down laws good in themselves, but by
investigating the fitness of the people, for which they are destined,
to receive them. Plato refused to legislate for the Arcadians and the
Cyrenæans, because he knew that both peoples were rich and could not
put up with equality; and good laws and bad men were found together
in Crete, because Minos had inflicted discipline on a people already
burdened with vice.

A thousand nations have achieved earthly greatness, that could never
have endured good laws; even such as could have endured them could
have done so only for a very brief period of their long history. Most
peoples, like most men, are docile only in youth; as they grow old they
become incorrigible. When once customs have become established and
prejudices inveterate, it is dangerous and useless to attempt their
reformation; the people, like the foolish and cowardly patients who
rave at sight of the doctor, can no longer bear that any one should lay
hands on its faults to remedy them.

There are indeed times in the history of States when, just as some
kinds of illness turn men's heads and make them forget the past,
periods of violence and revolutions do to peoples what these crises do
to individuals: horror of the past takes the place of forgetfulness,
and the State, set on fire by civil wars, is born again, so to speak,
from its ashes, and takes on anew, fresh from the jaws of death, the
vigour of youth. Such were Sparta at the time of Lycurgus, Rome after
the Tarquins, and, in modern times, Holland and Switzerland after the
expulsion of the tyrants.

But such events are rare; they are exceptions, the cause of which
is always to be found in the particular constitution of the State
concerned. They cannot even happen twice to the same people, for it
can make itself free as long as it remains barbarous, but not when the
civic impulse has lost its vigour. Then disturbances may destroy it,
but revolutions cannot mend it: it needs a master, and not a liberator.
Free peoples, be mindful of maxim; "Liberty may be gained, but can
never be recovered."

Youth is not infancy. There is for nations, as for men, a period of
youth, or, shall we say, maturity, before which they should not be
made subject to laws; but the maturity of a people is not always
easily recognisable, and, if it is anticipated, the work is spoilt.
One people is amenable to discipline from the beginning; another, not
after ten centuries. Russia will never be really civilised, because
it was civilised too soon. Peter had a genius for imitation; but he
lacked true genius, which is creative and makes all from nothing. He
did some good things, but most of what he did was out of place. He
saw that his people was barbarous, but did not see that it was not
ripe for civilisation: he wanted to civilise it when it needed only
hardening. His first wish was to make Germans or Englishmen, when he
ought to have been making Russians; and he prevented his subjects from
ever becoming what they might have been by persuading them that they
were what they are not. In this fashion too a French teacher turns out
his pupil to be an infant prodigy, and for the rest of his life to be
nothing whatsoever. The empire of Russia will aspire to conquer Europe,
and will itself be conquered. The Tartars, its subjects or neighbours,
will become its masters and ours, by a revolution which I regard as
inevitable. Indeed, all the kings of Europe are working in concert to
hasten its coming.




CHAPTER IX

THE PEOPLE (_continued_)


As nature has set bounds to the stature of a well-made man, and,
outside those limits, makes nothing but giants or dwarfs, similarly,
for the constitution of a State to be at its best, it is possible to
fix limits that will make it neither too large for good government,
nor too small for self-maintenance. In every body politic there is
a _maximum_ strength which it cannot exceed and which it only loses
by increasing in size. Every extension of the social tie means its
relaxation; and, generally speaking, a small State is stronger in
proportion than a great one.

A thousand arguments could be advanced in favour of this principle.
First, long distances make administration more difficult, just as a
weight becomes heavier at the end of a longer lever. Administration
therefore becomes more and more burdensome as the distance grows
greater; for, in the first place, each city has its own, which is
paid for by the people: each district its own, still paid for by the
people: then comes each province, and then the great governments,
satrapies, and vice-royalties, always costing more the higher you go,
and always at the expense of the unfortunate people. Last of all comes
the supreme administration, which eclipses all the rest. All these
overcharges are a continual drain upon the subjects; so far from being
better governed by all these different orders, they are worse governed
than if there were only a single authority over them. In the meantime,
there scarce remain resources enough to meet emergencies; and, when
recourse must be had to these, the State is always on the eve of
destruction.

This is not all; not only has the government less vigour and
promptitude for securing the observance of the laws, preventing
nuisances, correcting abuses, and guarding against seditious
undertakings begun in distant places; the people has less affection for
its rulers, whom it never sees, for its country, which, to its eyes,
seems like the world, and for its fellow-citizens, most of whom are
unknown to it. The same laws cannot suit so many diverse provinces with
different customs, situated in the most various climates, and incapable
of enduring a uniform government. Different laws lead only to trouble
and confusion among peoples which, living under the same rulers and in
constant communication one with another, intermingle and intermarry,
and, coming under the sway of new customs, never know if they can call
their very patrimony their own. Talent is buried, virtue unknown and
vice unpunished, among such a multitude of men who do not know one
another, gathered together in one place at the seat of the central
administration. The leaders, overwhelmed with business, see nothing
for themselves; the State is governed by clerks. Finally, the measures
which have to be taken to, maintain the general authority, which all
these distant officials wish to escape or to impose upon, absorb all
the energy of the public, so that there is none left for the happiness
of the people. There is hardly enough to defend it when need arises,
and thus a body which is too big for its constitution gives way and
falls crushed under its own weight.

Again, the State must assure itself a safe foundation, if it is to
have stability, and to be able to resist the shocks it cannot help
experiencing, as well as the efforts it will be forced to make for
its maintenance; for all peoples have a kind of centrifugal force
that makes them continually act one against another, and tend to
aggrandise themselves at their neighbours' expense, like the vortices
of Descartes. Thus the weak run the risk of being soon swallowed up;
and it is almost impossible for any one to preserve itself except by
putting itself in a state of equilibrium with all, so that the pressure
is on all sides practically equal.

It may therefore be seen that there are reasons for expansion and
reasons for contraction; and it is no small part of the statesman's
skill to hit between them the mean that is most favourable to the
preservation of the State. It may be said that the reason for
expansion, being merely external and relative, ought to be subordinate
to the reasons for contraction, which are internal and absolute. A
strong and healthy constitution is the first thing to look for; and it
is better to count on the vigour which comes of good government than on
the resources a great territory furnishes.

It may be added that there have been known States so constituted that
the necessity of making conquests entered into their very constitution,
and that, in order to maintain themselves, they were forced to expand
ceaselessly. It may be that they congratulated themselves greatly on
this fortunate necessity, which none the less indicated to them, along
with the limits of their greatness, the inevitable moment of their fall.




CHAPTER X

THE PEOPLE (_continued_)


A body politic may be measured in two ways--either by the extent of its
territory, or by the number of its people; and there is, between these
two measurements, a right relation which makes the State really great.
The men make the State, and the territory sustains the men; the right
relation therefore is that the land should suffice for the maintenance
of the inhabitants, and that there should be as many inhabitants as
the land can maintain. In this proportion lies the _maximum_ strength
of a given number of people; for if there is too much land, it is
troublesome to guard and inadequately cultivated, produces more than is
needed, and soon gives rise to wars of defence; if there is not enough,
the State depends on its neighbours for what it needs over and above,
and this soon gives rise to wars of offence. Every people, to which
its situation gives no choice save that between commerce and war, is
weak in itself: it depends on its neighbours, and on circumstances;
its existence can never be more than short and uncertain. It either
conquers others, and changes its situation, or it is conquered and
becomes nothing. Only insignificance or greatness can keep it free.

No fixed relation can be stated between the extent of the territory
and the population that are adequate one to the other, both because
of the differences in the quality of land, in its fertility, in the
nature of its products, and in the influence of climate, and because of
the different tempers of those who inhabit it; for some in a fertile
country consume little, and others on an ungrateful soil much. The
greater or less fecundity of women, the conditions that are more or
less favourable in each country to the growth of population, and the
influence the legislator can hope to exercise by his institutions, must
also be taken into account. The legislator therefore should not go
by what he sees, but by what he foresees; he should stop not so much
at the state in which he actually finds the population, as at that
to which it ought naturally to attain. Lastly, there are countless
cases in which the particular local circumstances demand or allow
the acquisition of a greater territory than seems necessary. Thus,
expansion will be great in a mountainous country, where the natural
products, _i.e._ woods and pastures, need less labour, where we know
from experience that women are more fertile than in the plains, and
where a great expanse of slope affords only a small level tract that
can be counted on for vegetation. On the other hand, contraction is
possible on the coast, even in lands of rocks and nearly barren sands,
because there fishing makes up to a great extent for the lack of
land-produce, because the inhabitants have to congregate together more
in order to repel pirates, and further because it is easier to unburden
the country of its superfluous inhabitants by means of colonies.

To these conditions of law-giving must be added one other which,
though it cannot take the place of the rest, renders them all useless
when it is absent. This is the enjoyment of peace and plenty; for the
moment at which a State sets its house in order is, like the moment
when a battalion is forming up, that when its body is least capable of
offering resistance and easiest to destroy. A better resistance could
be made at a time of absolute disorganisation than at a moment of
fermentation, when each is occupied with his own position and not with
the danger. If war, famine, or sedition arises at this time of crisis,
the State will inevitably be overthrown.

Not that many governments have not been set up during such storms; but
in such cases these governments are themselves the State's destroyers.
Usurpers always bring about or select troublous times to get passed,
under cover of the public terror, destructive laws, which the people
would never adopt in cold blood. The moment chosen is one of the surest
means of distinguishing the work of the legislator from that of the
tyrant.

What people, then, is a fit subject for legislation? One which,
already bound by some unity of origin, interest, or convention, has
never yet felt the real yoke of law; one that has neither customs nor
superstitions deeply ingrained, one which stands in no fear of being
overwhelmed by sudden invasion; one which, without entering into its
neighbours' quarrels, can resist each of them single-handed, or get the
help of one to repel another; one in which every member may be known by
every other, and there is no need to lay on any man burdens too heavy
for a man to bear; one which can do without other peoples, and without
which all others can do;[1] one which is neither rich nor poor, but
self-sufficient; and, lastly, one which unites the consistency of an
ancient people with the docility of a new one. Legislation is made
difficult less by what it is necessary to build up than by what has to
be destroyed; and what makes success so rare is the impossibility of
finding natural simplicity together with social requirements. All these
conditions are indeed rarely found united, and therefore few States
have good constitutions.

There is still in Europe one country capable of being given
laws--Corsica. The valour and persistency with which that brave people
has regained and defended its liberty well deserves that some wise man
should teach it how to preserve what it has won. I have a feeling that
some day that little island will astonish Europe.


[1] If there were two neighbouring peoples, one of which could not
do without the other, it would be very hard on the former, and very
dangerous for the latter. Every wise nation, in such a case, would make
haste to free the other from dependence. The Republic of Thlascala,
enclosed by the Mexican Empire, preferred doing without salt to
buying from the Mexicans, or even getting it from them as a gift
The Thlascalans were wise enough to see the snare hidden under such
liberality. They kept their freedom, and that little State, shut up in
that great Empire, was finally the instrument of its ruin.




CHAPTER XI

THE VARIOUS SYSTEMS OF LEGISLATION


If we ask in what precisely consists the greatest good of all, which
should be the end of every system of legislation, we shall find it
reduce itself to two main objects, liberty and equality--liberty,
because all particular dependence means so much force taken from the
body of the State, and equality, because liberty cannot exist without
it.

I have already defined civil liberty; by equality, we should
understand, not that the degrees of power and riches are to be
absolutely identical for everybody; but that power shall never be
great enough for violence, and shall always be exercised by virtue of
rank and law; and that, in respect of riches, no citizen shall ever be
wealthy enough to buy another, and none poor enough to be forced to
sell himself:[1] which implies, on the part of the great, moderation
in goods and position, and, on the side of the common sort, moderation
in avarice and covetousness.

Such equality, we are told, is an unpractical ideal that cannot
actually exist. But if its abuse is inevitable, does it follow that we
should not at least make regulations concerning it? It is precisely
because the force of circumstances tends continually to destroy
equality that the force of legislation should always tend to its
maintenance.

But these general objects of every good legislative system need
modifying in every country in accordance with the local situation
and the temper of the inhabitants; and these circumstances should
determine, in each case, the particular system of institutions which
is best, not perhaps in itself, but for the State for which it is
destined. If, for instance, the soil is barren and unproductive, or
the land too crowded for its inhabitants, the people should turn
to industry and the crafts, and exchange what they produce for the
commodities they lack. If, on the other hand, a people dwells in rich
plains and fertile slopes, or, in a good land, lacks inhabitants, it
should give all its attention to agriculture, which causes men to
multiply, and should drive out the crafts, which would only result in
depopulation, by grouping in a few localities the few inhabitants there
are.[2] If a nation dwells on an extensive and convenient coast-line,
let it cover the sea with ships and foster commerce and navigation. It
will have a life that will be short and glorious. If, on its coasts,
the sea washes nothing but almost inaccessible rocks, let it remain
barbarous and ichthyophagous: it will have a quieter, perhaps a better,
and certainly a happier life. In a word, besides the principles that
are common to all, every nation has in itself something that gives them
a particular application, and makes its legislation peculiarly its own.
Thus, among the Jews long ago and more recently among the Arabs, the
chief object was religion, among the Athenians letters, at Carthage and
Tyre commerce, at Rhodes shipping, at Sparta war, at Rome virtue. The
author of _The Spirit of the Laws_ has shown with many examples by
what art the legislator directs the constitution towards each of these
objects.

What makes the constitution of a State really solid and lasting is
the due observance of what is proper, so that the natural relations
are always in agreement with the laws on every point, and law only
serves, so to speak, to assure, accompany and rectify them. But if
the legislator mistakes his object and adopts a principle other than
circumstances naturally direct; if his principle makes for servitude
while they make for liberty, or if it makes for riches, while they
make for populousness, or if it makes for peace, while they make
for conquest--the laws will insensibly lose their influence, the
constitution will alter, and the State will have no rest from trouble
till it is either destroyed or changed, and nature has resumed her
invincible sway.


[1] If the object is to give the State consistency, bring the two
extremes as near to each other as possible; allow neither rich men
nor beggars. These two estates, which are naturally inseparable, are
equally fatal to the common good; from the one come the friends of
tyranny, and from the other tyrants. It is always between them that
public liberty is put up to auction; the one buys, and the other sells.

[2] "Any branch of foreign commerce," says M. d'Argenson, "creates on
the whole only apparent advantage for the kingdom in general; it may
enrich some individuals, or even some towns; but the nation as a whole
gains nothing by it, and the people is no better off."




CHAPTER XII

THE DIVISION OF THE LAWS


If the whole is to be set in order, and the commonwealth put into the
best possible shape, there are various relations to be considered.
First, there is the action of the complete body upon itself, the
relation of the whole to the whole, of the Sovereign to the State; and
this relation, as we shall see, is made up of the relations of the
intermediate terms.

The laws which regulate this relation bear the name of political laws,
and are also called fundamental laws, not without reason if they are
wise. For, if there is, in each State, only one good system, the
people that is in possession of it should hold fast to this; but if
the established order is bad, why should laws that prevent men from
being good be regarded as fundamental? Besides, in any case, a people
is always in a position to change its laws, however good; for, if it
choose to do itself harm, who can have a right to stop it?

The second relation is that of the members one to another, or to the
body as a whole; and this relation should be in the first respect as
unimportant, and in the second as important, as possible. Each citizen
would then be perfectly independent of all the rest, and at the same
time very dependent on the city; which is brought about always by the
same means, as the strength of the State can alone secure the liberty
of its members. From this second relation arise civil laws.

We may consider also a third kind of relation between the individual
and the law, a relation of disobedience to its penalty. This gives
rise to the setting up of criminal laws, which, at bottom, are less a
particular class of law than the sanction behind all the rest.

Along with these three kinds of law goes a fourth, most important of
all, which is not graven on tablets of marble or brass, but on the
hearts of the citizens. This forms the real constitution of the State,
takes on every day new powers, when other laws decay or die out,
restores them or takes their place, keeps a people in the ways in which
it was meant to go, and insensibly replaces authority by the force
of habit. I am speaking of morality, of custom, above all of public
opinion; a power unknown to political thinkers, on which none the less
success in everything else depends. With this the great legislator
concerns himself in secret, though he seems to confine himself to
particular regulations; for these are only the arc of the arch, while
manners and morals, slower to arise, form in the end its immovable
keystone.

Among the different classes of laws, the political, which determine the
form of the government, are alone relevant to my subject.
