BOOK III
(PART 1 OF 3)

Before speaking of the different forms of government, let us try to
fix the exact sense of the word, which has not yet been very clearly
explained.




CHAPTER I

GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL


I warn the reader that this chapter requires careful reading, and that
I am unable to make myself clear to those who refuse to be attentive.

Every free action is produced by the concurrence of two causes; one
moral, _i.e._ the will which determines the act; the other physical,
_i.e._ the power which executes it. When I walk towards an object, it
is necessary first that I should will to go there, and, in the second
place, that my feet should carry me. If a paralytic wills to run and
an active man wills not to, they will both stay where they are. The
body politic has the same motive powers; here too force and will are
distinguished, will under the name of legislative power and force under
that of executive power. Without their concurrence, nothing is, or
should be, done.

We have seen that the legislative power belongs to the people, and can
belong to it alone. It may, on the other hand, readily be seen, from
the principles laid down above, that the executive power cannot belong
to the generality as legislature or Sovereign, because it consists
wholly of particular acts which fall outside the competency of the law,
and consequently of the Sovereign, whose acts must always be laws.

The public force therefore needs an agent of its own to bind it
together and set it to work under the direction of the general will, to
serve as a means of communication between the State and the Sovereign,
and to do for the collective person more or less what the union of soul
and body does for man. Here we have what is, in the State, the basis of
government, often wrongly confused with the Sovereign, whose minister
it is.

What then is government? An intermediate body set up between the
subjects and the Sovereign, to secure their mutual correspondence,
charged with the execution of the laws and the maintenance of liberty,
both civil and political.

The members of this body are called magistrates or _kings_, that is to
say _governors_, and the whole body bears the name _prince_.[1] Thus
those who hold that the act, by which a people puts itself under a
prince, is not a contract, are certainly right. It is simply and solely
a commission, an employment, in which the rulers, mere officials of the
Sovereign, exercise in their own name the power of which it makes them
depositaries. This power it can limit, modify or recover at pleasure;
for the alienation of such a right is incompatible with the nature of
the social body, and contrary to the end of association.

I call then _government_, or supreme administration, the legitimate
exercise of the executive power, and prince or magistrate the man or
the body entrusted with that administration.

In government reside the intermediate forces whose relations make up
that of the whole to the whole, or of the Sovereign to the State. This
last relation may be represented as that between the extreme terms of a
continuous proportion, which has government as its mean proportional.
The government gets from the Sovereign the orders it gives the people,
and, for the State to be properly balanced, there must, when everything
is reckoned in, be equality between the product or power of the
government taken in itself, and the product or power of the citizens,
who are on the one hand sovereign and on the other subject.

Furthermore, none of these three terms can be altered without the
equality being instantly destroyed. If the Sovereign desires to govern,
or the magistrate to give laws, or if the subjects refuse to obey,
disorder takes the place of regularity, force and will no longer act
together, and the State is dissolved and falls into despotism or
anarchy. Lastly, as there is only one mean proportional between each
relation, there is also only one good government possible for a State.
But, as countless events may change the relations of a people, not only
may different governments be good for different peoples, but also for
the same people at different times.

In attempting to give some idea of the various relations that may hold
between these two extreme terms, I shall take as an example the number
of a people, which is the most easily expressible.

Suppose the State is composed of ten thousand citizens. The Sovereign
can only be considered collectively and as a body; but each member, as
being a subject, is regarded as an individual: thus the Sovereign is
to the subject as ten thousand to one, _i.e._ each member of the State
has as his share only a ten-thousandth part of the sovereign authority,
although he is wholly under its control. If the people numbers a
hundred thousand, the condition of the subject undergoes no change,
and each equally is under the whole authority of the laws, while his
vote, being reduced to one hundred thousandth part, has ten times less
influence in drawing them up. The subject therefore remaining always
a unit, the relation between him and the Sovereign increases with the
number of the citizens. From this it follows that, the larger the
State, the less the liberty.

When I say the relation increases, I mean that it grows more unequal.
Thus the greater it is in the geometrical sense, the less relation
there is in the ordinary sense of the word. In the former sense,
the relation, considered according to quantity, is expressed by the
quotient; in the latter, considered according to identity, it is
reckoned by similarity.

Now, the less relation the particular wills have to the general will,
that is, morals and manners to laws, the more should the repressive
force be increased. The government, then, to be good, should be
proportionately stronger as the people is more numerous.

On the other hand, as the growth of the State gives the depositaries
of the public authority more temptations and chances of abusing their
power, the greater the force with which the government ought to be
endowed for keeping the people in hand, the greater too should be the
force at the disposal of the Sovereign for keeping the government in
hand. I am speaking, not of absolute force, but of the relative force
of the different parts of the State.

It follows from this double relation that the continuous proportion
between the Sovereign, the prince and the people, is by no means an
arbitrary idea, but a necessary consequence of the nature of the body
politic. It follows further that, one of the extreme terms, viz. the
people, as subject, being fixed and represented by unity, whenever the
duplicate ratio increases or diminishes, the simple ratio does the
same, and is changed accordingly. From this we see that there is not a
single unique and absolute form of government, but as many governments
differing in nature as there are States differing in size.

If, ridiculing this system, any one were to say that, in order to find
the mean proportional and give form to the body of the government,
it is only necessary, according to me, to find the square root of
the number of the people, I should answer that I am here taking this
number only as an instance; that the relations of which I am speaking
are not measured by the number of men alone, but generally by the
amount of action, which is a combination of a multitude of causes; and
that, further, if, to save words, I borrow for a moment the terms of
geometry, I am none the less well aware that moral quantities do not
allow of geometrical accuracy.

The government is on a small scale what the body politic which includes
it is on a great one. It is a moral person endowed with certain
faculties, active like the Sovereign and passive like the State,
and capable of being resolved into other similar relations. This
accordingly gives rise to a new proportion, within which there is yet
another, according to the arrangement of the magistracies, till an
indivisible middle term is reached, _i.e._ a single ruler or supreme
magistrate, who may be represented, in the midst of this progression,
as the unity between the fractional and the ordinal series.

Without encumbering ourselves with this multiplication of terms, let us
rest content with regarding government as a new body within the State,
distinct from the people and the Sovereign, and intermediate between
them.

There is between these two bodies this essential difference, that
the State exists by itself, and the government only through the
Sovereign. Thus the dominant will of the prince is, or should be,
nothing but the general will or the law; his force is only the public
force concentrated in his hands, and, as soon as he tries to base
any absolute and independent act on his own authority, the tie that
binds the whole together begins to be loosened. If finally the prince
should come to have a particular will more active than the will of the
Sovereign, and should employ the public force in his hands in obedience
to this particular will, there would be, so to speak, two Sovereigns,
one rightful and the other actual, the social union would evaporate
instantly, and the body politic would be dissolved.

However, in order that the government may have a true existence
and a real life distinguishing it from the body of the State, and
in order that all its members may be able to act in concert and
fulfil the end for which it was set up, it must have a particular
personality, a sensibility common to its members, and a force and will
of its own making for its preservation. This particular existence
implies assemblies, councils, power of deliberation and decision,
rights, titles, and privileges belonging exclusively to the prince
and making the office of magistrate more honourable in proportion
as it is more troublesome. The difficulties lie in the manner of so
ordering this subordinate whole within the whole, that it in no way
alters the general constitution by affirmation of its own, and always
distinguishes the particular force it possesses, which is destined
to aid in its preservation, from the public force, which is destined
to the preservation of the State; and, in a word, is always ready to
sacrifice the government to the people, and never to sacrifice the
people to the government.

Furthermore, although the artificial body of the government is the work
of another artificial body, and has, we may say, only a borrowed and
subordinate life, this does not prevent it from being able to act with
more or less vigour or promptitude, or from being, so to speak, in more
or less robust health. Finally, without departing directly from the
end for which it was instituted, it may deviate more or less from it,
according to the manner of its constitution.

From all these differences arise the various relations which the
government ought to bear to the body of the State, according to the
accidental and particular relations by which the State itself is
modified, for often the government that is best in itself will become
the most pernicious, if the relations in which it stands have altered
according to the defects of the body politic to which it belongs.


[1] Thus at Venice the College, even in the absence of the Doge, is
called "Most Serene Prince."




CHAPTER II

THE CONSTITUENT PRINCIPLE IN THE VARIOUS FORMS OF GOVERNMENT


To set forth the general cause of the above differences, we must here
distinguish between government and its principle, as we did before
between the State and the Sovereign.

The body of the magistrate may be composed of a greater or a less
number of members. We said that the relation of the Sovereign to the
subjects was greater in proportion as the people was more numerous,
and, by a clear analogy, we may say the same of the relation of the
government to the magistrates.

But the total force of the government, being always that of the State,
is invariable; so that, the more of this force it expends on its own
members, the less it has left to employ on the whole people.

The more numerous the magistrates, therefore, the weaker the
government. This principle being fundamental, we must do our best to
make it clear.

In the person of the magistrate we can distinguish three essentially
different wills: first, the private will of the individual, tending
only to his personal advantage; secondly, the common will of the
magistrates, which is relative solely to the advantage of the prince,
and may be called corporate will, being general in relation to the
government, and particular in relation to the State, of which the
government forms part; and, in the third place, the will of the people
or the sovereign will, which is general both in relation to the State
regarded as the whole, and to the government regarded as a part of the
whole.

In a perfect act of legislation, the individual or particular will
should be at zero; the corporate will belonging to the government
should occupy a very subordinate position; and, consequently, the
general or sovereign will should always predominate and should be the
sole guide of all the rest.

According to the natural order, on the other hand, these different
wills become more active in proportion as they are concentrated. Thus,
the general will is always the weakest, the corporate will second, and
the individual will strongest of all: so that, in the government, each
member is first of all himself, then a magistrate, and then a citizen
--in an order exactly the reverse of what the social system requires.

This granted, if the whole government is in the hands of one man, the
particular and the corporate will are wholly united, and consequently
the latter is at its highest possible degree of intensity. But, as the
use to which the force is put depends on the degree reached by the
will, and as the absolute force of the government is invariable, it
follows that the most active government is that of one man.

Suppose, on the other hand, we unite the government with the
legislative authority, and make the Sovereign prince also, and all the
citizens so many magistrates: then the corporate will, being confounded
with the general will, can possess no greater activity than that will,
and must leave the particular will as strong as it can possibly be.
Thus, the government, having always the same absolute force, will be at
the lowest point of its relative force or activity.

These relations are incontestable, and there are other considerations
which still further confirm them. We can see, for instance, that
each magistrate is more active in the body to which he belongs than
each citizen in that to which he belongs, and that consequently the
particular will has much more influence on the acts of the government
than on those of the Sovereign; for each magistrate is almost always
charged with some governmental function, while each citizen, taken
singly, exercises no function of Sovereignty. Furthermore, the bigger
the State grows, the more its real force increases, though not in
direct proportion to its growth; but, the State remaining the same,
the number of magistrates may increase to any extent, without the
government gaining any greater real force; for its force is that of the
State, the dimension of which remains equal. Thus the relative force or
activity of the government decreases, while its absolute or real force
cannot increase.

Moreover, it is a certainty that promptitude in execution diminishes
as more people are put in charge of it: where prudence is made too
much of, not enough is made of fortune; opportunity is let slip, and
deliberation results in the loss of its object.

I have just proved that the government grows remiss in proportion as
the number of the magistrates increases; and I previously proved that,
the more numerous the people, the greater should be the repressive
force. From this it follows that the relation of the magistrates to the
government should vary inversely to the relation of the subjects to the
Sovereign; that is to say, the larger the State, the more should the
government be tightened, so that the number of the rulers diminish in
proportion to the increase of that of the people.

It should be added that I am here speaking of the relative strength of
the government, and not of its rectitude: for, on the other hand, the
more numerous the magistracy, the nearer the corporate will comes to
the general will; while, under a single magistrate, the corporate will
is, as I said, merely a particular will. Thus, what may be gained on
one side is lost on the other, and the art of the legislator is to know
how to fix the point at which the force and the will of the government,
which are always in inverse proportion, meet in the relation that is
most to the advantage of the State.




CHAPTER III

THE DIVISION OF GOVERNMENTS


We saw in the last chapter what causes the various kinds or forms of
government to be distinguished according to the number of the members
composing them: it remains in this to discover how the division is made.

In the first place, the Sovereign may commit the charge of the
government to the whole people or to the majority of the people, so
that more citizens are magistrates than are mere private individuals.
This form of government is called _democracy_.

Or it may restrict the government to a small number; so that there are
more private citizens than magistrates; and this is named _aristocracy_.

Lastly, it may concentrate the whole government in the hands of a
single magistrate from whom all others hold their power. This third
form is the most usual, and is called _monarchy_, or royal government.

It should be remarked that all these forms, or at least the first two,
admit of degree, and even of very wide differences; for democracy may
include the whole people, or may be restricted to half. Aristocracy, in
its turn, may be restricted indefinitely from half the people down to
the smallest possible number. Even royalty is susceptible of a measure
of distribution. Sparta always had two kings, as its constitution
provided; and the Roman Empire saw as many as eight emperors at once,
without it being possible to say that the Empire was split up. Thus
there is a point at which each form of government passes into the next,
and it becomes clear that, under three comprehensive denominations,
government is really susceptible of as many diverse forms as the State
has citizens.

There are even more: for, as the government may also, in certain
aspects, be subdivided into other parts, one administered in one
fashion and one in another, the combination of the three forms
may result in a multitude of mixed forms, each of which admits of
multiplication by all the simple forms.

There has been at all times much dispute concerning the best form of
government, without consideration of the fact that each is in some
cases the best, and in others the worst.

If, in the different States, the number of supreme magistrates should
be in inverse ratio to the number of citizens, it follows that,
generally, democratic government suits small States, aristocratic
government those of middle size, and monarchy great ones. This rule
is immediately deducible from the principle laid down. But it is
impossible to count the innumerable circumstances which may furnish
exceptions.




CHAPTER IV

DEMOCRACY


He who makes the law knows better than any one else how it should be
executed and interpreted. It seems then impossible to have a better
constitution than that in which the executive and legislative powers
are united; but this very fact renders the government in certain
respects inadequate, because things which should be distinguished are
confounded, and the prince and the Sovereign, being the same person,
form, so to speak, no more than a government without government.

It is not good for him who makes the laws to execute them, or for the
body of the people to turn its attention away from a general standpoint
and devote it to particular objects. Nothing is more dangerous than
the influence of private interests in public affairs, and the abuse of
the laws by the government is a less evil than the corruption of the
legislator, which is the inevitable sequel to a particular standpoint.
In such a case, the State being altered in substance, all reformation
becomes impossible. A people that would never misuse governmental
powers would never misuse independence; a people that would always
govern well would not need to be governed.

If we take the term in the strict sense, there never has been a real
democracy, and there never will be. It is against the natural order for
the many to govern and the few to be governed. It is unimaginable that
the people should remain continually assembled to devote their time to
public affairs, and it is clear that they cannot set up commissions for
that purpose without the form of administration being changed.

In fact, I can confidently lay down as a principle that, when the
functions of government are shared by several tribunals, the less
numerous sooner or later acquire the greatest authority, if only
because they are in a position to expedite affairs, and power thus
naturally comes into their hands.

Besides, how many conditions that are difficult to unite does such a
government presuppose! First, a very small State, where the people can
readily be got together and where each citizen can with ease know all
the rest; secondly, great simplicity of manners, to prevent business
from multiplying and raising thorny problems; next, a large measure
of equality in rank and fortune, without which equality of rights and
authority cannot long subsist; lastly, little or no luxury--for luxury
either comes of riches or makes them necessary; it corrupts at once
rich and poor, the rich by possession and the poor by covetousness; it
sells the country to softness and vanity, and takes away from the State
all its citizens, to make them slaves one to another, and one and all
to public opinion.

This is why a famous writer has made virtue the fundamental principle
of Republics; for all these conditions could not exist without virtue.
But, for want of the necessary distinctions, that great thinker was
often inexact, and sometimes obscure, and did not see that, the
sovereign authority being everywhere the same, the same principle
should be found in every well-constituted State, in a greater or less
degree, it is true, according to the form of the government.

It may be added that there is no government so subject to civil wars
and intestine agitations as democratic or popular government, because
there is none which has so strong and continual a tendency to change
to another form, or which demands more vigilance and courage for its
maintenance as it is. Under such a constitution above all, the citizen
should arm himself with strength and constancy, and say, every day of
his life, what a virtuous Count Palatine[1] said in the Diet of Poland:
Malo periculosam libertatem quam quietum servitium.

Were there a people of gods, their government would be democratic. So
perfect a government is not for men.


[1] The Palatine of Posen, father of the King of Poland, Duke of
Lorraine. I prefer liberty with danger to peace with slavery.




CHAPTER V

ARISTOCRACY


We have here two quite distinct moral persons, the government and
the Sovereign, and in consequence two general wills, one general in
relation to all the citizens, the other only for the members of the
administration. Thus, although the government may regulate its internal
policy as it pleases, it can never speak to the people save in the
name of the Sovereign, that is, of the people itself, a fact which must
not be forgotten.

The first societies governed themselves aristocratically. The heads
of families took counsel together on public affairs. The young bowed
without question to the authority of experience. Hence such names
as _priests, elders, senate_, and _gerontes_. The savages of North
America govern themselves in this way even now, and their government is
admirable.

But, in proportion as artificial inequality produced by institutions
became predominant over natural inequality, riches or power[1] were put
before age, and aristocracy became elective. Finally, the transmission
of the father's power along with his goods to his children, by creating
patrician families, made government hereditary, and there came to be
senators of twenty.

There are then three sorts of aristocracy--natural, elective and
hereditary. The first is only for simple peoples; the third is the
worst of all governments; the second is the best, and is aristocracy
properly so called.

Besides the advantage that lies in the distinction between the two
powers, it presents that of its members being chosen; for, in popular
government, all the citizens are born magistrates; but here magistracy
is confined to a few, who become such only by election.[2] By this
means uprightness, understanding, experience and all other claims to
pre-eminence and public esteem become so many further guarantees of
wise government.

Moreover, assemblies are more easily held, affairs better discussed and
carried out with more order and diligence, and the credit of the State
is better sustained abroad by venerable senators than by a multitude
that is unknown or despised.

In a word, it is the best and most natural arrangement that the wisest
should govern the many, when it is assured that they will govern
for its profit, and not for their own. There is no need to multiply
instruments, or get twenty thousand men to do what a hundred picked men
can do even better, but it must not be forgotten that corporate interest
here begins to direct the public power less under the regulation of the
general will, and that a further inevitable propensity takes away from
the laws part of the executive power.

If we are to speak of what is individually desirable, neither should
the State be so small, nor a people so simple and upright, that the
execution of the laws follows immediately from the public will, as
it does in a good democracy. Nor should the nation be so great that
the rulers have to scatter in order to govern it and are able to play
the Sovereign each in his own department, and, beginning by making
themselves independent, end by becoming masters.

But if aristocracy does not demand all the virtues needed by popular
government, it demands others which are peculiar to itself; for
instance, moderation on the side of the rich and contentment on that
of the poor; for it seems that thorough-going equality would be out of
place, as it was not found even at Sparta.

Furthermore, if this form of government carries with it a certain
inequality of fortune, this is justifiable in order that as a rule the
administration of public affairs may be entrusted to those who are most
able to give them their whole time, but not, as Aristotle maintains, in
order that the rich may always be put first. On the contrary, it is of
importance that an opposite choice should occasionally teach the people
that the deserts of men offer claims to pre-eminence more important
than those of riches.


[1] It is clear that the word _optimates_ meant, among the ancients,
not the best, but the most powerful.

[2] It is of great importance that the form of the election of
magistrates should be regulated by law; for if it is left at the
discretion of the prince, it is impossible to avoid falling into
hereditary aristocracy, as the Republics of Venice and Berne actually
did. The first of these has therefore long been a State dissolved; the
second, however, is maintained by the extreme wisdom of the senate, and
forms an honourable and highly dangerous exception.




CHAPTER VI

MONARCHY


So far, we have considered the prince as a moral and collective person,
unified by the force of the laws, and the depositary in the State of
the executive power. We have now to consider this power when it is
gathered together into the hands of a natural person, a real man, who
alone has the right to dispose of it in accordance with the laws. Such
a person is called a monarch or king.

In contrast with other forms of administration, in which a collective
being stands for an individual, in this form an individual stands for a
collective being; so that the moral unity that constituted the prince
is at the same time a physical unity, and all the qualities, which in
the other case are only with difficulty brought together by the law,
are found naturally united.

Thus the will of the people, the will of the prince, the public force
of the State, and the particular force of the government, all answer to
a single motive power; all the springs of the machine are in the same
hands, the whole moves towards the same end; there are no conflicting
movements to cancel one another, and no kind of constitution can be
imagined in which a less amount of effort produces a more considerable
amount of action. Archimedes, seated quietly on the bank and easily
drawing a great vessel afloat, stands to my mind for a skilful monarch,
governing vast states from his study, and moving everything while he
seems himself unmoved.

But if no government is more vigorous than this, there is also none
in which the particular will holds more sway and rules the rest more
easily. Everything moves towards the same end indeed, but this end is
by no means that of the public happiness, and even the force of the
administration constantly shows itself prejudicial to the State.

Kings desire to be absolute, and men are always crying out to them
from afar that the best means of being so is to get themselves loved
by their people. This precept is all very well, and even in some
respects very true. Unfortunately, it will always be derided at court.
The power which comes of a people's love is no doubt the greatest; but
it is precarious and conditional, and princes will never rest content
with it. The best kings desire to be in a position to be wicked, if
they please, without forfeiting their mastery: political sermonisers
may tell them to their hearts' content that, the people's strength
being their own, their first interest is that the people should be
prosperous, numerous and formidable; they are well aware that this
is Untrue. Their first personal interest is that the people should
be weak, wretched, and unable to resist them. I admit that, provided
the subjects remained always in submission, the prince's interest
would indeed be that it should be powerful, in order that its power,
being his own, might make him formidable to his neighbours; but, this
interest being merely secondary and subordinate, and strength being
incompatible with submission, princes naturally give the preference
always to the principle that is more to their immediate advantage. This
is what Samuel put strongly before the Hebrews, and what Macchiavelli
has clearly shown. He professed to teach kings; but it was the people
he really taught. His _Prince_ is the book of Republicans.[1]
