BOOK III
(PART 3 OF 3)

A case certain to be cited against my view is that of the Roman
Republic, which, it will be said, followed exactly the opposite course,
and passed from monarchy to aristocracy and from aristocracy to
democracy. I by no means take this view of it.

What Romulus first set up was a mixed government, which soon
deteriorated into despotism. From special causes, the State died an
untimely death, as new-born children sometimes perish without reaching
manhood. The expulsion of the Tarquins was the real period of the birth
of the Republic. But at first it took on no constant form, because,
by not abolishing the patriciate, it left half its work undone. For,
by this means, hereditary aristocracy, the worst of all legitimate
forms of administration, remained in conflict with democracy, and the
form of the government, as Macchiavelli has proved, was only fixed
on the establishment of the tribunate: only then was there a true
government and a veritable democracy. In fact, the people was then not
only Sovereign, but also magistrate and judge; the senate was only a
subordinate tribunal, to temper and concentrate the government, and the
consuls themselves, though they were patricians, first magistrates, and
absolute generals in war, were in Rome itself no more than presidents
of the people.

From that point, the government followed its natural tendency,
and inclined strongly to aristocracy. The patriciate, we may say,
abolished itself, and the aristocracy was found no longer in the body
of patricians as at Venice and Genoa, but in the body of the senate,
which was composed of patricians and plebeians, and even in the body
of tribunes when they began to usurp an active function: for names do
not affect facts, and, when the people has rulers who govern for it,
whatever name they bear, the government is an aristocracy.

The abuse of aristocracy led to the civil wars and the triumvirate.
Sulla, Julius Cæsar and Augustus became in fact real monarchs; and
finally, under the despotism of Tiberius, the State was dissolved.
Roman history then confirms, instead of invalidating, the principle I
have laid down.

[2] Omnes enim et habentur et dicuntur tyranni, qui potestate utuntur
perpetua in ea civitate quæ libertate usa est (Cornelius Nepos, _Life
of Miltiades_). [For all those are called and considered tyrants,
who hold perpetual power in a State that has known liberty.] It is
true that Aristotle (_Nicomachean Ethics_, Book viii, chapter x)
distinguishes the tyrant from the king by the fact that the former
governs in his own interest, and the latter only for the good of his
subjects; but not only did all Greek authors in general use the word
_tyrant_ in a different sense, as appears most clearly in Xenophon's
_Hiero_, but also it would follow from Aristotle's distinction that,
from the very beginning of the world, there has not yet been a single
king.




CHAPTER XI

THE DEATH OF THE BODY POLITIC


Such is the natural and inevitable tendency of the best constituted
governments. If Sparta and Rome perished, what State can hope to endure
for ever? If we would set up a long-lived form of government, let us
not even dream of making it eternal. If we are to succeed, we must not
attempt the impossible, or flatter ourselves that we are endowing the
work of man with a stability of which human conditions do not permit.

The body politic, as well as the human body, begins to die as soon as
it is born, and carries in itself the causes of its destruction. But
both may have a constitution that is more or less robust and suited to
preserve them a longer or a shorter time. The constitution of man is
the work of nature; that of the State the work of art. It is not in
men's power to prolong their own lives; but it is for them to prolong
as much as possible the life of the State, by giving it the best
possible constitution. The best constituted State will have an end;
but it will end later than any other, unless some unforeseen accident
brings about its untimely destruction.

The life-principle of the body politic lies in the sovereign authority.
The legislative power is the heart of the State; the executive power
is its brain, which causes the movement of all the parts. The brain
may become paralysed and the individual still live. A man may remain
an imbecile and live; but as soon as the heart ceases to perform its
functions, the animal is dead.

The State subsists by means not of the laws, but of the legislative
power. Yesterday's law is not binding to-day; but silence is taken for
tacit consent, and the Sovereign is held to confirm incessantly the
laws it does not abrogate as it might. All that it has once declared
itself to will it wills always, unless it revokes its declaration.

Why then is so much respect paid to old laws? For this very reason. We
must believe that nothing but the excellence of old acts of will can
have preserved them so long: if the Sovereign had not recognised them
as throughout salutary, it would have revoked them a thousand times.
This is why, so far from growing weak, the laws continually gain new
strength in any well constituted State; the precedent of antiquity
makes them daily more venerable: while wherever the laws grow weak as
they become old, this proves that there is no longer a legislative
power, and that the State is dead.




CHAPTER XII

HOW THE SOVEREIGN AUTHORITY MAINTAINS ITSELF


The Sovereign, having no force other than the legislative power, acts
only by means of the laws; and the laws being solely the authentic acts
of the general will, the Sovereign cannot act save when the people is
assembled. The people in assembly, I shall be told, is a mere chimera.
It is so to-day, but two thousand years ago it was not so. Has man's
nature changed?

The bounds of possibility, in moral matters, are less narrow than
we imagine: it is our weaknesses, our vices and our prejudices that
confine them. Base souls have no belief in great men; vile slaves smile
in mockery at the name of liberty.

Let us judge of what can be done by what has been done. I shall say
nothing of the Republics of ancient Greece; but the Roman Republic was,
to my mind, a great State, and the town of Rome a great town. The last
census showed that there were in Rome four hundred thousand citizens
capable of bearing arms, and the last computation of the population
of the Empire showed over four million citizens, excluding subjects,
foreigners, women, children and slaves.

What difficulties might not be supposed to stand in the way of the
frequent assemblage of the vast population of this capital and its
neighbourhood. Yet few weeks passed without the Roman people being in
assembly, and even being so several times. It exercised not only the
rights of Sovereignty, but also a part of those of government. It dealt
with certain matters, and judged certain cases, and this whole people
was found in the public meeting-place hardly less often as magistrates
than as citizens.

If we went back to the earliest history of nations, we should find that
most ancient governments, even those of monarchical form, such as the
Macedonian and the Frankish, had similar councils. In any case, the one
incontestable fact I have given is an answer to all difficulties; it is
good logic to reason from the actual to the possible.




CHAPTER XIII

THE SAME (_continued_)


It is not enough for the assembled people to have once fixed the
constitution of the State by giving its sanction to a body of law;
it is not enough for it to have set up a perpetual government, or
provided once for all for the election of magistrates. Besides the
extraordinary assemblies unforeseen circumstances may demand, there
must be fixed periodical assemblies which cannot be abrogated or
prorogued, so that on the proper day the people is legitimately called
together by law, without need of any formal summoning.

But, apart from these assemblies authorised by their date alone, every
assembly of the people not summoned by the magistrates appointed for
that purpose, and in accordance with the prescribed forms, should be
regarded as unlawful, and all its acts as null and void, because the
command to assemble should itself proceed from the law.

The greater or less frequency with which lawful assemblies should occur
depends on so many considerations that no exact rules about them can be
given. It can only be said generally that the stronger the government
the more often should the Sovereign show itself.

This, I shall be told, may do for a single town; but what is to be
done when the State includes several? Is the sovereign authority to be
divided? Or is it to be concentrated in a single town to which all the
rest are made subject?

Neither the one nor the other, I reply. First, the sovereign authority
is one and simple, and cannot be divided without being destroyed. In th
second place, one town cannot, any more than one nation, legitimately
be made subject to another, because the essence of the body politic
lies in the reconciliation of obedience and liberty, and the words
subject and Sovereign are identical correlatives the idea of which
meets in the single word "citizen."

I answer further that the union of several towns in a single city is
always bad, and that, if we wish to make such a union, we should not
expect to avoid its natural disadvantages. It is useless to bring up
abuses that belong to great States against one who desires to see only
small ones; but how can small States be given the strength to resist
great ones, as formerly the Greek towns resisted the Great King, and
more recently Holland and Switzerland have resisted the House of
Austria?

Nevertheless, if the State cannot be reduced to the right limits, there
remains still one resource; this is, to allow no capital, to make the
seat of government move from town to town, and to assemble by turn in
each the Provincial Estates of the country.

People the territory evenly, extend everywhere the same rights, bear
to every place in it abundance and life: by these means will the State
become at once as strong and as well governed as possible. Remember
that the walls of towns are built of the ruins of the houses of the
countryside. For every palace I see raised in the capital, my mind's
eye sees a whole country made desolate.




CHAPTER XIV

THE SAME (continued)


The moment the people is legitimately assembled as a sovereign body,
the jurisdiction of the government wholly lapses, the executive power
is suspended, and the person of the meanest citizen is as sacred and
inviolable as that of the first magistrate; for in the presence of
the person represented, representatives no longer exist. Most of the
tumults that arose in the comitia at Rome were due to ignorance or
neglect of this rule. The consuls were in them merely the presidents of
the people; the tribunes were mere speakers;[1] the senate was nothing
at all.

These intervals of suspension, during which the prince recognises or
ought to recognise an actual superior, have always been viewed by him
with alarm; and these assemblies of the people, which are the aegis
of the body politic and the curb on the government, have at all times
been the horror of rulers: who therefore never spare pains, objections,
difficulties, and promises, to stop the citizens from having them. When
the citizens are greedy, cowardly, and pusillanimous, and love ease
more than liberty, they do not long hold out against the redoubled
efforts of the government; and thus, as the resisting force incessantly
grows, the sovereign authority ends by disappearing, and most cities
fall and perish before their time.

But between the sovereign authority and arbitrary government there
sometimes intervenes a mean power of which something must be said.


[1] In nearly the same sense as this word has in the English
Parliament. The similarity of these functions would have brought the
consuls and the tribunes into conflict, even had all jurisdiction been
suspended.




CHAPTER XV

DEPUTIES OR REPRESENTATIVES


As soon as public service ceases to be the chief business of the
citizens, and they would rather serve with their money than with their
persons, the State is not far from its fall. When it is necessary
to march out to war, they pay troops and stay at home: when it is
necessary to meet in council, they name deputies and stay at home. By
reason of idleness and money, they end by having soldiers to enslave
their country and representatives to sell it.

It is through the hustle of commerce and the arts, through the greedy
self-interest of profit, and through softness and love of amenities
that personal services are replaced by money payments. Men surrender
a part of their profits in order to have time to increase them at
leisure. Make gifts of money, and you will not be long without chains.
The word _finance_ is a slavish word, unknown in the city-state. In a
country that is truly free, the citizens do everything with their own
arms and nothing by means of money; so far from paying to be exempted
from their duties, they would even pay for the privilege of fulfilling
them themselves. I am far from taking the common view: I hold enforced
labour to be less opposed to liberty than taxes.

The better the constitution of a State is, the more do public affairs
encroach on private in the minds of the citizens. Private affairs are
even of much less importance, because the aggregate of the common
happiness furnishes a greater proportion of that of each individual,
so that there is less for him to seek in particular cares. In a
well-ordered city every man flies to the assemblies: under a bad
government no one cares to stir a step to get to them, because no one
is interested in what happens there, because it is foreseen that the
general will will not prevail, and lastly because domestic cares are
all-absorbing. Good laws lead to the making of better ones; bad ones
bring about worse. As soon as any man says of the affairs of the State
_What does it matter to me?_ the State may be given up for lost.

The lukewarmness of patriotism, the activity of private interest, the
vastness of States, conquest and the abuse of government suggested
the method of having deputies or representatives of the people in
the national assemblies. These are what, in some countries, men have
presumed to call the Third Estate. Thus the individual interest of two
orders is put first and second; the public interest occupies only the
third place.

Sovereignty, for the same reason as makes it inalienable, cannot be
represented; it lies essentially in the general will, and will does not
admit of representation: it is either the same, or other; there is no
intermediate possibility. The deputies of the people, therefore, are
not and cannot be its representatives: they are merely its stewards,
and can carry through no definitive acts. Every law the people has not
ratified in person is null and void--is, in fact, not a law. The people
of England regards itself as free; but it is grossly mistaken; it is
free only during the election of members of parliament. As soon as they
are elected, slavery overtakes it, and it is nothing. The use it makes
of the short moments of liberty it enjoys shows indeed that it deserves
to lose them.

The idea of representation is modern; it comes to us from feudal
government, from that iniquitous and absurd system which degrades
humanity and dishonours the name of man. In ancient republics and even
in monarchies, the people never had representatives; the word itself
was unknown. It is very singular that in Rome, where the tribunes
were so sacrosanct, it was never even imagined that they could usurp
the functions of the people, and that in the midst of so great a
multitude they never attempted to pass on their own authority a single
plebiscitum. We can, however, form an idea of the difficulties caused
sometimes by the people being so numerous, from what happened in the
time of the Gracchi, when some of the citizens had to cast their votes
from the roofs of buildings.

Where right and liberty are everything, disadvantages count for
nothing. Among this wise people everything was given its just value,
its lictors were allowed to do what its tribunes would never have dared
to attempt; for it had no fear that its lictors would try to represent
it.

To explain, however, in what way the tribunes did sometimes represent
it, it is enough to conceive how the government represents the
Sovereign. Law being purely the declaration of the general will, it is
clear that, in the exercise of the legislative power, the people cannot
be represented; but in that of the executive power, which is only the
force that is applied to give the law effect, it both can and should be
represented. We thus see that if we looked closely into the matter we
should find that very few nations have any laws. However that may be,
it is certain that the tribunes, possessing no executive power, could
never represent the Roman people by right of the powers entrusted to
them, but only by usurping those of the senate.

In Greece, all that the people had to do, it did for itself; it was
constantly assembled in the public square. The Greeks lived in a mild
climate; they had no natural greed; slaves did their work for them;
their great concern was with liberty. Lacking the same advantages, how
can you preserve the same rights? Your severer climates add to your
needs;[1] for half the year your public squares are uninhabitable; the
flatness of your languages unfits them for being heard in the open air;
you sacrifice more for profit than for liberty, and fear slavery less
than poverty.

What then? Is liberty maintained only by the help of slavery? It may be
so. Extremes meet. Everything that is not in the course of nature has
its disadvantages, civil society most of all. There are some unhappy
circumstances in which we can only keep our liberty at others' expense,
and where the citizen can be perfectly free only when the slave is most
a slave. Such was the case with Sparta. As for you, modern peoples,
you have no slaves, but you are slaves yourselves; you pay for their
liberty with your own. It is in vain that you boast of this preference;
I find in it more cowardice than humanity.

I do not mean by all this that it is necessary to have slaves, or that
the right of slavery is legitimate: I am merely giving the reasons why
modern peoples, believing themselves to be free, have representatives,
while ancient peoples had none. In any case, the moment a people allows
itself to be represented, it is no longer free: it no longer exists.

All things considered, I do not see that it is possible henceforth for
the Sovereign to preserve among us the exercise of its rights, unless
the city is very small. But if it is very small, it will be conquered?
No. I will show later on how the external strength of a great people[2]
may be combined with the convenient polity and good order of a small
State.


[1] To adopt in cold countries the luxury and effeminacy of the East is
to desire to submit to its chains; it is indeed to bow to them far more
inevitably in our case than in theirs.

[2] I had intended to do this in the sequel to this work, when
in dealing with external relations I came to the subject of
confederations. The subject is quite new, and its principles have still
to be laid down.




CHAPTER XVI

THAT THE INSTITUTION OF GOVERNMENT IS NOT A CONTRACT


The legislative power once well established, the next thing is to
establish similarly the executive power; for this latter, which
operates only by particular acts, not being of the essence of the
former, is naturally separate from it. Were it possible for the
Sovereign, as such, to possess the executive power, right and fact
would be so confounded that no one could tell what was law and what was
not; and the body politic, thus disfigured, would soon fall a prey to
the violence it was instituted to prevent.

As the citizens, by the social contract, are all equal, all can
prescribe what all should do, but no one has a right to demand that
another shall do what he does not do himself. It is strictly this
right, which is indispensable for giving the body politic life and
movement, that the Sovereign, in instituting the government, confers
upon the prince.

It has been held that this act of establishment was a contract between
the people and the rulers it sets over itself.--a contract in which
conditions were laid down between the two parties binding the one to
command and the other to obey. It will be admitted, I am sure, that
this is an odd kind of contract to enter into. But let us see if this
view can be upheld.

First, the supreme authority can no more be modified than it can be
alienated; to limit it is to destroy it. It is absurd and contradictory
for the Sovereign to set a superior over itself; to bind itself to obey
a master would be to return to absolute liberty.

Moreover, it is clear that this contract between the people and such
and such persons would be a particular act; and from this it follows
that it can be neither a law nor an act of Sovereignty, and that
consequently it would be illegitimate.

It is plain too that the contracting parties in relation to each other
would be under the law of nature alone and wholly without guarantees
of their mutual undertakings, a position wholly at variance with the
civil state. He who has force at his command being always in a position
to control execution, it would come to the same thing if the name
"contract" were given to the act of one man who said to another; "I
give you all my goods, on condition that you give me back as much of
them as you please."

There is only one contract in the State, and that is the act of
association, which in itself excludes the existence of a second. It
is impossible to conceive of any public contract that would not be a
violation of the first.




CHAPTER XVII

THE INSTITUTION OF GOVERNMENT


Under what general idea then should the act by which government is
instituted be conceived as falling? I will begin by stating that the
act is complex, as being composed of two others--the establishment' of
the law and its execution.

By the former, the Sovereign decrees that there shall be a governing
body established in this or that form; this act is clearly a law.

By the latter, the people nominates the rulers who are to be entrusted
with the government that has been established. This nomination, being a
particular act, is clearly not a second law, but merely a consequence
of the first and a function of government.

The difficulty is to understand how there can be a governmental act
before government exists, and how the people, which is only Sovereign
or subject, can, under certain circumstances, become a prince or
magistrate.

It is at this point that there is revealed one of the astonishing
properties of the body politic, by means of which it reconciles
apparently contradictory operations; for this is accomplished by a
sudden conversion of Sovereignty into democracy, so that, without
sensible change, and merely by virtue of a new relation of all to all,
the citizens become magistrates and pass from general to particular
acts, from legislation to the execution of the law.

This changed relation is no speculative subtlety without instances
in practice: it happens every day in the English Parliament, where,
on certain occasions, the Lower House resolves itself into Grand
Committee, for the better discussion of affairs, and thus, from being
at one moment a sovereign court, becomes at the next a mere commission;
so that subsequently it reports to itself, as House of Commons, the
result of its proceedings in Grand Committee, and debates over again
under one name what it has already settled under another.

It is, indeed, the peculiar advantage of democratic government that it
can be established in actuality by a simple act of the general will.
Subsequently, this provisional government remains in power, if this
form is adopted, or else establishes in the name of the Sovereign the
government that is prescribed by law; and thus the whole proceeding
is regular. It is impossible to set up government in any other manner
legitimately and in accordance with the principles so far laid down.




CHAPTER XVIII

HOW TO CHECK THE USURPATIONS OF GOVERNMENT


What we have just said confirms Chapter XVI, and makes it clear that
the institution of government is not a contract, but a law; that the
depositaries of the executive power are not the people's masters, but
its officers; that it can set them up and pull them down when it likes;
that for them there is no question of contract, but of obedience; and
that in taking charge of the functions the State imposes on them they
are doing no more than fulfilling their duty as citizens, without
having the remotest right to argue about the conditions.

When therefore the people sets up an hereditary government, whether
it be monarchical and confined to one family, or aristocratic and
confined to a class, what it enters into is not an undertaking; the
administration is given a provisional form, until the people chooses to
order it otherwise.

It is true that such changes are always dangerous, and that the
established government should never be touched except when it comes
to be incompatible with the public good; but the circumspection this
involves is a maxim of policy and not a rule of right, and the State is
no more bound to leave civil authority in the hands of its rulers than
military authority in the hands of its generals.

It is also true that it is impossible to be too careful to observe,
in such cases, all the formalities necessary to distinguish a regular
and legitimate act from a seditious tumult, and the will of a whole
people from the clamour of a faction. Here above all no further
concession should be made to the untoward possibility than cannot, in
the strictest logic, be refused it. From this obligation the prince
derives a great advantage in preserving his power despite the people,
without it being possible to say he has usurped it; for, seeming to
avail himself only of his rights, he finds it very easy to extend them,
and to prevent, under the pretext of keeping the peace, assemblies that
are destined to the re-establishment of order; with the result that he
takes advantage of a silence he does not allow to be broken, or of
irregularities he causes to be committed, to assume that he has the
support of those whom fear prevents from speaking, and to punish those
who dare to speak. Thus it was that the decemvirs, first elected for
one year and then kept on in office for a second, tried to perpetuate
their power by forbidding the comitia to assemble; and by this easy
method every government in the world, once clothed with the public
power, sooner or later usurps the sovereign authority.

The periodical assemblies of which I have already spoken are designed
to prevent or postpone this calamity, above all when they need no
formal summoning; for in that case, the prince cannot stop them without
openly declaring himself a law-breaker and an enemy of the State.

The opening of these assemblies, whose sole object is the maintenance
of the social treaty, should always take the form of putting two
propositions that may not be suppressed, which should be voted on
separately.

The first is: "Does it please the Sovereign to preserve the present
form of government?"

The second is: "Does it please the people to leave its administration
in the hands of those who are actually in charge of it?"

I am here assuming what I think I have shown; that there is in the
State no fundamental law that cannot be revoked, not excluding the
social compact itself; for if all the citizens assembled of one accord
to break the compact, it is impossible to doubt that it would be very
legitimately broken. Grotius even thinks that each man can renounce his
membership of his own State, and recover his natural liberty and his
goods on leaving the country.[1] It would be indeed absurd if all the
citizens in assembly could not do what each can do by himself.


[1] Provided, of course, he does not leave to escape his obligations
and avoid having to serve his country in the hour of need. Flight
in such a case would be criminal and punishable, and would be, not
withdrawal, but desertion.
