BOOK IV
(PART 1 OF 3)

CHAPTER I

THAT THE GENERAL WILL IS INDESTRUCTIBLE


As long as several men in assembly regard themselves as a single body,
they have only a single will which is concerned with their common
preservation and general well-being. In this case, all the springs of
the State are vigorous and simple and its rules clear and luminous;
there are no embroilments or conflicts of interests; the common good is
everywhere clearly apparent, and only good sense is needed to perceive
it. Peace, unity and equality are the enemies of political subtleties.
Men who are upright and simple are difficult to deceive because of
their simplicity; lures and ingenious pretexts fail to impose upon
them, and they are not even subtle enough to be dupes. When, among the
happiest people in the world, bands of peasants are seen regulating
affairs of State under an oak, and always acting wisely, can we help
scorning the ingenious methods of other nations, which make themselves
illustrious and wretched with so much art and mystery?

A State so governed needs very few laws; and, as it becomes necessary
to issue new ones, the necessity is universally seen. The first man to
propose them merely says what all have already felt, and there is no
question of factions or intrigues or eloquence in order to secure the
passage into law of what every one has already decided to do, as soon
as he is sure that the rest will act with him.

Theorists are led into error because, seeing only States that have
been from the beginning wrongly constituted, they are struck by the
impossibility of applying such a policy to them. They make great game
of all the absurdities a clever rascal or an insinuating speaker might
get the people of Paris or London to believe. They do not know that
Cromwell would have been put to "the bells" by the people of Berne, and
the Due de Beaufort on the treadmill by the Genevese.

But when the social bond begins to be relaxed and the State to grow
weak, when particular interests begin to make themselves felt and the
smaller societies to exercise an influence over the larger, the common
interest changes and finds opponents: opinion is no longer unanimous;
the general will ceases to be the will of all; contradictory views and
debates arise; and the best advice is not taken without question.

Finally, when the State, on the eve of ruin, maintains only a vain,
illusory and formal existence, when in every heart the social bond
is broken, and the meanest interest brazenly lays hold of the sacred
name of "public good," the general will becomes mute: all men, guided
by secret motives, no more give their views as citizens than if the
State had never been; and iniquitous decrees directed solely to private
interest get passed under the name of laws.

Does it follow from this that the general will is exterminated or
corrupted? Not at all: it is always constant, unalterable and pure; but
it is subordinated to other wills which encroach upon its sphere. Each
man, in detaching, his interest from the common interest, sees clearly
that he cannot entirely separate them; but his share in the public
mishaps seems to him negligible beside the exclusive good he aims at
making his own. Apart from this particular good, he wills the general
good in his own interest, as strongly as any one else. Even in selling
his vote for money, he does not extinguish in himself the general
will, but only eludes it. The fault he commits is that of changing the
state of the question, and answering something different from what he
is asked. Instead of saying, by his vote, "It is to the advantage of
the State," he says, "It is of advantage to this or that man or party
that this or that view should prevail." Thus the law of public order
in assemblies is not so much to maintain in them the general will as
to secure that the question be always put to it, and the answer always
given by it.

I could here set down many reflections on the simple right of voting
in every act of Sovereignty--a right which no-one can take from the
citizens--and also on the right of stating views, making proposals,
dividing and discussing, which the government is always most careful
to leave solely to its members; but this important subject would need a
treatise to itself, and it is impossible to say everything in a single
work.




CHAPTER II

VOTING


It may be seen, from the last chapter, that the way in which general
business is managed may give a clear enough indication of the actual
state of morals and the health of the body politic. The more concert
reigns in the assemblies, that is, the nearer opinion approaches
unanimity, the greater is the dominance of the general will. On
the other hand, long debates, dissensions and tumult proclaim the
ascendancy of particular interests and the decline of the State.

This seems less clear when two or more orders enter into the
constitution, as patricians and plebeians did at Rome; for quarrels
between these two orders often disturbed the comitia, even in the best
days of the Republic. But the exception is rather apparent than real;
for then, through the defect that is inherent in the body politic,
there were, so to speak, two States in one, and what is not true of
the two together is true of either separately. Indeed, even in the
most stormy times, the plebiscita of the people, when the Senate did
not interfere with them, always went through quietly and by large
majorities. The citizens having but one interest, the people had but a
single will.

At the other extremity of the circle, unanimity recurs; this is the
case when the citizens, having fallen into servitude, have lost both
liberty and will. Fear and flattery then change votes into acclamation;
deliberation ceases, and only worship or malediction is left. Such
was the vile manner in which the senate expressed its views under the
Emperors. It did so sometimes with absurd precautions. Tacitus observes
that, under Otho, the senators, while they heaped curses on Vitellius,
contrived at the same time to make a deafening noise, in order that,
should he ever become their master, he might not know what each of them
had said.

On these various considerations depend the rules by which the methods
of counting votes and comparing opinions should be regulated, according
as the general will is more or less easy to discover, and the State
more or less in its decline.

There is but one law which, from its nature, needs unanimous consent.
This is the social compact; for civil association is the most voluntary
of all acts. Every man being born free and his own master, no-one,
under any pretext whatsoever, can make any man subject without his
consent. To decide that the son of a slave is born a slave is to decide
that he is not born a man.

If then there are opponents when the social compact is made, their
opposition does not invalidate the contract, but merely prevents them
from being included in it. They are foreigners among citizens. When the
State is instituted, residence constitutes consent; to dwell within its
territory is to submit to the Sovereign.[1]

Apart from this primitive contract, the vote of the majority always
binds all the rest. This follows from the contract itself. But it is
asked how a man can be both free and forced to conform to wills that
are not his own. How are the opponents at once free and subject to laws
they have not agreed to?

I retort that the question is wrongly put. The citizen gives his
consent to all the laws, including those which are passed in spite of
his opposition, and even those which punish him when he dares to break
any of them. The constant will of all the members of the State is the
general will; by virtue of it they are citizens and free.[2] When in
the popular assembly a law is proposed, what the people is asked is not
exactly whether it approves or rejects the proposal, but whether it is
in conformity with the general will, which is their will. Each man, in
giving his vote, states his opinion on that point; and the general will
is found by counting votes. When therefore the opinion that is contrary
to my own prevails, this proves neither more nor less than that I was
mistaken, and that what I thought to be the general will was not so. If
my particular opinion had carried the day I should have achieved the
opposite of what was my will and it is in that case that I should not
have been free.

This presupposes, indeed, that all the qualities of the general will
still reside in the majority: when they cease to do so, whatever side a
man may take, liberty is no longer possible.

In my earlier demonstration of how particular wills are substituted
for the general will in public deliberation, I have adequately pointed
out the practicable methods of avoiding this abuse; and I shall have
more to say of them later on. I have also given the principles for
determining the proportional number of votes for declaring that will.
A difference of one vote destroys equality; a single opponent destroys
unanimity; but between equality and unanimity, there are several grades
of unequal division, at each of which this proportion may be fixed in
accordance with the condition and the needs of the body politic.

There are two general rules that may serve to regulate this relation.
First, the more grave and important the questions discussed, the nearer
should the opinion that is to prevail approach unanimity. Secondly, the
more the matter in hand calls for speed, the smaller the prescribed
difference in the numbers of votes may be allowed to become: where an
instant decision has to be reached, a majority of one vote should be
enough. The first of these two rules seems more in harmony with the
laws, and the second with practical affairs. In any case, it is the
combination of them that gives the best proportions for determining the
majority necessary.


[1] This should of course be understood as applying to a free State;
for elsewhere family, goods, lack of a refuge, necessity, or violence
may detain a man in a country against his will; and then his dwelling
there no longer by itself implies his consent to the contract or to its
violation.

[2] At Genoa, the word _Liberty_ may be read over the front of the
prisons and on the chains of the galley-slaves. This application of the
device is good and just. It is indeed only malefactors of all estates
who prevent the citizen from being free. In the country in which
all such men were in the galleys, the most perfect liberty would be
enjoyed.




CHAPTER III

ELECTIONS


In the elections of the prince and the magistrates, which are, as I
have said, complex acts, there are two possible methods of procedure,
choice and lot. Both have been employed in various republics, and a
highly complicated mixture of the two still survives in the election of
the Doge at Venice.

"Election by lot," says Montesquieu, "is democratic in nature." I agree
that it is so; but in what sense? "The lot," he goes on, "is a way
of making choice that is unfair to nobody; it leaves each citizen a
reasonable hope of serving his country." These are not reasons.

If we bear in mind that the election of rulers is a function of
government, and not of Sovereignty, we shall see why the lot is the
method more natural to democracy, in which the administration is better
in proportion as the number of its acts is small.

In every real democracy, magistracy is not an advantage, but a
burdensome charge which cannot justly be imposed on one individual
rather than another. The law alone can lay the charge on him on whom
the lot falls. For, the conditions being then the same for all, and
the choice not depending on any human will, there is no particular
application to alter the universality of the law.

In an aristocracy, the prince chooses the prince, the government is
preserved by itself, and voting is rightly ordered.

The instance of the election of the Doge of Venice confirms, instead
of destroying, this distinction; the mixed form suits a mixed
government. For it is an error to take the government of Venice for a
real aristocracy. If the people has no share in the government, the
nobility is itself the people. A host of poor Barnabotes never gets
near any magistracy, and its nobility consists merely in the empty
title of Excellency, and in the right to sit in the Great Council. As
this Great Council is as numerous as our General Council at Geneva, its
illustrious members have no more privileges than our plain citizens.
It is indisputable that, apart from the extreme disparity between the
two republics, the _bourgeoisie_ of Geneva is exactly equivalent to the
_patriciate_ of Venice; our _natives_ and _inhabitants_ correspond to
the _townsmen_ and the _people_ of Venice; our _peasants_ correspond
to the _subjects_ on the mainland; and, however that republic be
regarded, if its size be left out of account, its government is no more
aristocratic than our own. The whole difference is that, having no
life-ruler, we do not, like Venice, need to use the lot.

Election by lot would have few disadvantages in a real democracy, in
which, as equality would everywhere exist in morals and talents as
well as in principles and fortunes, it would become almost a matter
of indifference who was chosen. But I have already said that a real
democracy is only an ideal.

When choice and lot are combined, positions that require special
talents, such as military posts, should be filled by the former; the
latter does for cases, such as judicial offices, in which good sense,
justice, and integrity are enough, because in a State that is well
constituted, these qualities are common to all the citizens.

Neither lot nor vote has any place in monarchical government. The
monarch being by right sole prince and only magistrate, the choice of
his lieutenants belongs to none but him. When the Abbé de Saint-Pierre
proposed that the Councils of the King of France should be multiplied,
and their members elected by ballot, he did not see that he was
proposing to change the form of government.

I should now speak of the methods of giving and counting opinions in
the assembly of the people; but perhaps an account of this aspect of
the Roman constitution will more forcibly illustrate all the rules I
could lay down. It is worth the while of a judicious reader to follow
in some detail the working of public and private affairs in a Council
consisting of two hundred thousand men.




CHAPTER IV

THE ROMAN COMITIA


We are without well-certified records of the first period of Rome's
existence; it even appears very probable that most of the stories told
about it are fables; indeed, generally speaking, the most instructive
part of the history of peoples, that which deals with their foundation,
is what we have least of. Experience teaches us every day what causes
lead to the revolutions of empires; but, as no new peoples are now
formed, we have almost nothing beyond conjecture to go upon in
explaining how they were created.

The customs we find established show at least that these customs had
an origin. The traditions that go back to those origins, that have
the greatest authorities behind them, and that are confirmed by the
strongest proofs, should pass for the most certain. These are the rules
I have tried to follow in inquiring how the freest and most powerful
people on earth exercised its supreme power.

After the foundation of Rome, the new-born republic, that is, the
army of its founder, composed of Albans, Sabines and foreigners, was
divided into three classes, which, from this division, took the name
of _tribes_. Each of these tribes was subdivided into ten _curiæ_, and
each _curia_ into _decuriæ_, headed by leaders called _curiones_ and
_decuriones_.

Besides this, out of each tribe was taken a body of one hundred
_Equites_ or Knights, called a _century_, which shows that these
divisions, being unnecessary in a town, were at first merely military.
But an instinct for greatness seems to have led the little township of
Rome to provide itself in advance with a political system suitable for
the capital of the world.

Out of this original division an awkward situation soon arose. The
tribes of the Albans (Ramnenses) and the Sabines (Tatienses) remained
always in the same condition, while that of the foreigners (Luceres)
continually grew as more and more foreigners came to live at Rome,
so that it soon surpassed the others in strength. Servius remedied
this dangerous fault by changing the principle of cleavage, and
substituting for the racial division, which he abolished, a new one
based on the quarter of the town inhabited by each tribe. Instead of
three tribes he created four, each occupying and named after one of the
hills of Rome. Thus, while redressing the inequality of the moment, he
also provided for the future; and in order that the division might be
one of persons as well as localities, he forbade the inhabitants of one
quarter to migrate to another, and so prevented the mingling of the
races.

He also doubled the three old centuries of Knights and added twelve
more, still keeping the old names, and by this simple and prudent
method, succeeded in making a distinction between the body of Knights
and the people, without a murmur from the latter.

To the four urban tribes Servius added fifteen others called rural
tribes, because they consisted of those who lived in the country,
divided into fifteen cantons. Subsequently, fifteen more were created,
and the Roman people finally found itself divided into thirty-five
tribes, as it remained down to the end of the Republic.

The distinction between urban and rural tribes had one effect which
is worth mention, both because it is without parallel elsewhere, and
because to it Rome owed the preservation of her morality and the
enlargement of her empire. We should have expected that the urban
tribes would soon monopolise power and honours, and lose no time in
bringing the rural tribes into disrepute; but what happened was exactly
the reverse. The taste of the early Romans for country life is well
known. This taste they owed to their wise founder, who made rural and
military labours go along with liberty, and, so to speak, relegated to
the town arts, crafts, intrigue, fortune and slavery.

Since therefore all Rome's most illustrious citizens lived in the
fields and tilled the earth, men grew used to seeking there alone the
mainstays of the republic. This condition, being that of the best
patricians, was honoured by all men; the simple and laborious life
of the villager was preferred to the slothful and idle life of the
_bourgeoisie_ of Rome; and he who, in the town, would have been but a
wretched proletarian, became, as a labourer in the fields, a respected
citizen. Not without reason, says Varro, did our great-souled ancestors
establish in the village the nursery of the sturdy and valiant men
who defended them in time of war and provided for their Sustenance in
time of peace. Pliny states positively that the country tribes were
honoured because of the men of whom they were composed; while cowards
men wished to dishonour were transferred, as a public disgrace, to the
town tribes. The Sabine Appius Claudius, when he had come to settle
in Rome, was loaded with honours and enrolled in a rural tribe, which
subsequently took his family name. Lastly, freedmen always entered the
urban, and never the rural, tribes: nor is there a single example,
throughout the Republic, of a freedman, though he had become a citizen,
reaching any magistracy.

This was an excellent rule; but it was carried so far that in the end
it led to a change and certainly to an abuse in the political system.

First the censors, after having for a long time claimed the right of
transferring citizens arbitrarily from one tribe to another, allowed
most persons to enrol themselves in whatever tribe they pleased. This
permission certainly did no good, and further robbed the censorship
of one of its greatest resources. Moreover, as the great and powerful
all got themselves enrolled in the country tribes, while the freedmen
who had become citizens remained with the populace in the town tribes,
both soon ceased to have any local or territorial meaning, and all were
so confused that the members of one could not be told from those of
another except by the registers; so that the idea of the word _tribe_
became personal instead of real, or rather came to be little more than
a chimera.

It happened in addition that the town tribes, being more on the spot,
were often the stronger in the comitia and sold the State to those who
stooped to buy the votes of the rabble composing them.

As the founder had set up ten _curiæ_ in each tribe, the whole Roman
people, which was then contained within the walls, consisted of thirty
_curia_, each with its temples, its gods, its officers, its priests and
its festivals, which were called _compitalia_ and corresponded to the
_paganalia,_ held in later times by the rural tribes.

When Servius made his new division, as the thirty _curiæ_ could not be
shared equally between his four tribes, and as he was unwilling to
interfere with them, they became a further division of the inhabitants
of Rome, quite independent of the tribes: but in the case of the rural
tribes and their members there was no question of _curiæ_ as the
tribes had then become a purely civil institution, and, a new system
of levying troops having been introduced, the military divisions of
Romulus were superfluous. Thus, although every citizen was enrolled in
a tribe, there were very many who were not members of a _curia_.

Servius made yet a third division, quite distinct from the two we have
mentioned, which became, in its effects, the most important of all.
He distributed the whole Roman people into six classes, distinguished
neither by place nor by person, but by wealth; the first classes
included the rich, the last the poor, and those between persons of
moderate means. These six classes were subdivided into one hundred and
ninety-three other bodies, called centuries, which were so divided that
the first class alone comprised more than half of them, while the last
comprised only one. Thus the class that had the smallest number of
members had the largest number of centuries, and the whole of the last
class only counted as a single subdivision, although it alone included
more than half the inhabitants of Rome.

In order that the people might have the less insight into the results
of this arrangement, Servius tried to give it a military tone: in
the second class he inserted two centuries of armourers, and in the
fourth two of makers of instruments of war: in each class, except the
last, he distinguished young and old, that is, those who were under an
obligation to bear arms and those whose age gave them legal exemption.
It was this distinction, rather than that of wealth, which required
frequent repetition of the census or counting. Lastly, he ordered that
the assembly should be held in the Campus Martius, and that all who
were of age to serve should come there armed.

The reason for his not making in the last class also the division of
young and old was that the populace, of whom it was composed, was not
given the right to bear arms for its country: a man had to possess a
hearth to acquire the right to defend it, and of all the troops of
beggars who to-day lend lustre to the armies of kings, there is perhaps
not one who would not have been driven with scorn out of a Roman
cohort, at a time when soldiers were the defenders of liberty.

In this last class, however, _proletarians_ were distinguished from
_capite censi._ The former, not quite reduced to nothing, at least gave
the State citizens, and sometimes, when the need was pressing, even
soldiers. Those who had nothing at all, and could be numbered only by
counting heads, were regarded as of absolutely no account, and Marius
was the first who stooped to enrol them.

Without deciding now whether this third arrangement was good or bad in
itself, I think I may assert that it could have been made practicable
only by the simple morals, the disinterestedness, the liking for
agriculture and the scorn for commerce and for love of gain which
characterised the early Romans. Where is the modern people among whom
consuming greed, unrest, intrigue, continual removals, and perpetual
changes of fortune, could let such a system last for twenty years
without turning the State upside down? We must indeed observe that
morality and the censorship, being stronger than this institution,
corrected its defects at Rome, and that the rich man found himself
degraded to the class of the poor for making too much display of his
riches.
