BOOK IV
(PART 2 OF 3)

From all this it is easy to understand why only five classes are
almost always mentioned, though there were really six. The sixth, as
it furnished neither soldiers to the army nor votes in the Campus
Martius,[1] and was almost without function in the State, was seldom
regarded as of any account.

These were the various ways in which the Roman people was divided. Let
us now see the effect on the assemblies. When lawfully summoned, these
were called _comitia_: they were usually held in the public square
at Rome or in the Campus Martius, and were distinguished as _Comitia
Curiata, Comitia Centuriata_, and _Comitia Tributa_, according to
the form under which they were convoked. The _Comitia Curiata_ were
founded by Romulus; the _Centuriata_ by Servius; and the _Tributa_
by the tribunes of the people. No law received its sanction and no
magistrate was elected, save in the comitia; and as every citizen
was enrolled in a _curia_, a century, or a tribe, it follows that no
citizen was excluded from the right of voting, and that the Roman
people was truly sovereign both _de jure_ and _de facto_.

For the comitia to be lawfully assembled, and for their acts to have
the force of law, three conditions were necessary. First, the body
or magistrate convoking them had to possess the necessary authority;
secondly, the assembly had to be held on a day allowed by law; and
thirdly, the auguries had to be favourable.

The reason for the first regulation needs no explanation; the second is
a matter of policy. Thus, the comitia might not be held on festivals
or market-days, when the country-folk, coming to Rome on business, had
not time to spend the day in the public square. By means of the third,
the senate held in check the proud and restive people, and meetly
restrained the ardour of seditious tribunes, who, however, found more
than one way of escaping this hindrance.

Laws and the election of rulers were not the only questions submitted
to the judgment of the comitia: as the Roman people had taken on itself
the most important functions of government, it may be said that the lot
of Europe was regulated in its assemblies. The variety of their objects
gave rise to the various forms these took, according to the matters on
which they had to pronounce.

In order to judge of these various forms, it is enough to compare
them. Romulus, when he set up _curiæ_, had in view the checking of
the senate by the people, and of the people by the senate, while
maintaining his ascendancy over both alike. He therefore gave the
people, by means of this assembly, all the authority of numbers to
balance that of power and riches, which he left to the patricians.
But, after the spirit of monarchy, he left all the same a greater
advantage to the patricians in the influence of their clients on the
majority of votes. This excellent institution of patron and client
was a masterpiece of statesmanship and humanity without which the
patriciate, being flagrantly in contradiction to the republican
spirit, could not have survived. Rome alone has the honour of having
given to the world this great example, which never led to any abuse,
and yet has never been followed.

As the assemblies by _curiæ_ persisted under the kings till the time
of Servius, and the reign of the later Tarquin was not regarded as
legitimate, royal laws were called generally _leges curiatæ_.

Under the Republic, the _curiæ_ still confined to the four urban
tribes, and including only the populace of Rome, suited neither the
senate, which led the patricians, nor the tribunes, who, though
plebeians, were at the head of the well-to-do citizens. They therefore
fell into disrepute, and their degradation was such, that thirty
lictors used to assemble and do what the _Comitia Curiata_ should have
done.

The division by centuries was so favourable to the aristocracy that it
is hard to see at first how the senate ever failed to carry the day in
the comitia bearing their name, by which the consuls, the censors and
the other curule magistrates were elected. Indeed, of the hundred and
ninety-three centuries into which the six classes of the whole Roman
people were divided, the first class contained ninety-eight; and, as
voting went solely by centuries, this class alone had a majority over
all the rest. When all these centuries were in agreement, the rest of
the votes were not even taken; the decision of the smallest number
passed for that of the multitude, and it may be said that, in the
_Comitia Centuriata_, decisions were regulated far more by depth of
purses than by the number of votes.

But this extreme authority was modified in two ways. First, the
tribunes as a rule, and always a great number of plebeians, belonged
to the class of the rich, and so counterbalanced the influence of the
patricians in the first class.

The second way was this. Instead of causing the centuries to vote
throughout in order, which would have meant beginning always with the
first, the Romans always chose one by lot which proceeded alone to
the election; after this all the centuries were summoned another day
according to their rank, and the same election was repeated, and as a
rule confirmed. Thus the authority of example was taken away from rank,
and given to the lot on a democratic principle.

From this custom resulted a further advantage. The citizens from the
country had time, between the two elections, to inform themselves of
the merits of the candidate who had been provisionally nominated,
and did not have to vote without knowledge of the case. But, under
the pretext of hastening matters, the abolition of this custom was
achieved, and both elections were held on the same day.

The _Comitia Tributa_ were properly the council of the Roman people.
They were convoked by the tribunes alone; at them the tribunes were
elected and passed their plebiscita. The senate not only had no
standing in them, but even no right to be present; and the senators,
being forced to obey laws on which they could not vote, were in this
respect less free than the meanest citizens. This injustice was
altogether ill-conceived, and was alone enough to invalidate the
decrees of a body to which all its members were not admitted. Had all
the patricians attended the comitia by virtue of the right they had as
citizens, they would not, as mere private individuals, have had any
considerable influence on a vote reckoned by counting heads, where the
meanest proletarian was as good as the _princeps senatus_.

It may be seen, therefore, that besides the order which was achieved
by these various ways of distributing so great a people and taking its
votes, the various methods were not reducible to forms indifferent in
themselves, but the results of each were relative to the objects which
caused it to be preferred.

Without going here into further details, we may gather from what has
been said above that the _Comitia Tributa_ were the most favourable to
popular government, and the _Comitia Centuriata_ to aristocracy. The
_Comitia Curiata,_ in which the populace of Rome formed the majority,
being fitted only to further tyranny and evil designs, naturally fell
into disrepute, and even seditious persons abstained from using a
method which too clearly revealed their projects. It is indisputable
that the whole majesty of the Roman people lay solely in the _Comitia
Centuriata_, which alone included all; for the _Comitia Curiata_
excluded the rural tribes, and the _Comitia Tributa_ the senate and the
patricians.

As for the method of taking the vote, it was among the ancient Romans
as simple as their morals, although not so simple as at Sparta. Each
man declared his vote aloud, and a clerk duly wrote it down; the
majority in each tribe determined the vote of the tribe, the majority
of the tribes that of the people, and so with _curiæ_ and centuries.
This custom was good as long as honesty was triumphant among the
citizens, and each man was ashamed to vote publicly in favour of an
unjust proposal or an unworthy subject; but, when the people grew
corrupt and votes were bought, it was fitting that voting should be
secret in order that purchasers might be restrained by mistrust, and
rogues be given the means of not being traitors.

I know that Cicero attacks this change, and attributes partly to it the
ruin of the Republic. But though I feel the weight Cicero's authority
must carry on such a point, I cannot agree with him; I hold, on the
contrary, that, for want of enough such changes, the destruction of the
State must be hastened. Just as the regimen of health does not suit
the sick, we should not wish to govern a people that has been corrupted
by the laws that a good people requires. There is no better proof of
this rule than the long life of the Republic of Venice, of which the
shadow still exists, solely because its laws are suitable only for men
who are wicked.

The citizens were provided, therefore, with tablets by means of which
each man could vote without any one knowing how he voted: new methods
were also introduced for collecting the tablets, for counting voices,
for comparing numbers, etc.; but all these precautions did not prevent
the good faith of the officers charged with these functions[2] from
being often suspect. Finally, to prevent intrigues and trafficking in
votes, edicts were issued; but their very number proves how useless
they were.

Towards the close of the Republic, it was often necessary to have
recourse to extraordinary expedients in order to supplement the
inadequacy of the laws. Sometimes miracles were supposed; but this
method, while it might impose on the people, could not impose on those
who governed. Sometimes an assembly was hastily called together,
before the candidates had time to form their factions: sometimes a
whole sitting was occupied with talk, when it was seen that the people
had been won over and was on the point of taking up a wrong position.
But in the end ambition eluded all attempts to check it; and the most
incredible fact of all is that, in the midst of all these abuses,
the vast people, thanks to its ancient regulations, never ceased to
elect magistrates, to pass laws, to judge cases, and to carry through
business both public and private, almost as easily as the senate itself
could have done.


[1] I say "in the Campus Martius" because it was there that the comitia
assembled by centuries; in its two other forms the people assembled
in the _forum_ or elsewhere; and then the _capite censi_ had as much
influence and authority as the foremost citizens.

[2] Custodes, diribitores, rogatores suffragiorum.




CHAPTER V

THE TRIBUNATE


When an exact proportion cannot be established between the constituent
parts of the State, or when causes that cannot be removed continually
alter the relation of one part to another, recourse is had to the
institution of a peculiar magistracy that enters into no corporate
unity with the rest. This restores to each term its right relation to
the others, and provides a link or middle term between either prince
and people, or prince and Sovereign, or, if necessary, both at once.

This body, which I shall call the _tribunate_, is the preserver of the
laws and of the legislative power. It serves sometimes to protect the
Sovereign against the government, as the tribunes of the people did
at Rome; sometimes to uphold the government against the people, as
the Council of Ten now does at Venice; and sometimes to maintain the
balance between the two, as the Ephors did at Sparta.

The tribunate is not a constituent part of the city, and should have
no share in either legislative or executive power; but this very fact
makes its own power the greater: for, while it can do nothing, it can
prevent anything from being done. It is more sacred and more revered,
as the defender of the laws, than the prince who executes them, or than
the Sovereign which ordains them. This was seen very clearly at Rome,
when the proud patricians, for all their scorn of the people, were
forced to bow before one of its officers, who had neither auspices nor
jurisdiction.

The tribunate, wisely tempered, is the strongest support a good
constitution can have; but if its strength is ever so little excessive,
it upsets the whole State. Weakness, on the other hand, is not natural
to it: provided it is something, it is never less than it should be.

It degenerates into tyranny when it usurps the executive power, which
it should confine itself to restraining, and when it tries to dispense
with the laws, which it should confine itself to protecting. The
immense power of the Ephors, harmless as long as Sparta preserved its
morality, hastened corruption when once it had begun. The blood of
Agis, slaughtered by these tyrants, was avenged by his successor; the
crime and the punishment of the Ephors alike hastened the destruction
of the republic, and after Cleomenes Sparta ceased to be of any
account. Rome perished in the same way: the excessive power of the
tribunes, which they had usurped by degrees, finally served, with the
help of laws made to secure liberty, as a safeguard for the emperors
who destroyed it. As for the Venetian Council of Ten, it is a tribunal
of blood, an object of horror to patricians and people alike; and, so
far from giving a lofty protection to the laws, it does nothing, now
they have become degraded, but strike in the darkness blows of which no
one dare take note.

The tribunate, like the government, grows weak as the number of its
members increases. When the tribunes of the Roman people, who first
numbered only two, and then five, wished to double that number, the
senate let them do so, in the confidence that it could use one to check
another, as indeed it afterwards freely did.

The best method of preventing usurpations by so formidable a body,
though no government has yet made use of it, would be not to make it
permanent, but to regulate the periods during which it should remain
in abeyance. These intervals, which should not be long enough to give
abuses time to grow strong, may be so fixed by law that they can easily
be shortened at need by extraordinary commissions.

This method seems to me to have no disadvantages, because, as I have
said, the tribunate, which forms no part of the constitution, can be
removed without the constitution being affected. It seems to be also
efficacious, because a newly restored magistrate starts not with the
power his predecessor exercised, but with that which the law allows him.




CHAPTER VI

THE DICTATORSHIP


The inflexibility of the laws, which prevents them from adapting
themselves to circumstances, may, in certain cases, render them
disastrous, and make them bring about, at a time of crisis, the ruin
of the State. The order and slowness of the forms they enjoin require
a space of time which circumstances sometimes withhold. A thousand
cases against which the legislator has made no provision may present
themselves, and it is a highly necessary part of foresight to be
conscious that everything cannot be foreseen.

It is wrong therefore to wish to make political institutions so strong
as to render it impossible to suspend their operation. Even Sparta
allowed its laws to lapse.

However, none but the greatest dangers can counter-balance that of
changing the public order, and the sacred power of the laws should
never be arrested save when the existence of the country is at stake.
In these rare and obvious cases, provision is made for the public
security by a particular act entrusting it to him who is most worthy.
This commitment may be carried out in either of two ways, according to
the nature of the danger.

If increasing the activity of the government is a sufficient remedy,
power is concentrated in the hands of one or two of its members: in
this case the change is not in the authority of the laws, but only in
the form of administering them. If, on the other hand, the peril is
of such a kind that the paraphernalia of the laws are an obstacle to
their preservation, the method is to nominate a supreme ruler, who
shall silence all the laws and suspend for a moment the sovereign
authority. In such a case, there is no doubt about the general will,
and it is clear that the people's first intention is that the State
shall not perish. Thus the suspension of the legislative authority is
in no sense its abolition; the magistrate who silences it cannot make
it speak; he dominates it, but cannot represent it. He can do anything,
except make laws.

The first method was used by the Roman senate when, in a consecrated
formula, it charged the consuls to provide for the safety of the
Republic. The second was employed when one of the two consuls nominated
a dictator:[1] a custom Rome borrowed from Alba.

During the first period of the Republic, recourse was very often had to
the dictatorship, because the State had not yet a firm enough basis to
be able to maintain itself by the strength of its constitution alone.
As the state of morality then made superfluous many of the precautions
which would have been necessary at other times, there was no fear that
a dictator would abuse his authority, or try to keep it beyond his term
of office. On the contrary, so much power appeared to be burdensome
to him who was clothed with it, and he made all speed to lay it down,
as if taking the place of the laws had been too troublesome and too
perilous a position to retain.

It is therefore the danger not of its abuse, but of its cheapening,
that makes me attack the indiscreet use of this supreme magistracy in
the earliest times. For as long as it was freely employed at elections,
dedications and purely formal functions, there was danger of its
becoming less formidable in time of need, and of men growing accustomed
to regarding as empty a title that was used only on occasions of empty
ceremonial.

Towards the end of the Republic, the Romans, having grown more
circumspect, were as unreasonably sparing in the use of the
dictatorship as they had formerly been lavish. It is easy to see
that their fears were without foundation, that the weakness of the
capital secured it against the magistrates who were in its midst; that
a dictator might, in certain cases, defend the public liberty, but
could never endanger it; and that the chains of Rome would be forged,
not in Rome itself, but in her armies. The weak resistance offered by
Marius to Sulla, and by Pompey to Cæsar, clearly showed what was to be
expected from authority at home against force from abroad.

This misconception led the Romans to make great mistakes; such, for
example, as the failure to nominate a dictator in the Catilinarian
conspiracy. For, as only the city itself, with at most some province
in Italy, was concerned, the unlimited authority the laws gave to the
dictator would have enabled him to make short work of the conspiracy,
which was, in fact, stifled only by a combination of lucky chances
human prudence had no right to expect.

Instead, the senate contented itself with entrusting its whole power
to the consuls, so that Cicero, in order to take effective action, was
compelled on a capital point to exceed his powers; and if, in the first
transports of joy, his conduct was approved, he was justly called,
later on, to account for the blood of citizens spilt in violation of
the laws. Such a reproach could never have been levelled at a dictator.
But the consul's eloquence carried the day; and he himself, Roman
though he was, loved his own glory better than his country, and sought,
not so much the most lawful and secure means of saving the State, as to
get for himself the whole honour of having done so.[2] He was therefore
justly honoured as the liberator of Rome, and also justly punished
as a law-breaker. However brilliant his recall may have been, it was
undoubtedly an act of pardon.

However this important trust be conferred, it is important that its
duration should be fixed at a very brief period, incapable of being
ever prolonged. In the crises which lead to its adoption, the State
is either soon lost, or soon saved; and, the present need passed,
the dictatorship becomes either tyrannical or idle. At Rome, where
dictators held office for six months only, most of them abdicated
before their time was up. If their term had been longer, they might
well have tried to prolong it still further, as the decemvirs did when
chosen for a year. The dictator had only time to provide against the
need that had caused him to be chosen; he had none to think of further
projects.


[1] The nomination was made secretly by night, as if there were
something shameful in setting a man above the laws.

[2] That is what he could not be sure of, if he proposed a dictator;
for he dared not nominate himself, and could not be certain that his
colleague would nominate him.




CHAPTER VII

THE CENSORSHIP


As the law is the declaration of the general will, the censorship is
the declaration of the public judgment: public opinion is the form of
law which the censor administers, and, like the prince, only applies to
particular cases.

The censorial tribunal, so far from being the arbiter of the people's
opinion, only declares it, and, as soon as the two part company, its
decisions are null and void.

It is useless to distinguish the morality of a nation from the objects
of its esteem; both depend on the same principle and are necessarily
indistinguishable. There is no people on earth the choice of whose
pleasures is not decided by opinion rather than nature. Right men's
opinions, and their morality will purge itself. Men always love what is
good or what they find good; it is in judging what is good that they
go wrong. This judgment, therefore, is what must be regulated. He who
judges of morality judges of honour; and he who judges of honour finds
his law in opinion.

The opinions of a people are derived from its constitution; although
the law does not regulate morality, it is legislation that gives it
birth. When legislation grows weak, morality degenerates; but in such
cases the judgment of the censors will not do what the force of the
laws has failed to effect.

From this it follows that the censorship may be useful for the
preservation of morality, but can never be so for its restoration. Set
up censors while the laws are vigorous; as soon as they have lost their
vigour, all hope is gone; no legitimate power can retain force when
the laws have lost it.

The censorship upholds morality by preventing opinion from growing
corrupt, by preserving its rectitude by means of wise applications, and
sometimes even by fixing it when it is still uncertain. The employment
of seconds in duels, which had been carried to wild extremes in the
kingdom of France, was done away with merely by these words in a royal
edict: "As for those who are cowards enough to call upon seconds." This
judgment, in anticipating that of the public, suddenly decided it. But
when edicts from the same source tried to pronounce duelling itself an
act of cowardice, as indeed it is, then, since common opinion does not
regard it as such, the public took no notice of a decision on a point
on which its mind was already made up.

I have stated elsewhere[1] that as public opinion is not subject to
any constraint, there need be no trace of it in the tribunal set up to
represent it. It is impossible to admire too much the art with which
this resource, which we moderns have wholly lost, was employed by the
Romans, and still more by the Lacedæmonians.

A man of bad morals having made a good proposal in the Spartan Council,
the Ephors neglected it, and caused the same proposal to be made by a
virtuous citizen. What an honour for the one, and what a disgrace for
the other, without praise or blame of either! Certain drunkards from
Samos[2] polluted the tribunal of the Ephors: the next day, a public
edict gave Samians permission to be filthy. An actual punishment would
not have been so severe as such an impunity. When Sparta has pronounced
on what is or is not right, Greece makes no appeal from her judgments.


[1] I merely call attention in this chapter to a subject with which I
have dealt at greater length in my _Letter to M. d'Alembert_.

[2] They were from another island, which the delicacy of our language
forbids me to name on this occasion.




CHAPTER VIII

CIVIL RELIGION


At first men had no kings save the gods, and no government save
theocracy. They reasoned like Caligula, and, at that period, reasoned
aright. It takes a long time for feeling so to change that men can make
up their minds to take their equals as masters, in the hope that they
will profit by doing so.
