Chapter One: Water Waves and Water Ripples

(Part 1 of 6)

We have all stood many times on the seashore, watching the waves roll in, crested with white foam, and break on the rocks or the beach. Everyone has more than once thrown a stone onto the still water of a lake or a pond and noticed the expanding rings of ripples. Some of us have voyaged over stormy seas where great ships are tossed by mighty billows with no more apparent effort than the rocking of a cradle.

In all of these we have been watching what is called a wave-motion, taking place on the surface of water. Perhaps it did not occur to us at the time that the sound of the splash, or the thunder of those breaking waves, was carried to our ears as a wave-motion of another sort in the air we breathe — nor even that the light by which we see these beautiful things is also a wave-motion, of a more hidden kind, produced in a medium called the aether which fills all space.

A steady study of nature has shown us that we are surrounded on every side by wave-motions of various kinds — waves in water, waves in air, and waves in aether — and that our most precious senses, our eyes and our ears, are really wave-detectors of a very special sort. Examining these waves, and their properties and powers, has led us to see that waves in water, air and aether, though they differ greatly in detail, have much in common; and that many things about them which are hard to understand become clearer when we compare the different wave-motions with one another.

In these lectures, then, I shall use your familiar experience of the sea and of water waves to help you understand some of the properties of air waves, to which we owe our sensations of sound and music; and, so far as I can, I shall try to explain the nature of the aether waves created in the all-pervading aether, to which we owe not only light and sight but also many electrical effects, including such modern wonders as wireless telegraphy.

In every department of natural science we find ourselves face to face with the phenomena of wave-motion. In the study of earthquakes and tides, of telegraphs and telephones, of the temperature of the earth itself, no less than in the examination of water waves and ripples, of sound, of music, or of light and heat, we are bound to consider waves of one kind or another.

Fixing our attention for the moment on surface water waves, the first question we shall ask is: what is a wave?

If we take our station on a high cliff looking down on the sea on a clear day when the wind is fresh, we see the waves on its surface like green rounded ridges racing forward, and at first sight it looks as though these ridges were themselves moving masses of water. But if we look instead at a patch of seaweed, or a floating cork, or a seagull, as each wave passes over it, we notice that the object is merely lifted up and let down again — or at most has a small movement to and fro.

We are led to conclude, then, that even when it is agitated by waves, each particle of water never moves far from the place it occupies at rest, and that the real movement of the water is something very different from its apparent motion.

If we put a number of corks or pieces of paper on the surface of water and watch them as a wave passes, we notice that they rise and fall one after another, in succession, and not all together. A little closer scrutiny will show that in the case of sea waves in deep water the motion of a floating object as the wave passes is a circular one: it is first lifted up, then pushed forward, then let down, and lastly pulled back. So it repeats a round-and-round motion, with the plane of the circle lying in the direction the wave is travelling. This is shown in the diagram in Figure 1, where the dotted circles represent the paths described by corks floating on the surface of the sea while waves travel over it.

[Figure 1: The paths, drawn as dotted circles, that corks floating on the sea describe as waves pass beneath them. Each cork is lifted, pushed forward, let down and drawn back again, and ends where it began.]

We conclude, then, that we must clearly distinguish between the actual individual motion of each water particle and that general motion which we call the wave-motion.

We may define the latter by saying that to produce a wave-motion, each separate particle of a medium — water, or air, or any other fluid — must carry out a movement which is repeated again and again; and the several particles along any line must perform that same motion one after another, that is, lagging behind each other, and not all at the same moment.

We might illustrate this by supposing a row of fifty boys standing in a line in a playground, each boy in turn lifting his arm and letting it down again, and going on doing so. If all the boys lifted their arms together, that would not produce a wave-motion; but if each did it one after another in order along the rank, it would make a wave-motion travelling along the line of boys.

In more learned language, we may say that a wave-motion exists in any medium when the separate portions of it along any line carry out, in order, some kind of cyclical or repeated motion, the particles along that line performing the movement one after another with a certain fixed delay between each neighbouring pair as regards the stage they have reached in the movement.

It will be plain, then, that there can be many different kinds of wave, depending on the sort of repeated motion the several parts perform.

Some of the many forms of wave-motion can be illustrated by mechanical models, as follows.

A board has a series of wooden wheels fastened to it, and on the rim of each wheel is fixed a white knob. The wheels are connected by endless bands, so that turning one wheel makes them all revolve in the same direction. If the knobs are set at the start so that each is a little ahead of its neighbour on the way round, then when the wheels are standing still the knobs will lie along a wavy line (see Figure 2). On turning the first wheel, each knob moves in a circle, but every knob lags a little behind its neighbour on one side and is a little ahead of its neighbour on the other. The result is to produce a wave-motion; and looking at the general effect of the moving knobs, we see that it looks like a hump travelling along, just as with a water wave.

[Figure 2: The wheel model. Wooden wheels linked by endless bands, each carrying a white knob set a little ahead of its neighbour, so that when the wheels turn the knobs run in circles and a hump appears to travel along the row.]

[Figure 3: The model of eccentric wheels on a shaft, each with a rod ending in a white ball. Turning the shaft makes each ball rise and fall in turn, so that a wave runs along the line of balls at right angles to their motion — a transverse wave.]

The motion of the particles of water in a deep-sea wave is like that of the white knobs in the model I have described. Those of you who swim will remember your sensations as a sea wave surges over you. The wave lifts the swimmer, pushes him a little forward, lets him down, and lastly drags him back. It is this dragging-back action which is so dangerous to people who cannot swim, when they are bathing on a steep coast where strong waves are rolling towards the shore.

Two other kinds of wave-motion can be illustrated by the model shown in Figure 3. In this apparatus there are a number of eccentric wheels fixed on a shaft. Each wheel is embraced by a band carrying a long rod which ends in a white ball. The wheels are set on the shaft so that when everything is at rest the balls lie in a wavy line. Then, on turning the shaft, each ball rises and falls in a vertical line and carries out a periodic motion, lagging behind that of its neighbour on one side. The result is a wave-motion running along the line of balls. By altering the model slightly, each ball can be made to describe a circle in a direction at right angles to the line of balls, and then we get a sort of corkscrew wave-motion travelling along the row.

[Figure 4: Golf balls hung by strings, with a spiral brass spring between each pair. A tap on the end ball sends the to-and-fro motion along from ball to ball — a longitudinal wave, in which the movement is along the direction of travel and not across it.]

Another form of wave-motion again may be illustrated by the model shown in Figure 4. Here a number of golf balls are hung up by strings, with spiral brass springs put in between them. On giving the end ball a slight tap, we notice that its to-and-fro motion is handed on from ball to ball, and we have a wave-motion in which the individual movement of the balls is along the direction of the wave-movement, and not across it.

The kind of wave illustrated by the model in Figure 3 is called a transverse wave, and the one shown in Figure 4 is called a longitudinal wave.

At this point it may be as well to define some other expressions which will be much used in these lectures.

We have seen that in a wave-motion each part of the medium makes some kind of movement over and over again, and that of its neighbours on either side, one is a little ahead of it in the performance and the other a little behind. If we look along the line, we shall see that we can pick out portions which are at exactly the same stage of movement — that is, moving in the same way at the same moment. The distance between these portions is called one wave-length. In the case of sea waves, then, the distance between two neighbouring crests, or humps, is one wave-length.

When we speak of a long wave, we do not mean a wave of great length along the ridge, but waves whose crests are far apart, measuring from crest to crest across the ridges.

Strictly speaking, the wave-length may be defined as the shortest distance from crest to crest, or from hollow to hollow, or from one particle to the next which is at the same stage of its movement at the same moment.

Another way of illustrating the same thing would be to pleat or pucker a sheet of paper into parallel ridges. If we make the pleats very narrow, they represent what we call short waves; if we make them very far apart, they represent long waves.

Another much-used phrase is wave-velocity. Suppose a seagull were to fly along above a set of sea waves so as to keep always over one particular hump, or crest: the speed of the gull, reckoned in miles per hour or feet per minute, would be called the speed of the waves. That is something very different from the actual speed of each particle of water.

A third expression in constant use is wave-frequency. If we watch a cork floating on a wave-tossed sea, we see it bob up and down so many times in a minute. The number of times per second, or per minute, that each particle of the medium goes through its cycle of motion is called the wave-frequency, or simply the frequency.

We use the term amplitude, again, for the greatest distance each individual particle of the medium moves from its mean position, its position of rest. In speaking of sea waves we generally call the vertical distance between crest and hollow the height of the wave, and that is twice the amplitude.

There is generally a great deal of exaggeration about the height of sea waves. Voyagers are in the habit of speaking of "waves running mountains high," and yet a sea wave more than 40 feet high is a rare sight. Waves have been measured in the southern Indian Ocean between the Cape of Good Hope and the island of St. Paul, and of thirty waves observed the average height was found to be just under 30 feet; the highest was only 37½ feet. On the other hand, waves of 16 to 20 feet are not uncommon. Travellers who have crossed the Atlantic in stormy weather will often tell of waves said to be 100 feet high; but these are exceedingly rare, if they are ever met with at all, and unless wave-heights are got by some accurate method of measurement, the eye of the inexperienced voyager is easily deceived.

In every case of wave-motion there is a very close connection between the wave-velocity, or speed, the wave-length and the wave-frequency. The connection is expressed by the numerical law that the velocity is equal to the length multiplied by the frequency.

So, supposing we take the case of Atlantic waves 300 feet from crest to crest travelling at the rate of 27 miles an hour, and we are asked to calculate the frequency — the number of times per minute, or per second, that a floating object, say a boat, will be lifted as these waves pass under it.

We must first turn a speed of 27 miles an hour into its equivalent in feet per minute. Since one mile is 5,280 feet, 27 miles an hour comes to 2,376 feet per minute. It is then easy to see that the wave-frequency must be 7.92, or nearly 8, because 7.92 times 300 is 2,376. The answer to the question, then, is that the floating object will rise and fall eight times a minute.

The rule may be put in a compact form which it is worth holding firmly in the memory:

    Wave-velocity = wave-length × wave-frequency

This relation, which we shall have frequent occasion to call on, may be stated another way. We call the period of a wave the time taken to make one complete movement. The periodic time is therefore inversely proportional to the frequency. So we can say that the wave-length divided by the periodic time gives us the wave-velocity.

In the case of water waves and ripples, the wave-velocity is settled by the wave-length. This is not the case, as we shall see, with waves in air or waves in aether: in those, so far as we know, waves of all wave-lengths travel at the same rate. Long sea waves on deep water, however, travel faster than short ones.

A formal and exact proof of the law connecting speed and wave-length for deep-sea waves needs mathematical reasoning of an advanced kind; but its results can be put very simply by saying that, for waves on deep water, the speed at which they travel in miles per hour is equal to the square root of 2¼ times the wave-length in feet.

So, for instance, if we notice waves on a deep sea 100 feet from crest to crest, then the speed at which those waves are travelling in miles per hour is the number got by taking the square root of 2¼ times 100 — that is, of 225. Since 15 is the square root of 225, because 15 times 15 is 225, the speed of those waves is 15 miles an hour.
