Chapter Two: Waves and Ripples Made by Ships

(Part 1 of 4)

It is impossible for even the most careless onlooker to watch a steamer making her way along a lake, or a boy's boat skimming across a pond, or even a duck paddling on a stream, without noticing that the moving body is always accompanied by a trail of waves or ripples which spread out from it and stretch away behind. In the case of a steamer there is an additional irregular disturbance of the water made by the paddle-wheels or the screw, which churn it up and leave a line of rough water in her wake; but that is not part of the true ship-wave effect we are about to discuss. We can best observe the proper ship-wave disturbance in a yacht running freely before the wind on a fairly smooth sea.

The study of these ship-waves has led to most important and practical improvements in the art of designing and building ships, and no treatment of waves and ripples on water would be complete if it left them out altogether.

Before I can explain how these waves are formed, and what effect they have on the motion of a ship and on the power needed to drive her forward, we must begin with a little discussion of some fundamental facts about liquids in motion.

Everyone knows that certain liquids are, as we say, sticky — or, to use the scientific word, viscous. Asked to name some sticky liquids, most people would produce tar, treacle, gum water, glycerine and honey. Very few would think of including pure water in a list of viscous liquids, and fewer still spirits of wine; and yet it is quite easy to show by experiment that even these have some degree of stickiness, of viscosity.

An illustration may be given like this. Take several very large glass tubes, nearly filled with mercury, water, alcohol, glycerine and oil respectively. A small space is left in each tube holding a little air, and the tubes are closed with corks. If we suddenly turn all the tubes upside down, the bubbles of air begin to climb from the bottom of each tube to the top. We notice that in the mercury tube the bubble arrives at the top in a second or two; in the water tube it takes a little longer; in the oil tube longer still; and in the tube of glycerine it is quite a minute or more before the bubble has completed its journey. This experiment, rightly understood, shows us that water has some degree of viscosity.

It can be proved more forcibly by another experiment. To a whirling table is fixed a glass vessel half full of water, and on the water floats a round disc of wood with a long wire attached carrying a paper flag. If we set the basin of water slowly rotating, the paper flag does not move at first. The basin turns without setting the water inside it turning, and slips round it, so to speak. Presently, however, the flag begins to turn slowly, showing us that the water has gradually been set rotating.

This happens because the water sticks slightly to the inner surface of the basin, and the layers of water stick likewise to one another. So as the glass vessel slides round the water it gradually forces the outermost layer to move with it, and that layer forces the next, and so on inwards, until at last the floating block of wood shares in the motion and the basin and its contents turn round as one mass. This could not happen unless the water had some degree of viscosity, and unless what is called skin friction existed between the inside of a glass vessel and the water in it.

We may say at once, however, that no real liquid we know of is entirely free of stickiness, of viscosity. We can nevertheless imagine a liquid utterly without a trace of the property, and this hypothetical substance is called a perfect fluid.

Clearly this ideal perfect liquid must differ in several important ways from any real fluid such as water, and some of those differences we shall now examine. I must point out that in any liquid there may be two kinds of motion: one called irrotational motion, and the other rotational, or vortex, motion.

Consider any mass of water — a river, say — moving in any manner. We may in imagination fix our attention on some small portion of it which at a given instant we take to be spherical. If, as this sphere of liquid moves along embedded in the rest, it is turning about an axis in some direction as well as being distorted in shape, then the motion of that part of the fluid is called rotational. If, however, our little sphere of liquid is merely being stretched or pulled into an oval or ellipsoidal shape without any turning or spinning, then the motion is said to be irrotational.

We might compare these small portions of liquid to a crowd of people moving along a street. If each person moves so as always to keep his face pointing the same way, that movement is irrotational. But if they moved like couples dancing in a ballroom, going along and turning round at the same time, their motion would be called rotational.

Examples of rotational, or vortex, motion are seen whenever we empty a washbasin by pulling out the plug: the water swirls round, rotates, and forms what is called an eddy, or whirlpool. Eddies are also seen near the margin of a swiftly flowing river, where the water is set rotating by friction against objects on the bank. And eddies are created when two streams of water flow over each other at different speeds.

A beautiful instance of this can be seen at an interesting place a mile or two outside the city of Geneva. The Rhone, a rapid river, comes out of the Lake of Geneva as a clear blue stream. At a point called the Junction d'Eaux it meets the Arve, a more sluggish and muddy glacier stream, and the two then run on together in the same channel. The waters of the Rhone and the Arve do not mix at once; the line of separation between them is marked by a series of whirlpools, eddies set up by the flow of the rapid Rhone water against the slower Arve water in contact with it.

Again, it is impossible to move a solid body through a liquid without setting up eddy motion. The movement of an oar through the water, or even of a teaspoon through tea, is seen to be accompanied by little whirls which detach themselves from the oar or the spoon, and which are really the ends of vortices set up in the liquid.

The two facts to notice particularly are these. First, making eddies in liquids always involves spending energy — or, in mechanical language, it means doing work. To set a mass of any liquid rotating requires energy to be delivered to it, just as it does to set a heavy wheel turning or a heavy train moving; and that energy must be supplied by, or absorbed from, the moving solid or liquid which makes the eddies.

Second, eddies or vortices set up in an imperfect fluid such as water are in the end destroyed by fluid friction. Their energy is frittered down into heat, and a mass of water in which eddies have been made by moving a paddle through it is warmer after the eddies have subsided than it was before. It is plain from what has been said that if a really perfect fluid did exist, it would be impossible to make eddies in it by mechanical means; but if eddies were somehow created in it, they would go on for ever, and would have something of the permanence of material substances.

[Figure 27: The smoke-ring box: a wooden box with a round hole in one side and its opposite face covered tightly with elastic cloth. Filled with white fumes and struck sharply on the cloth, it shoots a smoke ring out of the hole and across the room.]

A vortex motion in water may be either a terminated vortex, whose ends are at the surface and are seen as eddies or whirls, or an endless vortex, which is called a vortex ring.

Such a ring is very easily made in air, as follows. Take a cubical wooden box about 18 inches on a side, and make a hole 6 inches across in the bottom (see Figure 27). Cover the open top of the box tightly with elastic cloth. Then fill the box with the white vapour of ammonium chloride, by leading dry hydrochloric acid gas and dry ammonia gas into it together. When it is quite full of dense white fumes, give the cloth cover a sharp blow with the fist, and out of the round hole a white smoke ring leaps and slides away through the air. The experiment can be done on a smaller scale with a cardboard box filled with the smoke of brown paper or tobacco.

If we look closely at the smoke ring as it glides through the air, we shall see that the motion of the air, or of the smoke particles composing the ring, is like that of a rubber umbrella ring fitted tightly on a round ruler and pushed along. The ring turns itself continually over and over, rotating about the circular axis line of the ring itself. This rotary motion is set up by the friction of the smoky air against the edge of the hole in the box as the puff of air comes out of it when the back is thumped.

A simple but striking experiment can be made without filling the box with smoke at all. Set a lighted candle a few feet from the opening of the box and strike the back. An invisible vortex ring of air is formed, and blows the candle out as it passes over it.

Note: Some smokers can blow these rings from their mouths; and they may sometimes be seen when a gun is fired with the old-fashioned black gunpowder, or coming from engine funnels.

Although it is quite easy to make a rotational motion in an imperfect fluid — and in fact difficult not to — a very interesting and valuable discovery has been made in recent years by Professor Hele-Shaw: a method of creating, and making visible, a motion in an imperfect liquid like water which is irrotational. The discovery was that if water is made to flow in a thin sheet between two plates, say of flat glass, not more than about a fiftieth of an inch apart, the motion of the water is exactly that of a perfect fluid, and is irrotational. Whatever objects are put in the path of the water, it flows round them just as if all fluid friction, all viscosity, were absent.

This interesting fact can be shown by an apparatus Professor Hele-Shaw designed. Two glass plates are held in a frame, separated by a very small distance, and water is made to flow between them through an inlet pipe. A metal block pierced with small holes is attached to the end of one plate, and serves to introduce several small jets of coloured water into the main sheet. In making the apparatus, great care must be taken to keep the holes in that block very small — not more than a hundredth of an inch across — and set at exactly the right slope.

Note: For details and illustrations of these researches, the reader is referred to Professor H. S. Hele-Shaw's papers, "Investigation of the Nature of Surface-resistance of Water, and of Stream-line Motion under Experimental Conditions," Proceedings of the Institution of Naval Architects, July 1897 and March 1898. A convenient apparatus for showing these experiments in lectures has been designed by Professor Hele-Shaw and is made by the Imperial Engineering Company, Pembroke Place, Liverpool.

The main water inlet pipe is joined by a rubber tube to a cistern of water set about 4 feet above the apparatus. The frame and glass plates are held vertically in the field of an optical lantern, so that an image of the plates is thrown on the screen. The side inlet pipe leading to the pierced metal block is connected to another reservoir of water coloured purple with permanganate of potash, and the flow of both streams is controlled by taps.

The clear water is first let flow down between the plates, to drive out all air bubbles and create a thin film of moving water between the two sheets of glass. The jets of coloured water are then introduced; and after a little adjustment we shall see the coloured water flowing down in narrow parallel streams, not mixing with the clear water and showing no trace of eddies. The regularity of these coloured streams, and their sharp definition, show that the flow of liquid between the plates is entirely irrotational.

The lines marked out by the coloured water are called stream-lines, and they divide the whole space into uniform tubes of flow. The characteristic of this kind of flow is that the clear water in the space between two coloured streams never passes over into a neighbouring tube. So we can divide the whole sheet of liquid into tubular spaces, called tubes of flow, by means of these stream-lines.

If we now take the apparatus apart and put between the glasses a thin piece of sheet rubber — cut, say, into the shape of a ship, and thick enough to fill the space between the plates — we shall be able to see how the water flows round such an obstacle.

If the air is first driven out by the flow of clear water, and the jets of coloured water are then turned on, we see the lines of flow marked out by coloured streams or narrow bands, and we see these stream-lines bend round and enclose the obstructing object.

The space all round the ship-shaped solid is thus divided into tubes of flow by stream-lines; but the tubes are now no longer straight, and no longer of equal width everywhere. They are narrower opposite the middle of the obstruction than they are near either end.

[Figure 28: A uniform horizontal pipe with water flowing through it, and vertical glass gauge-tubes let into it at intervals. The water stands lower in each successive gauge, and the line joining their tops is the straight sloping hydraulic gradient.]

At this point I must digress to explain a fundamental law about the flow of fluid in tubes. Suppose we have a uniform horizontal metal tube with water flowing through it (see Figure 28). At various points along it let vertical glass pipes be inserted to act as gauge, or pressure, tubes. When the fluid flows along the horizontal pipe, it will stand at a certain height in each pressure tube, and that height measures the pressure in the horizontal pipe at the point where the gauge is fitted.

We shall notice that while the water flows, it stands at different heights in the different gauges, showing a fall of pressure along the pipe; and we notice too that a line joining the tops of all the liquid columns is a straight sloping line, which is called the hydraulic gradient. The experiment proves that when fluid flows along a pipe of uniform section there is a uniform fall, a uniform decrease, of pressure along it. The force driving the liquid along the pipe is measured by the difference between the pressures at its two ends — and the same holds for any chosen length of the pipe.

It will also be clear that, since water can be compressed only to the very slightest extent, the quantity of water — reckoned, say, in gallons — passing any cross-section of the pipe per minute must be the same everywhere.

[Figure 29: A pipe of varying width, with gauge-tubes along it. Contrary to what one expects, the water stands lowest in the gauges over the narrow parts: where the liquid moves fastest, the pressure is least.]

Next, suppose we make water flow through a tube which is narrower in some places than in others (see Figure 29). It will readily be granted that here too the same quantity of water flows across every section of the tube, wide or narrow. But if we ask where the greatest pressure will be, most people would certainly answer: in the narrow parts. They think of the water particles going along the tube as being like a crowd of people passing along a street which is pinched in at some points, as the Strand is; the crowd would be most tightly squeezed, and the pressure of people therefore greatest, in the narrow parts.

With water flowing through a tube of varying section, however, this is not so. So far from the pressure being greatest in the narrow parts, it can be shown experimentally that those are precisely the places where it is least.

This can be demonstrated with the tube shown in Figure 29. If water is allowed to flow through a tube constricted in places, with glass gauge-pipes at various points to show the pressure there, it is found that the pressure at the narrow parts, as shown by the height of water in the gauges, is less than it would be at those places if the tube were of uniform section and the same length and passed the same quantity of water.

We can put this fact as a general law, which governs the motion of fluids in other cases too: where the velocity of the liquid is greatest, there the pressure is least. It is evident, since the tube is wider in some places than in others and a practically incompressible liquid is passing through it, that the liquid must move faster in the narrow parts than in the wide ones; and experiment shows that, after allowing for what may be called the proper hydraulic gradient of the tube, the pressure is least in exactly those places — the constrictions — where the velocity is greatest. This general principle is of wide application in the science of hydraulics, and it lets us interpret rightly many puzzling facts met with in physics.
