Chapter Two: Waves and Ripples Made by Ships

(Part 3 of 4)

Coming back to the flow of a perfect fluid round an oval body: you will remember it was shown that because the stream-lines are further apart near the bow and the stern than they are opposite the middle, the pressure in the fluid is greater near the ends than in the middle.

When a body is not wholly submerged but floats at the surface, as a ship does, these excess pressures at bow and stern show themselves by forcing the water surface up opposite the ends of the vessel and letting it down opposite the middle. This can be seen by looking at any yacht in profile as she sails: she appears to rest on two cross-waves, one at the bow and one at the stern, with the water depressed amidships (see Figure 38).

[Figure 38: A yacht seen in profile under sail, riding on two cross-waves — one at the bow and one at the stern — with the water surface depressed amidships between them.]

These waves travel along with the yacht. If the ship is a long one, each of them gives rise to a wave-train; and looking at a long ship under way you will see that, besides the oblique bow system, there is a series of waves showing in profile against the hull.

[Figure 39: A torpedo-boat destroyer at high speed, her bow forced right up onto the crest of the front transverse wave so that her nose is clear of the water — always, in effect, going uphill.]

When a ship goes at very high speed, as torpedo-boat destroyers do, the bow is generally forced right up onto the top of the front transverse wave, and the boat travels with her nose entirely out of the water (see Figure 39). The boat is, so to speak, always going uphill, her bows resting on the side of a wave that advances with her and her stern followed by another, while behind her stretches an ever-lengthening trail of waves produced by those that travel with her.

The best way to see all these different groups of ship-waves is to tow a fairly large model ship — without masts or sails, a mere hulk — over smooth water in a canal or a lake. Let one person carry a longish pole with a string tied to the end, and pull the model through the water by the string. Let him run along the bank of the canal or lake and tow the ship steadily, keeping the speed as constant as he can. Let a second person, with a hand camera, be rowed in a boat a few yards behind the model. The second observer will be able to photograph the system of ship-waves the model makes, and get various photographs of it towed at different rates. The echelon and transverse waves should then be clearly visible; and if the water is smooth and the light is good, it is not difficult to get many useful photographs.

By throwing bits of bread to ducks and swans disporting themselves on still water, they too may be persuaded to take active exercise in the right direction and to expose themselves, and the waves and ripples they make, to the lens of a hand camera or a pocket kodak. From a collection of snapshots of these things the young investigator will learn a great deal about the form of the waves ships make, and will see that they are a necessary accompaniment of the movement of every floating object on water.

By carrying out experiments of this kind under conditions that allow the exact speed of the model and the resistance it meets to be determined, information of the utmost value to shipbuilders has been accumulated.

Our scientific knowledge of the laws of ship resistance we owe chiefly to the labours of two great engineers, Mr. Scott Russell and Mr. William Froude. Mr. Froude's work was begun privately at Torquay about 1870 and was afterwards continued by him for the British Admiralty. He was the first to show the value and usefulness of experiments made with model ships dragged through water.

At Torquay he built an experimental tank about 200 feet long — a sort of covered swimming bath — and used for his experiments model ships made of wood or of paraffin wax. The wax was chosen because a model could be cut so easily to the desired shape, and because all the shavings and the model itself could be melted down and used again for later experiments.

Without setting out his discoveries in historical order, it is enough to say that as the outcome of his work Mr. Froude was able to state two very important laws about the relative resistance met with when two models of different sizes are dragged through the water at different speeds.

The first concerns what are called "corresponding speeds." Suppose we have a real ship 250 feet long and we make an exact model of her 10 feet long, so that the ship is twenty-five times the length of the model. Froude's law of corresponding speeds is this.

If the model and the ship are both moved over still water, the ship going five times as fast as the model, then the system of waves made by the model will exactly reproduce, on a smaller scale, the system made by the ship. In other words, if we took two photographs — one of the ship going 20 miles an hour, and one of the model, one twenty-fifth her size, going 4 miles an hour — and reduced both to the same size, they would be exactly alike in every detail.

Put more precisely, Froude's first law is this. When a ship and a model of her move through smooth water at such speeds that the speed of the ship is to the speed of the model as the square root of the length of the ship is to the square root of the length of the model, those speeds are called corresponding speeds. At corresponding speeds the wave-making of the model resembles that of the ship on a reduced scale. If we call L and l the lengths of ship and model, and S and s their speeds, then

    S / s = √(L / l)

where S and s are corresponding speeds.

Mr. Froude then established a second law of equal importance, about that part of the whole resistance which is due to wave-making, as met with by a ship and a model, or by two models, moving at corresponding speeds.

Froude's second law is this: if a ship and a model are moving at corresponding speeds, the resistances due to wave-making are proportional to the cubes of their lengths.

To use the example given above: let the ship be 250 feet long and the model 10 feet, so that, as we have seen, the corresponding speeds are as 5 to 1, since the lengths are as 25 to 1. If the ship moves at 20 miles an hour and the model at 4, then the wave-making resistance felt by the ship is to that felt by the model as the cube of 25 is to the cube of 1 — that is, as 15,625 to 1. In symbols, letting R be the wave-making resistance of the ship, r that of the model at corresponding speeds, and L and l their lengths as before:

    R / r = L³ / l³

Before these laws could be applied to designing real ships, experiments had to be made to find the skin friction of different kinds of surface moving through water at various speeds.

Mr. Froude's experiments on this point were very extensive. He showed, for example, that the skin friction of a clean copper surface, such as forms the sheathing of a ship, may be taken as about a quarter of a pound per square foot of wetted surface when moving at 600 feet a minute. That is the same as saying that 4 square feet of copper moved through water at 10 feet a second meets a resisting force equal to the weight of 1 lb., due entirely to skin friction.

Very roughly, this skin resistance increases as the square of the speed. So at 20 feet per second the skin friction of 4 square feet of copper would be 4 lb., and at 30 feet per second 9 lb. Any roughness of the copper, however, greatly increases the skin friction; and in a ship the accumulation of barnacles on the copper sheathing has an immense effect in lowering her speed by increasing it. Hence the need to clean a ship's bottom periodically by scraping off these clinging growths of seaweed and barnacles.

Note: More accurately, as the 1.83 power of the speed.

Mr. Froude also made many experiments on surfaces of paraffin wax, since his ship models were made of that material. It is enough to say that the skin friction in this case, in fresh water, is such that 6 square feet of paraffin wax moving at 400 feet per minute would meet a resistance equal to the weight of 1 lb.

There are, however, certain corrections that have to be applied to these rules in practice, depending on the length of the immersed surface. The mean speed of the water past the model or the ship's surface depends on the form of the stream-lines next to it; and it has already been shown that the velocity of the water next to a ship is not the same at every point of her surface — it is greater near the middle than at the ends. So the longer the model, the less the mean resistance per square foot of wetted surface due to skin friction, when the model is moved at some constant speed.

These explanations will be enough to let the reader understand in a general way the problem to be solved in designing a ship, especially one meant to be driven by steam power.

If a shipbuilder takes a contract to build a steamer — say a passenger steamer for cross-Channel service — he is under an obligation to provide a ship capable of a stated speed. He may, for instance, guarantee that she shall be able to do 20 knots in smooth water. To fulfil that contract he must be able to work out beforehand what engine power to provide. If the engine power is too little he may fail to meet his contract and the ship may be returned on his hands. If he goes to the other extreme and allows too large a margin of power, he may lose money on the job, or else break his contract another way by supplying an engine and boiler too extravagant in fuel.

It is in solving practical problems of this kind that Mr. Froude's methods of experimenting with models in a tank are of such immense value. The first thing a naval architect does in designing a ship is to prepare a series of drawings showing the form of the hull. From those drawings a model is built exactly to scale.

In England, following Mr. Froude's practice, these models are usually made of paraffin wax, about 12 or 14 feet long and an inch thick. In the United States wood is used. The models are built with elaborate care and with the help of special machinery, and are generally 10 or 12 feet long — some convenient fraction of the length of the real vessel they represent. They are then put into a tank and experiments made, to find the force, the "pull," needed to drag the model through the water at various speeds.

The British Admiralty's tank is at Haslar, Gosport, near Portsmouth, where the experiments are now conducted by Mr. E. Edmund Froude, who continues the scientific work and investigations of his distinguished father. The Admiralty tank at Haslar is 400 feet long. The well-known shipbuilders Messrs. Denny Bros. of Dumbarton have a private experimental tank of the same kind; the Government of the United States has a similar one at Washington, the Italian Government one at Spezia, and the Russian Admiralty has built one too. These tanks look like large swimming baths with roofs over them (see Figure 40).

[Figure 40: One of the experimental tanks — a long roofed-over bath with rails above the water carrying the towing carriage, from which the model ship hangs on a rod fitted with recording gear.]

Over the water surface runs a pair of rails carrying a light carriage or platform. The carriage is drawn along by a rope from a steam engine which moves at a very uniform rate, and its speed can be exactly measured and automatically recorded. From the moving carriage hangs a rod or lever to which the model ship is attached, and the pull on that rod is exactly registered on a moving strip of paper by very delicate recording mechanism.

The experiment is made by placing the model at one end of the tank and taking a run at a known constant speed to the other. The experimenter can thus find the total resistance that has to be overcome in pushing the model through the water at a certain known speed. Then, having measured the immersed surface of the model and made the necessary calculations, he can subtract from the total the resistance due to skin friction, and what remains is the resistance due to wave-making.

Suppose the experiment has been done with a model of a ship not yet built, the run being taken at a corresponding speed. The observations give the wave-making resistance of the model, and from Froude's second law the wave-making resistance of the real ship is predicted. Adding to that the calculated skin-friction resistance of the real ship, we have the whole predicted ship resistance at the stated speed.

To give these ideas some precision, it may be worth outlining the calculation for a real ship, as given in a pamphlet by Mr. Archibald Denny.

Note: "Practical Applications of Model Experiments to Merchant Ship Design," by Mr. Archibald Denny, Engineering Conference, Institution of Civil Engineers, 25 May 1897.

The tank at the Leven shipyard, built by Messrs. Denny Bros. for their own experiments, is 300 feet long, 22 feet wide and 10 feet deep, and holds 1,500 tons of fresh water. At each end are shallower parts which serve as docks for ballasting and trimming the models.

As an example of how the tank is used to predict the power needed to drive a ship of a given design, Mr. Denny gives the following figures. The ship to be built was 240 feet long, and from the drawings a model 12 feet long was made — one-twentieth the size.

The problem was to predetermine the power needed to drive the ship through the water at 13½ knots. A knot, let me remark, is a speed of one nautical mile an hour, or 6,080 feet an hour; which, as you will see, is not far from 100 feet a minute.

By Froude's first law, the corresponding speed for the 12-foot model is therefore

    13½ × 6080/60 × √(12/240) = 306 feet per minute

The model was accordingly dragged along the tank at nearly 5 feet a second; and after subtracting from the total observed pull the resistance due to the model's calculated skin friction, the resistance due to wave-making at that speed was found to be 1.08 lb. So by Froude's second law the wave-making resistance of the ship was predicted to be

    1.08 × (240/12)³ × 40/39 = 8,850 lb.

The last fraction, 40/39, is a correcting factor for passing from fresh water to salt.

The surface of the proposed ship was 10,280 square feet, and the skin friction was known to be 1.01 lb. per square foot at a speed of 13.5 knots. So the total skin resistance of the ship would be

    10,280 × 1.01 × 40/39 = 10,620 lb.

Adding the 8,850 lb. for wave-making, we get a total of 19,470 lb. as the predicted resistance to be overcome in moving the ship at 13.5 knots. And since one horsepower is defined as the power that overcomes a resistance of 33,000 lb. moved one foot per minute, it is easy to see that 19,470 lb. overcome at 13.5 knots represents a power of

    (19,470 × 13.5 × 6080) / (33,000 × 60) = 810 horsepower

But in a screw-driven steamer part of the power is lost simply in churning up the water, and part in internal friction in the engine and the screw shaft. It is not far from the truth to say that 50 per cent of the applied engine power is lost in useless churning. So for the steamer above, an actual power of at least 1,600 horsepower would have to be applied to the screw shaft. And to allow for losses in friction, and to leave a margin for emergencies, it would be usual to give such a steamer engines of at least 3,000 indicated horsepower.

Every shipbuilder, however, has at hand a mass of data from actual measured-mile trials, which lets him work out the ratio between the calculated driving horsepower and the indicated horsepower of the engines, and so, in the light of experience, provide any new ship with exactly the steam power needed to reach the required speed.

As an instance of how accurately this can be done with the help of tank experiments, Mr. Denny gives an example from his own experience in building the well-known paddle steamers Princess Josephine and Princess Henriette for the Belgian Government's fast mail service from Dover to Ostend.
