Chapter Three: Waves and Ripples in the Air

(Part 3 of 5)

[Figure 47: Where the guns were heard. The map records observations from eighty-four places on the day of Queen Victoria's funeral procession across the Solent, the dashed arcs marking distance from the firing ships (× on the coast). Solid dots are places where the salutes were heard; open circles are places where they were not — and almost all the open circles lie close in, inside the ring of solid dots.]

Consider the case of a loud sound made near the surface of the earth. If the air were all at rest, and everywhere at the same temperature, the sound waves ought to spread out in a hemisphere. But if, as is generally the case, the temperature near the ground is higher than it is up above, then the part of the wave near the earth travels more quickly than the part in the higher regions of the air. The sound wave therefore has its direction altered: instead of travelling near the earth in a line parallel to the ground, it is tilted upwards, so that it strikes away into the sky. It may equally be brought down again by meeting a current of air blowing against the lower portion, holding that part back more than it holds back the upper part.

So it comes about that a sound wave may, as it were, "play leap-frog" over a whole district — lifted up, and then set down again — and people in that district will not hear the sound at all, although others much further off will hear it plainly.

A very striking instance of this occurred at the funeral procession of our late beloved Queen Victoria, of blessed memory. The body was carried across the Solent on 1 February 1901, between lines of battleships firing salutes with their big guns. Arrangements were made to find out the greatest distance at which the sound of those guns could be heard. In a very interesting article in Knowledge for June 1901, Dr C. Davison collected the results of observations from eighty-four places, some of which are marked on the map (see Figure 47), reproduced from that journal by kind permission of its editor.

Observations came in from places as far away as Alderton in Suffolk, 139 miles from the Solent. At several places the sound of the guns was loud enough to rattle windows — at Longfield (56 miles), Sutton (58 miles) and Richmond Hill (61 miles). But while there is clear evidence that the guns were heard even at Peterborough (125 miles), the strangest thing of all is that the sound was hardly heard at all in the neighbourhood of the Solent itself. The nearest place from which any record was received was Horley, in Surrey — 50 miles away.

It seems evident, then, that the sound was lifted up soon after it left the Solent and passed clean over the heads of the people standing near, travelling on through the upper air for a considerable distance — probably 40 or 50 miles — before being bent down again to reach observers on the earth's surface at much greater distances. An examination of the wind-charts for that day makes it tolerably clear that this was due to the way the wind was blowing at the time. Dr Davison writes:

"Now, on February 1, the wind at places to the west of Spithead was generally light, and from the west or nearly so, though near Lyndhurst there was a fresh breeze from about W.N.W. or N.W. At Portsmouth, again, the wind is described as from the shore. On the other hand, many of my correspondents at great distances from Spithead state that the wind, when sensible, was southerly in direction. Thus the sound-rays were first of all refracted by contrary winds over the heads of observers between 10 and 45 miles, and were afterwards brought down again by favourable upper currents, so that the reports were clearly audible beyond 50 miles and up to 140 miles from Spithead, and were so loud at a distance of 84 miles that labourers in the fields put down their spades and listened."

The same explanation has been offered for the extraordinary differences found, at different times, in the distance at which a lighthouse fog-horn can be heard by ships at sea. In that case, however, there is another possible explanation, involving what is called the interference of sound waves, which will be explained presently. The late Professor Tyndall, who was an authority on this subject, held that in certain states of the atmosphere there exists what he called "acoustic opacity." The air is then not uniform in temperature and moisture; and passing through so irregular a medium, sound waves lose a great deal of their intensity by internal reflection at each of those surfaces — just as light is stopped when it passes through crushed ice or crushed glass. At every surface a little of the light is wasted by irregular reflection, so that the medium, though made up of fragments of a perfectly transparent substance, is more or less opaque in the mass.

On the subject of sound-signals as coast-warnings, some exceedingly interesting information has lately been supplied by Mr E. Price-Edwards (see the Journal of the Society of Arts, vol. 50, p. 315, 1902). The lighthouse boards of the various countries provide means for making loud warning sounds at their lighthouses, as a substitute for the light when fog comes down. The distance at which those sounds can be heard, and the distance-carrying power of different kinds of sound, have been the subject of elaborate investigation.

The instrument found most effective in producing very powerful sound waves is called a siren. It consists of a tube or horn with a fixed disc at the bottom with slits cut in it. Outside that disc is a second, movable one, also slitted, which revolves against the first. As the second disc turns, the passage into the horn is opened and shut suddenly and repeatedly, as the slits in the two discs come opposite one another or not. Air or steam under a pressure of 10 to 40 lb. to the square inch is blown into the horn, and the rapid interruption of that blast by the revolving slits cuts it up into puffs which, when they come often enough, make a very loud sound. The compressed air is admitted into a back chamber and waits there for a chance to escape, which it gets the moment the revolving disc turns into a position where the two sets of slits coincide. In comparative trials of different sound-producing instruments, nothing has yet been found to beat the siren as a producer of penetrating sound.

It has turned out to be very important that the frequency of the note the siren gives should coincide with the fundamental tone of the trumpet or horn. As will be explained in the next lecture, every column of air in a tube has a particular natural period of oscillation. Suppose, for instance, that for a trumpet-tube of a certain length that period is 1/100 second. Then the siren with that trumpet will be most effective if the interruptions of the air-blast come 100 times a second.

Lord Rayleigh has also shown that the shape of the mouth of the trumpet matters, and that it should not be circular, as it usually is, but elliptical or oval, the shortest diameter of the ellipse being a quarter of the longest. The mouth should be set so that the longer axis is vertical. He considers, too, that the short axis of the oval should not be more than half the wave-length of the sound being sent out. With a trumpet-mouth of that shape the sound is to some extent prevented from being flung up and down, and is spread better sideways — which is exactly what is wanted in a coast signal.

The information that has accumulated about the distances at which sounds can be heard comes very briefly to this.

First as to wind. The direction of the wind has a most remarkable influence on the distance at which a given loud sound can be heard. In one instance the noise of a siren was heard 20 miles away in calm weather, whereas with an opposing wind it was not heard more than 1¼ miles away.

In calm weather a low-pitched note has been found to carry better than a high one; in rough weather the opposite is the case.

One thing noticed by everyone who has experimented on this subject is the curious occurrence of "areas of silence." That is to say, a particular siren will be heard well close to its position; a little further off the sound will be lost altogether; and on going further still it is heard again.

Many theories have been advanced to account for this, and none of them is completely satisfactory. It is, however, a thoroughly well established effect, and one which it behoves every mariner to know about.

One curious fact is the very great power that can be swallowed up in making a loud siren note. In one case a siren giving a high note was found to absorb as much as 600 horse-power when the note was sounded continuously. The most striking — and, in one sense, the most disappointing — thing about these loud sounds is the short distance they travel in certain states of the wind. The general result has been that the most effective sound for a coast-warning is one with a frequency of 100, or a wave-length of about 10 feet.

When we were dealing with waves in general, it was pointed out that the velocity of a wave depends on the elasticity and the density of the medium it is travelling in. In the case of a sound wave in air, or in any other gas, the speed of transmission is proportional to the square root of the elasticity of the gas, and inversely proportional to the square root of its density.

At the same temperature the elasticity of a gas may be taken as the same thing as its pressure. So at the same pressure the speed of sound through different gases varies inversely as the square root of their densities. An example will make this clear. Take the density of hydrogen as 1; then the density of oxygen is 16. The ratio of the densities is therefore 1 to 16, and the ratio of their square roots is 1 to 4. So the velocity of sound waves in hydrogen is to that in oxygen as 1 is to ¼ — in other words, sound travels four times faster in hydrogen than in oxygen at the same temperature and pressure. The following table gives the velocity of sound in various gases at the melting point of ice (0° C.) and atmospheric pressure (760 mm. on the barometer).

                Gas                       Velocity
           Hydrogen                4,163 feet per second
           Carbon monoxide         1,106 feet per second
           Air                     1,090 feet per second
           Oxygen                  1,041 feet per second
           Carbon dioxide            856 feet per second

We see, then, that the lighter the gas the faster sound travels in it, pressure and temperature being the same. If the atmosphere we breathe were made of hydrogen instead of a mixture of oxygen, nitrogen and a good many other gases, a clap of thunder would follow the flash of lightning much sooner than it does in our present air, supposing the storm to be at the same distance. As things are, if 20 seconds pass between the flash and the peal, it means the storm is about 4 miles away; but in a hydrogen atmosphere, for a storm at that same distance, the thunder would follow the lightning in about 5 seconds.

Armed with these facts about the travelling of air waves, we can now point out some interesting consequences. You will remember that in the first chapter it was pointed out that a wave on water can be reflected by a hard surface, and can be refracted, or bent, when it passes from a region where it is moving quickly to one where it moves more slowly. It will be necessary now to prove by experiment that the same things can be done with sound, so that a body of proof may be built up in your minds convincing you that the outside cause of the sensation of sound must be a wave-motion in the air.

First, I must describe to you in some detail the arrangements we shall use for producing and detecting the sound waves employed in these experiments.

It would not do to rely on the ear as the detector, because you cannot all be placed so as to hear the sounds that will be produced. We shall therefore use a peculiar kind of flame, called a sensitive flame, to act as our detector.

If ordinary coal-gas stored in a gasometer is burnt at a small jet under considerable pressure, we can produce a tall flame some 18 to 24 inches high. The jet used has a steatite top with a small pin-hole gas exit about 1/25 inch across. The gas pressure must be equal to about 10 inches of water; it cannot be drawn straight from the house gas-pipes, but has to be supplied from a special gasometer or gasbag at a pressure high enough to give a flame 18 inches or so tall. If the pressure is too great the flame roars; if it is reduced a little, the flame can be made to burn quietly and stand up as a tall reed-like spike (A, Figure 48).

This flame, properly adjusted, is curiously sensitive to shrill, chirping sounds. You may shout or talk loudly near it and it takes not the slightest notice of your voice; but chirrup, or whistle a shrill note, or clink your keys or a few coins in your hand, and the flame instantly shortens itself to about 6 or 7 inches, takes on a peculiarly ragged edge, and roars (B, Figure 48). When it is in adjustment, the clink of two coins in the hand will affect this sensitive flame from the other side of the room. It is also very sensitive to a shrill whistle or a bird-call. From what has already been explained it will be clear to you that the flame responds to very short air waves, which is to say to high notes. The particular flame I am about to use responds with great readiness to air waves from 1 inch to ½ inch in length.

Note: See Professor W. F. Barrett, Nature, 1877, vol. 16, p. 12.

[Figure 48: The sensitive flame. Undisturbed, it stands up quiet and lance-like (A); the moment a shrill sound reaches it — the clink of two coins across the room will do — it drops to a third of its height, roars, and frays out at the edges (B).]

It is worth explaining that the sensitive part of the flame is its root, just where it comes out of the burner, and that its curious behaviour is caused by the sound wave throwing that part of the flame into vibration.

If you think about what must be happening, you will easily see that what the sound wave does is to throw the particles of gas, just as they escape from the hole in the jet, into vibration crosswise — at right angles to the direction in which they are moving up the flame. When no sound wave is acting on them, the gas molecules are rushing out of the jet straight upwards. When the sound wave strikes them they are, so to speak, caught, and made to rock to and fro across the flame. The two motions combined have a spreading effect, so that instead of being a thin lance-like shape the flame becomes blunter, stumpier and ragged at the sides.

The flame acts, therefore, as a detector of certain sounds. It is a very sensitive kind of ear, one which listens and answers to the faintest whisper if only it is uttered in the right tones, but is stone deaf to everything else. Its great value to us is that it acknowledges the presence of air waves of short wave-length, and shows at once when it is standing in a stream of air waves — of air ripples — of very short wave-length.
