Chapter Three: Waves and Ripples in the Air

(Part 5 of 5)

In most transparent substances the aether waves which make up light are transmitted at different velocities, the longer waves moving faster than the shorter. Hence the familiar result that a glass prism breaks a ray of white light up into its different constituents. We cannot, however, do anything of that kind to a complicated series of sound waves with a carbon dioxide prism. In other words, a sound-prism refracts sound waves of various wave-lengths, but it does not disperse them.

One thing should be pointed out before we leave this experiment: if it is to succeed, the length of the sound waves used must be small compared with the size of the prism. Otherwise there would be too much bending of the waves round the obstacle. Whenever a train of waves — waves in air or waves in water, it makes no difference — meets a body it cannot pass through, there is always a certain amount of bending of the waves round it, which is technically called diffraction. We can see this on a large scale when sea waves rolling in pass some large rock standing up out of the water like an island. The waves meet it, pass round it, and, so to speak, embrace it and go on together on the other side. If there is to be any calm water at all on the lee side, the island must be large compared with the length of the waves. The same holds good with air waves.

For an object to cast an acoustic shadow — a sound-shadow — it must be large compared with the length of the wave.

A hand held in front of the mouth, for instance, does not much obstruct the waves of the speaking voice, because those waves are 2 to 4 feet long. But as you have seen, when the sound waves are only 1 inch long the hand casts a very well marked sound-shadow, as its effect shows when it is held between the whistle and the sensitive flame.

To complete our proof that the agency which affects our ears as sound really is a matter of air waves, we must be able to show that air waves can be made to interfere, as waves on water do. The nature of the effect called interference, by which one wave is made to annihilate another, has already been fully explained. I shall now try to show you the interference of two trains of sound waves, in an experiment due to Lord Rayleigh, whose apparatus he has kindly lent me.

It consists, as you see, of a stand carrying a jet from which we make a tall sensitive flame. Behind the flame stands a sheet of glass, held vertically, which can be slid towards the flame or away from it. A little distance off we place a bird-call, a sort of whistle, which when blown with air gives a note so shrill that human ears cannot hear it.

The air-vibrations it makes come at the rate of 33,000 a second, which is beyond the limit of hearing. So however hard it is blown, you hear no sound from it whatever.

It has, as you can see, a very violent effect on the sensitive flame. This flame, then, hears a note we cannot hear — which suggests that some animals or insects may have a range of hearing lying quite outside the limits set for our human ears.

That being so, you will see that when the glass plate is set behind the flame at a certain distance, the flame at once stops flaring and stands quiet. But if the plate is moved towards or away from the flame by a very small amount — about a twelfth of an inch — the tall flame instantly drops in height and begins to flare. Moving the plate steadily back by equal small steps, we find the flame quiet and waving by turns.

The explanation is that this is interference between the direct and the reflected sound-rays. The air waves are turned back when they meet the glass in such a way that the crests of the arriving waves are made to coincide with the hollows of the reflected ones — or, to put it more correctly, so that the zones of condensation of the one fall on the places of rarefaction of the other. When the glass is adjusted so that this happens, all air-wave motion just in front of it is destroyed, and the sensitive detecting flame therefore stands quiet. But if the glass is moved nearer to the flame or further from it, the condensations of the reflected wave may be brought to fall in the same places as the condensations of the arriving wave, and then the disturbance is doubled instead of destroyed.

[Figure 52: The folded-paper model of interference. The strip is cut into the outline of a wave; folded back on itself at ab, the crests of the incoming wave are exactly filled by the hollows of the returning one and the two cancel. Folded at cd instead, crest falls on crest and the two conspire.]

A little model can be made which will help the reader to grasp this point. Cut a piece of paper into the shape shown in Figure 52 to represent a wave. Bend the paper back on itself at the dotted line ab, and let one half stand for the arriving wave and the other for the reflected wave. You will see that in this case the crests of the incoming wave are obliterated by the hollows of the returning one. If, however, the paper is bent back at cd instead, then the crests of the reflected and the incoming waves conspire, and there is no interference.

Whenever we can produce interference in this way between two sets of rays — of sound, or of light, or of anything else — we have the strongest possible proof that what we are dealing with is a wave-motion. For there is no other way we can conceive of in which sound could be destroyed by sound, by superimposing two sound-rays on one another, or light destroyed by bringing two rays of light together.

We may close our discussion of this part of the subject by looking at the way vibrating bodies communicate waves of different form to the air. As has already been explained, our ears let us appreciate that the air has been thrown into a wave-motion, and that this wave-motion may be made of waves of great or small wave-length, and of great or small amplitude. But we can do something more than that: we can detect a difference between the form of two waves, so that when it is drawn out as a wavy line of light, as you have seen, the nature of that outline impresses itself on our consciousness.

Nothing is more remarkable than the extraordinary delicacy of the ear in this respect. Among all our scores of friends and acquaintances we recognise each one by a quality of voice we describe as harsh, melodious, sympathetic, rasping, penetrating or clear. It is not altogether a matter of enunciation or of vocalisation, for if two different people pronounce the same vowel-sound correctly, we can still detect a great difference between their voices. We have to ask, then, what this difference consists of when we consider it simply as something happening outside us in the air.

Great light was thrown on this by the invention and perfecting of the phonograph and the telephone, and also by a more recent and wonderful invention variously called the micro-phonograph or the telegraphone. You have all heard a phonograph speak, or sing, or reproduce music.

In its original form the Edison phonograph consisted of a cylinder covered with tinfoil, against which a steel point, fixed to the centre of a metal disc, pressed lightly. In its modern form, improved by Edison, Bell, Tainter and others, it is a far more perfect instrument for recording and reproducing sound. It now consists of a cylinder coated with a composition rather like very hard soap. The cylinder is carried on a metal drum and made to revolve slowly and very steadily by clockwork. A metal arm carries an elastic metal disc called the receiving diaphragm, and to the back of that is fixed a very delicate cutting tool, like a small chisel. A screw carries the chisel and diaphragm along the cylinder; and if the disc is given no vibration, the tool cuts a spiral on the recording cylinder — a clean groove with a smooth bottom, ploughed out of the soft composition.

If, however, we speak or sing to the diaphragm, the air waves set it vibrating, and this makes the tool cut a furrow whose bottom is irregular, the undulations corresponding exactly to the movements of the diaphragm. If we could look at a section of that furrow, we should see it rising and falling like a miniature switchback railway, each up-and-down answering to one vibration of the diaphragm. In this way we store up a record of air waves on the hard-soap cylinder. Then, to reproduce the sound, a second diaphragm with a trumpet mouthpiece has at its back a little pointed lever, or set of levers, one end of which rests on the bottom of the irregular furrow.

If the cylinder is now set so that this reproducing diaphragm travels over the record cut by the receiving one, a motion is communicated to it which is an exact facsimile of the motion that cut the furrow. So the reproducing diaphragm gives back to the air impulses which reproduce the same wave-trains, and therefore the same speech or song, as that which made the record in the first place.

We can in this way record any human utterance and receive it again, word-perfect, months or years after it was made.

Note: When this lecture was given at the Royal Institution, a large phonograph, kindly lent by the Edison-Bell Phonograph Company, Ltd., of Charing Cross Road, London, was used to reproduce a short address on natural history to the young people present, which had been spoken into the instrument ten days earlier by Lord Avebury, at my request. The address was heard perfectly by the five or six hundred people in the audience.

The working of the phonograph leads us to ask how a disc of metal, or of any other elastic material, responds to the aerial vibrations which fall upon it; and I shall end this lecture by showing you an experiment illustrating that point which, though not very easy to perform, is certainly one of the most attractive that can be shown.

On the table is a brass tube shaped somewhat like a square-shouldered funnel, and over its smaller end a wide indiarubber tube with a mouthpiece is loosely slipped. It is essential that the indiarubber tube should not fit tightly, but should be supported so that an air space is left all round between it and the brass funnel tube. The latter can be carried on a wooden stand. The wider end of the funnel must be about 2½ inches across, and its lip must be quite smooth. The inside of the funnel should be blackened.

A soap solution then has to be prepared, of the kind used for blowing soap bubbles. A good recipe for making it is given by Professor Vernon Boys in his book Soap Bubbles and the Forces which Mould Them, and runs as follows. Fill a clean stoppered bottle three-quarters full of soft water. Add one-fortieth of its weight of oleate of soda, which will probably float on the water; leave it until it has dissolved. Then nearly fill the bottle up with Price's glycerine and shake it well. Leave the bottle stoppered for a week in a dark place. Then syphon off the clear liquid from the scum at the top, and add one or two drops of strong ammonia to every pint of it. Do not warm the liquid or filter it, and keep it carefully from exposure to the air; but when you come to blow a bubble, pour a little of it out into a saucer.

Failing this excellent solution, a substitute can be made by dissolving bits of clear yellow soap in soft water; but soapy water of that kind does not give films that last as long as those made with the Plateau solution described above.

By dipping the wide end of the funnel tube into some of the soap solution in a saucer, it is easy to cover the end with a flat soap film which will last a considerable time. The tube then has to be set up in front of an electric arc or limelight lantern, so that a powerful parallel beam of light can be thrown onto the film by a small flat mirror. A lens is also placed so as to focus an image of the film onto a screen.

In finding the right position for the lens it is a great help to lay a piece of white card with some bold black letters on it over the brass funnel, in the place the soap film will occupy, and to focus that until the letters come out sharp on the screen. When the soap film is then put in place of the card, we should have on the screen a reflection of the surface of the film, which at first will look like a patch of white light. If we let the film stand for a few seconds it begins to grow thinner at the top than at the bottom, and the image on the screen breaks out into gorgeous bands of red and green — interference colours, due, like the colours of a soap bubble, to the interference of the light rays reflected from the inner and the outer surface of the film. If the experiment is done skilfully, what appears on the screen is very beautiful indeed: a patch of light banded with colours which grow more intense the longer the film stands, and which towards the end look something like an unusually lovely sunset.

Just before the film reaches that condition, if we sing gently into the mouthpiece of the indiarubber tube, the soap film will be thrown into vibration. The image on the screen shows a set of regularly arranged concentric stationary ripples, which change their appearance with every change in the note sung.

The experiment needs some care and practice to do properly, and should not be attempted in public without a great many rehearsals; but when it is well shown it is most effective and interesting. We see, then, that an object as delicate as a stretched soap film can take up the vibrations of the air and be thrown into vibration itself. The reason is that the soap film, as was explained in the first lecture, resists stretching and behaves like a sheet of elastic indiarubber. So as each air wave falls on it, the film is pushed out and pulled in by turns; and being held at the edges, the only way it can accommodate itself is by stretching. We therefore set up in the film a set of stationary waves, like those set up on a rope fixed at one end when the loose end is jerked regularly up and down by the hand.

The experiment shows us clearly how an elastic disc is set vibrating when waves of compression fall upon it; and in the next lecture we shall go on to discuss vibrations of this kind which give rise to musical effects.
