Chapter Four: Sound and Music

(Part 1 of 4)

Our discussion of waves and ripples in the air would be very incomplete if we left it without saying something more about the difference between those motions in the air which make up noise, or sound, and those we owe the pleasure-giving effects of musical tones to. I propose, then, to spend our time today on a brief account of the properties of those air-vibrations which give rise to the class of sensations we call music, and of the ways they are produced.

Enough has already been said to make it clear that one essential difference between sound or noise and music — as far as the events outside our own bodies are concerned — is that in the first case we have a more or less irregular motion of the air, and in the second a rhythmical movement making up a train of air waves. The greater pleasure we take in the second is no doubt partly due to its rhythmical character. We get satisfaction out of every regularly repeated muscular movement, such as those of dancing, skating and rowing, and the agreeable sensation we enjoy in performing them is partly a matter of their periodic, cyclical nature.

In the same way, our ears are satisfied by the evenly repeated and sustained vibrations coming from an organ-pipe or a tuning fork, but we are irritated and annoyed by the sensations set up when the irregular air-vibrations of a donkey's bray or a parrot's screech fall on them.

Before we can go any further into the nature of musical sounds, however, two things must be clearly explained: the meaning of the term natural period of vibration, and the nature of the effect called resonance.

You see before you three small brass balls hanging by strings. One string is 1 foot long, the second 4 feet, the third 9 feet. Balls hung in this way are called simple pendulums. Taking in my hands the balls on the 1-foot and the 4-foot strings, I draw them a little way aside from their positions of rest and let them go. They swing like pendulums; and, as you see, the 1-foot pendulum makes two swings in the time the 4-foot pendulum makes one. Repeating the experiment with the 1-foot and the 9-foot pendulums, we find the short one now makes three swings while the long one makes one. The conclusion follows at once: pendulums whose lengths are 1, 4 and 9 feet make their swings from side to side in times which are in the ratio of 1, 2 and 3.

Again, if we draw any one of the pendulums aside and let it swing, we find that in any stated period of time — say a minute — it performs a certain definite number of oscillations peculiar to itself. You might imagine that by drawing it further aside or less far, and so making it swing through a larger or smaller distance, you could make those swings per minute as many or as few as you pleased. But on trying the experiment you would find this is not so: provided the arc of vibration is not too great, the time of one complete swing to and fro is the same whether the swing is large or small.

In scientific language this is called the isochronism of the pendulum. It is said to have been discovered by Galileo in the cathedral at Pisa, as he watched the swings of a chandelier dying away and counted them by the beats of his own pulse. This periodic time of vibration, which is independent of the amplitude of the swing so long as that is small, is called the natural time of vibration of the pendulum, or its free periodic time.

In the case of a simple pendulum the free periodic time is proportional to the square root of the pendulum's length. So a short pendulum makes more swings a minute than a long one, and this rate of swinging is quite independent of the weight of the bob. We can of course take hold of the bob and force it to vibrate in any period we please, producing a forced vibration; but a free vibration, an unforced one, has a natural time-period of its own.

For any body to vibrate when it is displaced and then let go, two conditions must be satisfied. First, there must be a controlling force tending to bring the substance back to its original position when it is displaced. Second, the thing moved must have mass, inertia, so that when it is displaced and allowed to come back it overshoots the mark and takes up a displacement in the opposite direction. In the case of the pendulum, the elastic control, the restoring force, is the weight of the bob, which always tries to get to the lowest position.

We can, however, make a pendulum of another kind. Here is a heavy ball hung from a spiral spring (see Figure 53). If I pull the ball down a little and let it go, it jumps up and down, performing vertical vibrations. The elastic control here is the spring, which resists being stretched. In this case too there is a natural free time of vibration, independent of the extent of the motion but depending on the weight of the ball and the stiffness of the spring.

[Figure 53: The spring pendulum — a heavy ball hung from a spiral spring. Pulled down and released, it vibrates up and down in a time of its own, fixed by the weight of the ball and the stiffness of the spring, and quite unaffected by how far it is pulled.]

A good illustration of these principles is to be found in the construction of a clock or a watch. A clock contains a pendulum which vibrates in a certain fixed time. The arrangements we call the "works" are only a contrivance for counting the swings and recording them by the "hands." But because of friction in the works the pendulum would soon come to rest, so we have a mainspring, or "weights," to give it a little push at each swing and keep it going. In a watch there is no pendulum, but there is a "balance-wheel and hair-spring" — a wheel with a spiral spring attached, so that it can swing to and fro through a small angle. The so-called "escapement" is the means by which the swings are counted, and by which a little impulse is given to the wheel to keep it swinging. The watch "keeps time" if the hair-spring is of the right stiffness and the balance-wheel of the right weight and size. So a clock can be made to go faster or slower by slightly altering the length of its pendulum, and a watch by slightly changing the stiffness of its hair-spring.

It may be noted in passing that our legs swing like pendulums when we walk, and that every particular length of leg has its own natural time of vibration. There is therefore a certain speed at which each person can walk with the least fatigue, because it corresponds to the natural free, unforced period of vibration of the leg considered as a pendulum.

We now pass on to another very important matter. If we have any pendulum, or any mass hung from a spring — anything, that is, with a natural period of vibration — we can set it moving by giving it small repeated blows or pushes. If the interval between those impulses agrees with the natural time-period of oscillation, it will be found that a very large swing is quickly built up. If, on the other hand, the interval between the blows does not agree with the natural time of vibration, their effect in producing vibration is comparatively small.

This is very easily illustrated with the ball hung from a spring. Suppose that with an indiarubber puff-ball I direct a little puff of air against the ball. The small impulse produces hardly any visible effect. Now let the puff be repeated at intervals equal to the natural free period of vibration of the hanging ball: within a very few puffs we have set up a very considerable swing in the heavy ball. If, however, the puffs of air come irregularly, they do very little towards setting the ball in motion.

In the same way a pendulum made of a heavy block of wood can be set swinging through a considerable range by a very few properly timed taps of the finger. We may notice another instance of the effect of accumulated impulses when walking over a plank laid across a ditch. If we tread in time with the natural vibration-period of the springy plank, we shall very soon set up oscillations of a dangerously large size — whereas if we take care to make the timing of our steps disagree with the plank's, nothing of the kind happens.

It is for this reason that soldiers crossing a suspension bridge are often ordered to break step, in case the steady tramp of armed men should set up a perilous state of vibration in the bridge. It is no exaggeration to say that a boy with a pea-shooter could in time bring down the Charing Cross railway bridge over the Thames. Suppose a pea shot against one of the sections of that iron bridge: there is no doubt it would produce an infinitesimally small displacement of the bridge. Neither is there any question that the bridge, being an elastic and heavy structure, has a natural free time of vibration. So if pea after pea were shot at the same place at intervals exactly agreeing with that free time-period, the effects would accumulate, and would in time build up to an amount that would endanger the structure. Impracticable and undesirable as it might be to try the experiment, it is nevertheless perfectly true that a boy with a pea-shooter, given enough patience and enough peas, could in time bring down an iron girder bridge by the accumulation of properly timed but infinitely small blows.

I had an instance of this in front of me not long ago. I was at a place where very large masts were being put up. One of them, about 50 feet long, was resting on two great blocks of wood placed under either end. It was a fine beam of timber, square in section, each side about 2 feet across; so it lay like a bridge on its two end supports. Standing on the middle of this great beam, or jumping on it, produced hardly any visible bending. But I laid my hand on the centre of the log and pressed gently; and repeating the pressure at intervals, I soon discovered its natural time-period of vibration, and found that by pressing at the right moment large oscillations could be built up. Had I dared to carry the operation far enough, it is certain that with properly timed impulses it would have been possible to break this great wooden mast in half by the pressure of one hand.

We have constant occasion in mechanical work to notice that where one vigorous pull or push will not produce some wanted displacement of an object, a number of very small hits, or properly timed pushes or pulls, will do it. We might sum all this up by saying that it is a rule, in dealing with any body capable of free vibration of any kind, that impulses, however small, will build up oscillations of any size required, provided only that they are applied at intervals equal to the natural free period of vibration of the body in question.

We can illustrate these principles by a few experiments bearing specially on musical instruments. If we fasten one end of a rope to a fixed support, we find we can produce a wave, a pulse, in the rope by jerking the free end up and down with the hand. The speed at which a pulse or wave travels along a rope depends on its weight per unit of length — on how many pounds it weighs to the yard, say — and on the tension, the pull, on the rope. The tighter the rope, the faster the pulse travels; and at the same tension, the heavier the rope, the slower it travels.

It is not difficult to show that the speed of the pulse is measured by the square root of the tension of the rope divided by its weight per unit of length — by what we may call the density of the rope.

We have already explained that in a medium such as air a wave of compression travels at a speed measured by the square root of the air-pressure, or elasticity, divided by the density. In exactly the same way the hump formed on a rope by jerking one end runs along at a speed measured by the square root of the stretching force, the tension, divided by the density.

For lecture purposes the travelling of a pulse or wave along a string is most easily shown by filling a long indiarubber tube with sand and hanging it up by one end. A tube so loaded has a large weight per unit of length, so that if we jerk one end, the hump created travels along rather slowly and its movement can easily be watched. You may sometimes see a canal-boat driver give a jerk of this kind to the end of his horse-rope, to make it clear some obstacle such as a post or a bush.

If we do this with a rope fixed at one end, we notice that when the hump reaches the far end it is reflected and comes back on itself. If we call the length of the rope l, and the time it takes to travel the double distance, there and back from the free end, t, then 2l divided by t is obviously the velocity of the wave. But we have said that this velocity is equal to the square root of the tension of the rope (call it e) divided by the weight per unit of length (call it m). So clearly:

      2l/t = √(e/m);   or   t = 2l · √(m/e)

Supposing, then, that the jerks of the free end are given at intervals of time equal to t — the time the pulse takes to run along and back again — we shall find the rope thrown into what are called stationary waves. If the jerks come twice as fast, the rope can accommodate itself to them by dividing into two sections, each vibrating separately; and in the same way it can divide into three, four, five, six or more sections in stationary vibration. The rope, then, has not one natural free period of vibration but many, and it can adapt itself to many different frequencies of jerking, provided those frequencies are whole-number multiples of its fundamental frequency.

All this can very easily be verified with a large tuning fork and a string. Let a light cord or silk string be attached to one prong of a large tuning fork kept vibrating electrically, as will be explained presently. The other end of the cord passes over a pulley and carries a small weight. Set the fork vibrating and try various weights on the far end of the cord.

It is possible to find a weight which puts such a tension on the cord that its free time of vibration as a whole agrees with that of the fork. The cord is then thrown into stationary vibration. This is best seen by throwing the shadow of the cord onto a white screen, where it appears as a grey spindle-shaped shadow. The central point A of the spindle is called a ventral point, or antinode, and the stationary points N are called the nodes (see Figure 54).

Next let the tension of the string be reduced by taking some of the weight off the end. When the adjustment is right, the cord will vibrate in two segments with a node at the centre. Each segment vibrates in time with the tuning fork, but the time of vibration of the whole cord is twice that of the fork. In the same way, by adjusting the tension we can make the cord vibrate in three, four or more sections, giving what are called the harmonics of the string.
