Chapter Five: Electric Oscillations and Electric Waves

(Part 1 of 5)

In the previous chapters your attention has been directed to waves on water and waves in air. We shall now go on to discuss some of the more difficult matters connected with the production of waves in the aether. You will find that this part of our subject makes greater demands on our powers of comprehension, since much of what we have to consider is not directly an object of sense perception, and the inferences we have to draw from observed facts are less simple and less easy to follow. Still, I trust that if you have managed to grasp clearly the nature of a surface wave on water and of a compressional wave in air, you will not let yourselves be discouraged from tackling a new class of ideas, but will be able to go further still and gain a more or less clear conception of what an electric wave in the aether is.

First we must consider the medium in which these waves are created. We can see a water surface with our own eyes, and we can understand without much difficulty that the surface can be thrown into humps and hollows, or wrinkled, and that these elevations and depressions can change their position, so making a surface wave which moves forward. The movement of a water wave is therefore only the result of a local raising of the surface which travels along — which happens at one place after another across the surface.

With an air wave, again, although we cannot see the air, we are able with a little help from experiment to form a clear mental picture of a region of compression travelling through it: a certain slice, layer or zone of air is more compressed than the parts around it, and that region of compression shifts its place steadily along. It has been carefully explained that producing a wave of any kind therefore implies two things — first, a medium, a material, for the wave to exist in; and second, some kind of periodic change or movement which the various parts of that medium undergo one after another.

So if we are given any medium, water or air, and asked to explain how a wave is produced in it, we have first to ask what kind of change can take place in it, or on it, which can appear in one part after another. On a water surface, some parts can be heaped up higher than the rest, and that heaping can happen at one place after another in such a way that as it disappears in one place it reappears in the next. In air, some portion can be compressed more than the rest, and the place of compression can move forward, so that as the compression is released in one place it makes its appearance in the neighbouring one. In the first case we have a wave of elevation on water; in the second, a wave of compression in air.

Now let me carry you one step further. Here is a glass bulb from which the greater part of the air has been removed. We therefore say there is a vacuum in the bulb. It is impossible for us to remove absolutely every trace of air and so produce what would be called a perfect vacuum; but we can imagine it done, and we can picture the glass bulb utterly stripped of every trace of air or other material substance. The question then arises: is the bulb really empty, or is there still something inside it?

The same question may be put another way. The air we breathe forms an atmosphere wrapped round our earth like a garment, but it falls off rapidly in density as we go higher. At a height of about 50 miles above the earth there is reason to believe the air is exceedingly rarefied; and apart from meteoric dust, the space between the sun and the earth, and between the stars and the earth, is in all probability a highly perfect vacuum, in the sense of being empty of ordinary diffused matter. The question therefore arises: is interstellar space absolutely and completely empty?

We know perfectly well that rays of light reach us from the sun and stars across that empty space; and a fact of capital importance is that these rays of light, swift-footed though they are, take time to travel. This was suspected long ago, and the celebrated Galileo made the first experimental attempt to determine the velocity of light. No real knowledge was gained on the subject, however, until after he had discovered that the planet Jupiter is attended by four moons (a fifth has been discovered since), and that these revolve round the planet in definite periods, and so form the "hands" of a perfect celestial clock. The sunlight falling on the great globe of Jupiter casts a conical shadow behind it, and the little moons, as they go round, are plunged into that cone of shadow at intervals and for a time become invisible — eclipsed.

As soon as these eclipses of Jupiter's moons began to be regularly observed, it was found that the intervals between two eclipses of any one moon were not equal, but varied progressively, being longer by about 16 minutes and 26 seconds at one time of year than at another. The astronomer Roemer, in 1675, correctly concluded that this difference must be because rays of light take time to cross the earth's orbit, and not because of any irregularity in the working of this celestial timepiece. The eclipses do happen at equal intervals; it is our information about them that is delayed, by the time the ray of light takes to travel the varying distance between Jupiter and our earth.

These observations, critically considered, led to the conclusion that the speed of light rays is about 186,500 miles a second. By means it would take too long to describe here, experimental measurements of the velocity of light have been made many times since by various investigators, using methods which involve no astronomical observation at all; and the result has been to confirm that value and give us very exact knowledge of the speed at which rays of light travel through space. The figures are shown in the table below.

                        THE VELOCITY OF LIGHT
                                                        Miles per second
    From observations on Jupiter's satellites (Roemer)      186,500
    From experimental measurements by Foucault  (1862)      185,177
                  "            "        Cornu   (1874)      185,487
                  "            "          "     (1878)      186,413
                  "            "     Michelson  (1879)      186,364
                  "            "          "     (1882)      186,328
                  "            "     Newcomb    (1882)      186,333

When anything takes time to travel from one place to another, it can only be one of two things. Either it is an actual object carried bodily from place to place, like a letter sent by post or a bullet fired from a gun; or else it is a wave-motion created in a medium of some kind which fills all space.

The illustrious Newton proposed a hypothesis about the nature of light: that it consists of small corpuscles shot out violently from every luminous body. It is a wonderful testimony to Newton's exalted powers of thought that the most recent investigations show that hot and luminous bodies such as the sun and a lamp are in fact throwing small bodies called corpuscles out into space — though there is abundant proof that these are not the cause of light. After Newton's speculations, the alternative hypothesis was developed: that light consists of a wave-motion in a universally diffused medium called the aether.

A great gulf separates mere conjecture and speculation, however, from the accumulation of rigid proof that scientific investigation demands; and so although the conception of an aether had arisen as a hypothesis in the minds of Huyghens, Descartes and many other philosophers, it was not accepted by Newton, and the general assent of scientific investigators to the hypothesis of a universal aether was long delayed.

The philosopher we owe the crucial demonstration to — the demonstration that the assumption is valid, and indeed necessary — was Dr Thomas Young, the first Professor of Natural Philosophy at the Royal Institution of London. Young was a man whose exalted intellectual powers were not properly appreciated by the world until after his death. His researches in physical optics alone are epoch-making. It was he who first proved that in some circumstances two rays of light can destroy each other and so produce darkness.

Briefly, the experiment is this. If a beam of light of one colour — say red — coming from a single source, falls on a screen with two small holes very close together in it, we get from those holes two streams of light which originate, as it were, from two neighbouring sources. If we then hold a white screen not far from the holes and receive the light from them on it, we shall find the screen marked with alternate bands of red light and black. If we cover up one of the small holes, the black bands vanish and the screen is evenly lit.

Young pointed out that this effect is due to interference, and that the difference between the distances from any black band to the two holes is an exact odd multiple of a certain small distance called the wave-length of the light. If light is a substance, no possible explanation can be offered for two rays of light combining to produce darkness where they meet. If, on the other hand, rays of light consist of waves of some kind in a medium, then — as we have seen with water ripples and air waves — it is entirely possible for two wave-trains to annihilate each other's effect at a given point, if a hollow of one train arrives there at the same moment as a hump of the other.

The experiment of making two sets of light rays interfere so that they destroy each other is therefore a strong argument for the view that light must consist of some kind of wave-motion in a medium capable of supporting it — a medium filling all space and present in all transparent bodies. This medium we call the luminiferous aether.

The term "æther," or "ether," has been in use for many centuries to express the idea of something rarer, more tenuous, more refined than ordinary matter.

The classical writers used it for the space above the higher regions of the atmosphere, which they supposed to be occupied by a medium less palpable, less material, than even air. So Milton, speaking of the downfall of the enemy of mankind (Paradise Lost, Book I, line 44), says:

        "... Him the Almighty Power
    Hurled headlong, flaming, from the æthereal sky
    With hideous ruin and combustion down."

But although poets and philosophers had made free with the notion of an aether — some of them assuming the existence of several aethers — the conception did not become a serious scientific hypothesis until Young showed experimentally that the phenomena of optics imperatively demand the assumption of such a medium in space: a medium which is not ordinary matter, but has qualities of a special kind, which allow waves to be created in it that travel at the enormous velocity of nearly one thousand million feet a second.

The proofs that have accumulated for the validity of this hypothesis in explaining optical effects show that this medium, this aether, must exist not only in free space but also inside every solid, liquid and gaseous body — although its properties inside transparent bodies are certainly very different from those it has on its own. This aether fills every so-called vacuum, and we cannot pump it out of a vessel as we can pump out the air. It occupies all celestial space too, and suns and stars float, so to speak, in an illimitable ocean of aether. We cannot get it out of any enclosed place, because it passes quite easily through every solid material body; and for the same reason it is intangible, and it has no weight. So we cannot touch it, see it, smell it, taste it or in any way directly appreciate it with our senses — except in so far as waves in it of a certain kind affect our eyes as light.

That there is such a space-filling aether can therefore only be deduced by reasoning from experiment and observation; it is not directly an object of sense-perception in the way that water or air is. Nevertheless there is abundant proof that it is not merely a convenient scientific fiction, but is as much an actuality as ordinary gross, tangible, ponderable substances. It is, so to speak, matter of a higher order, and holds a rank in the hierarchy of created things above the materials we can see and touch.

The question we have to discuss next is this: what are the fundamental properties of this aether, and in what terms must we describe its qualities? To answer, we must turn our attention to certain electrical effects, since it has been shown that most electrical phenomena, like those of optics, point to the necessity of assuming a universal medium of the same kind, different from ordinary matter. Abundant proof has been gathered that the electro-magnetic medium and the luminiferous aether are one and the same.

At the very outset of our electrical studies we meet the term electric current. Most of us know that the working of electric telegraphs and telephones, of electric lamps and electric railways, depends on the use of an agency called an electric current.

The question then arises: what is an electric current? The answer is not easy to give in a few words. We can, however, begin by explaining what an electric current can do, and how its presence can be recognised.

On the table in front of me is a spiral of copper wire, and in this wire, by special means, I can create what we call an electric current. I want you to notice that when this is done, two effects are produced immediately. First, the wire becomes hot; second, it becomes magnetic. That it is hot is evident, because it is now nearly red hot and visibly glowing in the dark. If we dip the wire in iron filings, you will see the filings cling to it and be picked up by it, exactly as they would be by an ordinary steel magnet put in its place. The copper wire, while the current passes through it, also attracts a compass needle, which demonstrates its magnetic quality in another way.

Whenever, then, we find these two states — heat and magnetism — present together in and around a wire, we may take it as a sign that the wire forms part of a circuit through which an electric current is flowing. An electric current is a physical state or condition which can only exist in, and all along, a closed path called an electric circuit. This circuit may consist of a metallic wire, or, as we usually call it, a conductor; or, as we shall see, it may partly consist of what is usually called a non-conductor.
