Chapter Five: Electric Oscillations and Electric Waves

(Part 3 of 5)

[Figure 67: Oscillations passed from one circuit to another. A battery of six Leyden jars, L, is charged and discharged over and over again through a thick wire wound round the frame P; the neighbouring frame S carries a coil ending in the lamp G, and the lamp lights — which it could not do unless the jars were discharging to and fro.]

Still further proof that the discharge of a Leyden jar or condenser through a low-resistance circuit is oscillatory can be given in the following way.

We use the vacuum tube I drew your attention to a few moments ago. When an electric current is sent through such a tube always in the same direction, it is well known that the two ends of the tube do not look alike. The tube, as you saw, fills with a luminous glow; but that glow is interrupted, forming what is called a dark space near one terminal — the terminal known as the negative pole. This lopsided appearance of the light in the tube is therefore proof that the current is passing through it always in one direction.

We can, however, vary the experiment. Instead of lighting the tube with a direct discharge from an induction coil, which is always in one direction, we can light it with a rapid series of discharges from a Leyden jar. You will then see that the glow in the tube is symmetrical — the tube looks the same at both ends — and this shows us that in these circumstances the discharge must be alternating: first one way and then the other.

While this apparatus is set up, we can show two other very pretty experiments with it, both depending on the fact that the discharge of a Leyden jar through a low-resistance circuit is alternating, oscillatory. A moment ago we used such an oscillatory discharge in one circuit to induce a secondary oscillatory discharge in another metallic circuit, and made that secondary current evident by its power to light a little incandescent lamp. If, however, we put a large glass bulb, P, partly exhausted of its air, inside the primary discharge coil, you will see that the primary oscillatory discharge of the Leyden jar is able to create in the bulb a brilliant luminous ring of light (see Figure 68). This is called an electrodeless discharge. It arises because the rapidly oscillating current in the wire wrapped round the bulb creates a similar oscillatory discharge in the rarefied air inside — the rarefied air being a conductor — and so makes it luminous along a certain line.

The production of these electrodeless discharges in rarefied gases has been studied particularly by Professor J. J. Thomson.

Another experiment illustrating what is called the inductive transformation of electrical oscillations is the arrangement commonly known as a Tesla coil. One is in front of you now. It consists of a long coil of insulated wire placed inside a tall glass vessel, with another insulated and much longer wire wound round the outside of that vessel. If the alternating, oscillatory discharge of a Leyden jar is allowed to take place through the thicker wire inside the glass cylinder, it generates in the outer, secondary, wire a very powerful alternating electromotive force. We can see that this is so by connecting the ends of the secondary circuit to two insulated brass balls, between which a torrent of sparks is now passing.

We may vary the experiment by connecting the ends of the Tesla coil's secondary circuit to two insulated concentric rings of thin bare brass wire. Then, when the room is darkened, we see the space between the rings filled with a brilliant purple light, caused by the discharge passing through the air under the rapidly oscillating electromotive force generated in the secondary circuit.

[Figure 68: The electrodeless discharge. A partly exhausted glass bulb is simply set inside the discharge coil — nothing touches the gas, no wires enter the glass — and the oscillating current outside lights a brilliant ring of light within.]

I trust these experiments will have convinced you that releasing the electric strain in the glass dielectric of a Leyden jar results in electric oscillations, rapidly alternating currents, in the metallic circuit joining the two surfaces — just as suddenly releasing a compressed spring results in a series of mechanical oscillations.

We may remark here that any arrangement of two metal plates with a sheet of insulator, of non-conductor, between them is called a condenser. So a condenser can be built up by coating a sheet of glass on both sides with tinfoil; or instead of glass we may use mica, paraffin paper, or any other good non-conductor. We may even use air at ordinary pressure: if two metal plates are set near one another in air, both of them insulated — that is, supported on non-conductors — the arrangement constitutes what is called an air condenser. An air condenser is thus really only a kind of Leyden jar in which the glass has been replaced by air and the tinfoil by two stout metal plates.

I must now describe and show you a particular kind of air condenser invented by the late Professor Hertz, and known in consequence as a Hertz oscillator (see Figure 69). It consists of two square or round metal plates carried on glass or ebonite legs, with short stout wires attached to them ending in brass knobs. Set in line with one another, these plates constitute an air condenser of a very peculiar kind: the two brass plates correspond to the tinfoil surfaces of a Leyden jar, and the air all round them corresponds to the glass of the jar.

[Figure 69: The Hertz oscillator. Two metal plates on insulating legs, with stout wires ending in brass knobs set a quarter of an inch apart — a Leyden jar turned inside out, in which the surrounding air does the work of the glass.]

Suppose the plates are arranged with the brass knobs about a quarter of an inch apart, or rather less, and that we then connect the two plates to the secondary terminals of an induction coil or an electrical machine capable of giving long sparks in air. When the machine or coil is set going, we find that a very bright crackling spark passes between the little knobs; and with a little experience it is easy to adjust the gap so that this spark is an oscillatory one.

What is taking place is this. First, an electromotive force is acting between the two plates, creating an electric strain in the air all round them along certain lines, and also between the two knobs. Air, and all other gases like it, has this peculiar property: at ordinary pressures it is a nearly perfect non-conductor, and yet if it is subjected to more than a certain electric pressure it passes instantly into a condition in which it is a very good conductor. So if we steadily increase the electromotive force acting between the plates, then up to a certain point the whole arrangement behaves like a Leyden jar; but a moment comes when the air between the knobs breaks down and passes from a non-conducting to a conducting state. At that moment the two plates are like the surfaces of a charged Leyden jar joined together by a good conductor; and as we have already seen, in those circumstances the discharge is oscillatory, and the electric strain in the non-conductor, the dielectric — that is, in the air round the plates — dies away through a series of rapidly alternating strains in opposite directions.

At this point I must remind you that when we were speaking about the production of air waves, I pointed out that one condition essential to making an air wave is a very sudden application or release of air-pressure, such as an explosion or the escape of compressed air produces. We cannot make an air wave by moving something like a fan slowly to and fro through the air. To produce an air wave we must strike the air a very sudden blow — or, what comes to the same thing, we must apply and remove a pressure very suddenly. In those circumstances we start an air wave into existence, and it travels away from the vibrating or rapidly moving body and continues its journey out into the surrounding space.

I want to show you that in the case of the Hertz oscillator these very sudden reversals of electric strain in the air, in the space round about it, which take place at the moment when the oscillatory spark passes between the knobs, create in just the same way what is called an electric wave, which travels out into the space around. The point you must grasp is this: just as an air wave carries away to distant places a rapidly alternating compression made in the air by a vibrating body at one particular spot, so an electric wave carries away to distant places an alternating electric strain, started at some point in the medium by the oscillatory discharge of a condenser of some form.

Before we can demonstrate this, however, we must have some means of detecting the influence of what we call an electric wave. You will remember that in the experiments with air waves I used a sensitive flame to make evident to you the presence of waves in the air which you could not see. Here in the same way I must use a suitable detector for electric waves, whose working will make evident to us the existence, in the space round our oscillator, of electric waves that we cannot see.

Time will not allow me to discuss all the different forms of electric-wave detector that have been invented. For our present purposes we must limit ourselves to describing one plan, which depends on the remarkable fact that finely powdered dry metal, or metal filings, will not conduct an electric current until they are subjected to an electromotive force above a certain value — at which point the filings pass at once into a conducting condition.

If you think back to what was said just now about the special electrical properties of air and other gases, you will notice a remarkable similarity between the way air at ordinary pressures behaves towards electromotive force and the way a loose mass of metal filings behaves. Both are non-conductors so long as the electromotive force acting on them stays below a certain value, and both pass at once into a conducting condition if it goes above that critical value.

That pieces of metal in loose contact with one another behave in this way was discovered more than twenty years ago by the late Professor D. E. Hughes, who, as you may know, was the inventor of a printing telegraph, the microphone and many other most important electrical instruments. Professor Hughes was a great genius, and in many respects ahead of his age. He it was who undoubtedly discovered that an electric spark has the power of affecting, at a distance, the electrical conductivity of a metallic junction made of two metals in loose contact.

The peculiar behaviour of metal filings under electromotive force, and under the influence of electric sparks at a distance, was afterwards rediscovered by Professor Branly; and the effect of an oscillatory spark in changing the conductivity of a light metal contact was rediscovered too by Sir Oliver Lodge, and the phenomena have been investigated by many other observers. I can show you the experiment on a large scale in the following way.

[Figure 70: The metal-disc coherer. A row of thin aluminium discs the size of sixpences, resting lightly against one another between two terminal screws, will not pass a current at all — until a spark is made somewhere near, when they cohere, the battery current goes through, and the bell rings.]

I have here a number of aluminium discs the size of sixpences, stamped out of thin metal, arranged in a sort of semi-cylindrical trough between two terminal screws so that the discs press very lightly against one another. In this state the pile of discs is not a conductor, and it will not pass the current from a battery joined up in series with it and an electric bell (see Figure 70). Suppose, however, that I make an oscillatory spark near this pile of discs — as I can do by taking the discharge of a large Leyden jar close by. The pile at once becomes a conductor, the battery current can pass through it, and the bell rings. An arrangement of this kind has been named by Sir Oliver Lodge a coherer, because under the action of the oscillatory spark the discs cohere, stick together. We can separate them again by giving them a sharp rap, and then the whole thing can be repeated.

A far more sensitive arrangement can be made by taking a small wooden box with two nickel wires passing through the bottom of it, parallel to one another but not touching. In this box is put a small quantity of very finely powdered metallic nickel, nickel filings; and if the quantity is properly adjusted, it is possible to produce an arrangement in which there is no conductivity at all between the two nickel wires under ordinary circumstances, but in which they become conductively connected to one another the moment an oscillatory spark is made in the neighbourhood. We shall call this contrivance an electric wave indicator, and we shall use it in the experiments that follow to detect the presence of an electric wave.

We must now return for a moment to the production of electrical oscillations in circuits of various kinds. I trust it has been made plain to you that if two metal surfaces separated by a non-conductor such as air or glass are acted on by an electromotive force, the non-conductor becomes electrically strained. Another way of putting this is to say that a positive charge of electricity exists on one metal surface and a negative charge on the other. The only objection to describing the facts that way is that it fixes attention on the conductors rather than on the insulator, which is the real storehouse of the energy.

If the two metal surfaces are then joined by a conductor of low resistance, the charges disappear through a series of oscillations, and the result is an electric current in the connecting circuit which rushes backwards and forwards, gradually falling off in strength until it dies away entirely.

You may picture the electrical effect as analogous to the following experiment with two air vessels. Suppose we have two strong steel bottles, into one of which we have compressed a quantity of air, while in the other we have made a vacuum by pumping nearly all the air out. These vessels correspond to two conductors, one charged with positive electricity and the other with negative. Now imagine them connected by a wide pipe with a tap or valve in it which can be opened suddenly, letting the air rush over from the full vessel to the empty one. When this is done, it is a matter of experience that equality of pressure between the two vessels is not established at once: because of the inertia of the air, it comes about only after a series of oscillations in the pipe. Rushing over from the full vessel to the empty one, the air, so to speak, overshoots the mark, and the state of the two vessels as regards pressure is exactly interchanged. Then the air rushes back again; and only after a series of to-and-fro movements in the pipe is exact equality of pressure in the two vessels reached.
