Chapter Five: Electric Oscillations and Electric Waves

(Part 5 of 5)

It may be remarked in passing that there is a strong tendency in the human mind to look for, and to be satisfied by, what we call mechanical explanations. This probably arises because the only things we can picture to ourselves very clearly are movements, or changes of relative position. If we can in imagination reduce a physical operation to some kind of movement or displacement in some kind of material, we seem to arrive at a terminus of thought which is more or less satisfying. We invariably aim at being able to visualise whatever we are thinking about, and it takes some mental self-control to be content with a general expression that does not readily lend itself to being pictured.

There are plenty of signs, however, that this habit of mind — this endeavour to reduce all physical operations to simple mechanics, to movements of some kind — may in the end turn out to be unjustifiable. The time may come when we are better satisfied to explain mechanical operations in electrical language than to go on dissecting electrical effects into mechanical ones. Instead of speaking of electric inertia, for instance, it may really be more justifiable to speak of the inductance of ordinary matter. The final terms in which we try to offer ourselves an explanation of physical events are in all probability very much a matter of convenience and custom.

For present purposes, however, we may rest content to think of the electro-magnetic medium as in some sense like a heavy elastic substance capable of undergoing a strain, a distortion, which relieves itself as soon as the distorting force is withdrawn — but we must also think of the medium as possessing a quality analogous to inertia, so that as the distortion vanishes it overshoots the mark, and the medium regains its state of equilibrium at the point in question only through a series of oscillations, of alternating distortions, gradually decreasing in amount.

Any medium possessing these two qualities has, by the explanations already given, the property of having waves created in it. And what we mean by an electric wave is a state of electric strain propagated through the aether at a velocity equal to that of light — just as an air wave is a state of compression propagated through the air at a velocity of 1100 feet a second.

To sum up, we may say that whenever rapid electrical oscillations are created in an open circuit, such as the two rods described above, the arrangement constitutes a device for creating in the surrounding space an impulse, an effect, called an electric wave in the aether, in the electro-magnetic medium — just as an organ-pipe, a piano string or any other musical instrument constitutes a device for creating waves in air by means of mechanical oscillations.

[Figure 72: The filings detector. A thin slip of ivory with a gap cut in it is faced on both sides with silver plates bent into an L, making a very narrow box; the pinch of metal powder inside it will not carry a current until an electric wave arrives, and then the bell rings.]

The existence of these electric waves, and their passage to distant places, can be made evident by their action on finely powdered metals, as already described. An apparatus which shows the effect very well is set up in front of you now. At one end of the table I have a pair of rods connected to an induction coil, making up a Hertz radiator whose action has just been described. At the other end of the table are two similar long rods, but their inner ends are connected to two small silver plates which form the sides of a very narrow box, with a very small quantity of metallic powder between them.

The little box is made as follows. A thin slip of ivory has a small gap cut out of it (see Figure 72), and on the two sides of the slip are bound two silver plates bent into the shape of the letter L, so making a very narrow box with silver sides. The two plates are connected to the two long rods.

As already explained, metal filings or finely powdered metal are not, in their ordinary condition, conductors of electricity. So if we connect one terminal of a battery to one of the silver plates, with an electric bell in series, and connect the other end of the bell to the second silver plate, the battery cannot send a current through the bell, because the circuit is interrupted by the non-conducting powder in the little box.

Now suppose we make a spark pass between the balls of the radiator and start an electric wave. When that wave reaches the long rods connected to the receiving arrangement, it sets up in them a sudden electromotive force; and that force, as already explained, if it is large enough, makes the loose mass of filings pass from a non-conducting to a conducting condition. At that moment the battery is able to send a current through the bell and make it ring. We can stop the ringing by giving the little box a tap, which separates the filings again and breaks the conductivity.

The purpose of the two rods on the receiver is not quite the same as the purpose of the two rods on the radiator. To create a vigorous electric wave we need a radiator with considerable electric capacity and also considerable inductance, and in general we can only get that by using long rods. At the receiving end, on the other hand, the rods are effective because they add together, so to speak, the electric strain taking place over a considerable distance: the electromotive force set up in the receiving circuit depends on the length of the rods. The longer they are, therefore, the greater the distance at which we can get the effect now being shown to you with a given spark-length.

One point is important to notice: the rods of the receiver must be parallel to the rods of the radiator if we are to get any effect at a distance at all. If I turn the radiator rods round so that they are at right angles to those of the receiver, you see that no spark at the radiator balls will make the bell at the receiver ring. The reason is that the electric strain propagated out into space lies parallel to the radiator rods all along any line drawn perpendicular to the rods through the spark-gap; and the receiver rods will not have an electromotive force produced in them by that travelling line of strain unless they lie parallel to its direction.

It is to be hoped that these explanations have given some indication of what is meant by an electric wave. On the other hand, there may be many who find it exceedingly difficult to get clear ideas when the subject has to be put in such general terms as we have been obliged to use.

It may help, then, if before ending this chapter a word or two is said about recent investigations into the inner mechanism of an electric current and an electric strain. It is impossible to do that without mentioning, in the briefest possible way, modern research into the constitution of matter.

Imagine yourself supplied with a little crystal of ordinary table salt — chemically, chloride of sodium — and with the means of cutting it up under an immensely powerful microscope. You might go on dividing it into smaller and smaller pieces. If the process could be carried far enough, we should at last obtain a very small fragment of salt which, if divided any further, would give two portions of matter that were not alike and were not salt. This smallest possible portion of salt is called a molecule of sodium chloride. Chemical facts teach us that this molecule is made up of two still smaller portions of matter, called an atom of chlorine and an atom of sodium.

We have good reason to believe that all solids, liquids and gases are composed of molecules, and that these are built up of atoms, few or many. In some substances, such as salt, the molecule is very simple and made of two atoms. In others, such as albumen, the white of an egg, the molecules are very complicated and made of hundreds of atoms. The word atom means something which "cannot be cut," and until comparatively recent times it was held that atoms of matter were the smallest indivisible portions of matter that could exist.

More than twenty-five years ago Sir William Crookes showed, by numerous beautiful experiments, that in a vacuum tube like the one you have seen used today, a torrent of small particles is thrown out from the negative terminal when a current is passed through the tube. This stream of particles is called the cathode stream. In recent times Sir Joseph Thomson has proved that the cathode stream consists of particles very much smaller than chemical atoms, each charged with negative electricity. These particles are now called corpuscles, or electrons.

It has been shown that these electrons are constituents of chemical atoms, and that when we take an electron away from an atom we leave the remainder positively electrified. An atom can therefore, by various means, be divided into two portions of unequal size: first a very small part charged with negative electricity, and second a larger remaining portion charged with positive electricity. The two parts taken together are called ions — that is, wanderers. The negative ions, the electrons, the corpuscles, taken together are what we call negative electricity; and so far nobody has been able to show that a corpuscle can exist unelectrified.

Hence the view has been put forward that what we call electricity is a kind of matter, atomic in structure, and that these negative ions, these corpuscles, collectively are in fact the atoms of the electric fluid. These corpuscles can move freely inside some solids, going about between the molecules of the solid just as little dogs can run about among a crowd of people in a street. In such cases the substance is called a conductor of electricity. In other substances the movement of the corpuscles is more restricted, and these make up the various kinds of so-called non-conductor.

The corpuscle, being a small charge of negative electricity, creates in all the space around it a state called electric force. It is impossible to set out this action in more detail without mathematical reasoning of a difficult kind. It is enough to say that this electric force must be a particular condition of strain, or of motion, in the aether. If the corpuscle is moving rapidly, it creates in addition another kind of strain or motion called magnetic force.

The electric force and the magnetic force are related to one another in free space in such a way that if we know the difference between the values of the electric force at two points very close together, we can tell the rate at which the magnetic force is changing with time in a direction at right angles to the line joining those two points. We cannot specify the exact nature of these states or conditions that make up magnetic force and electric force in any greater detail until we know much more than we do at present about the real nature of the aether. The two fundamental qualities of the aether are, however, its capacity to sustain these two states we call the magnetic force and the electric force.

The electrons we have been speaking of not only give rise to electric and magnetic force when they move; they are themselves set moving by those forces. Electric force at any point moves any electron placed at that spot; and an electron in motion is acted on, and has its direction of motion changed, when a magnetic force acts on it.

Leaving any further remarks on the relations of atoms, electricity and aether until the end of the last lecture, we may conclude this one by explaining how the observed facts about a Hertz oscillator are interpreted in terms of this electron hypothesis of electricity.

Take the simple case of two long insulated metal rods separated by a spark-gap. Charging one rod positively and the other negatively consists in forcing more corpuscles — more negative ions, more electrons — into the one conductor and taking some away from the other. Any source of electromotive force, such as a dynamo or an induction coil, is on this hypothesis a sort of electron-pump, which pumps electrons out of one conductor and puts them into another. So one conductor gains in electron-pressure and the other loses.

The excess of electrons in the one conductor tries to escape, and a strain is produced on the electrons, or on the atoms, in the surrounding dielectric, in the air — a strain we may look on as the effort of electrons, more or less tethered to their atoms, to get away. The air in the spark-gap is subjected to the most intense strain of all; and when it reaches a certain intensity, some of the electrons are torn away from their atoms, and the air in the gap becomes a conductor.

The excess of electrons in the one conductor then rushes through the channel so prepared, and this constitutes an electric current. The first rush carries over too many electrons to balance the electron-pressure, so the first torrent of migrating electrons in one direction is followed by a back-rush in the other, and that in turn by another rush in the original direction; and equality in the number of electrons in the two conductors is only reached after a gradually diminishing series of to-and-fro rushes across the air-gap. This action constitutes a train of electrical oscillations.

At the same time as all this is going on in and between the conductors, the electrons attached to the atoms of the air, or of whatever other dielectric surrounds them, are being violently oscillated. These oscillations may not go far enough to detach electrons from their atoms, but they are enough to create rapidly reversing electric and magnetic forces. It appears that the very rapid movement of an electron to and fro causes a wave in the aether, just as a rapid movement of the hand through water causes a wave in the water, or the vibration of the prong of a tuning fork creates a wave in the air.

The electron has some grip on the aether, such that its sudden starting or stopping makes a disturbance which we may popularly describe as a splash in the aether. So if a large number of electrons are suddenly started into motion in the same direction, the effect on the aether is something like throwing a multitude of stones onto the surface of still water, or setting off a number of small explosions in the air at once.

Anything, therefore, which lets the electrons go gradually, so to speak — which softens the first rush — works against the production of a vigorous electric wave. Anything which makes that first rush of electrons across the air-gap very sudden is an advantage, and produces a powerful wave. Experience shows that the nature of the metal surfaces, whether polished or rough, has a great influence on the wave-making power of the radiator. If the spark-balls or surfaces are rough and unpolished, it seems to tone down the violence of the first rush of electrons, and the oscillator's wave-making power is not as great as it is when the balls are polished.

At this point, however, it will be best to hold back any further discussion of theory until we have considered the facts to be laid before you in the next lecture — facts showing that the electric radiation manufactured by means of electric oscillations is only one variety of a vast range of aether waves, some forms of which we recognise as light and as radiant heat.
