Chapter Six: Waves and Ripples in the Aether

(Part 1 of 6)

In the last chapter we explained the nature of electric oscillations and how they are produced, and showed that when they take place in an open electric circuit, in a long straight rod, they give rise to certain actions at a distance, made evident by the change they work in the conductivity of powdered metals. We have now to set out the outline of a proof that these actions really are due to a wave-motion of some kind set up in the aether — a wave-motion essentially the same in nature as the agency we call light.

We shall begin by looking at a few of the epoch-making discoveries we owe to the celebrated Heinrich Hertz, announced in a series of famous researches with which he surprised and delighted the scientific world in 1887 and 1888. Those investigations opened up a new and remarkable field of experimental work.

The exact form of apparatus Hertz used is unsuited to lecture demonstration, so on this occasion I shall use some arrangements of my own, which are only convenient modifications of appliances other experimenters have used before. The devices shown here are very convenient for public demonstration.

The apparatus is in two parts: a part for generating electric waves, which we shall call the radiator, and a part for detecting them, called the receiver.

The radiator consists of a zinc box, A (see Figure 73), fitted with hollow trunnions so that it can be mounted on a stand and turned in any direction. The box has one open end, and inside it are two brass rods about 4 inches long, each ending in a brass ball, S, 1 inch across. The rods are pushed through corks fixed in the ends of two ebonite tubes, which pass through the hollow trunnions of the box. Their ends are attached to very closely wound spirals of gutta-percha-covered wire inside the ebonite tubes, and these spirals are called choking coils. When the balls are set in their proper position inside the box they are about a sixteenth of an inch apart, and the rods carrying them are in line with each other.

[Figure 73: The radiator A and the receiver B. Each is a zinc box open at one end and mounted on trunnions so it can be swung like a gun; set mouth to mouth, the spark in A rings the bell on B, and turning either box aside stops it.]

The outer ends of the choking coils are connected to an induction coil, or to an electrical machine — a small Wimshurst machine will do — capable of producing sparks 2 or 3 inches long. If sparks are then taken between the balls, we have what is in fact a small Hertz oscillator, or radiator.

It was fully explained in the last chapter that the action of the induction coil or electrical machine is first to create a difference in the electrical condition of the two balls, so that one is positively and the other negatively electrified. The balls, the rods and the surrounding air then form a sort of Leyden jar or condenser, and under the electromotive force the air around the balls is electrically strained. When that strain reaches a particular value, the air between the balls passes at once into a conducting state, and we get a discharge between the conductors which is oscillatory in nature. We may take it that the electric charges on the two rods rush backwards and forwards, setting up an oscillatory surface current on the rods, and that this is accompanied by a very rapid reversal of the strain in the surrounding non-conductor, the dielectric. The upshot is that an effect called an electric wave is sent out into space.

[Figure 74: The receiver's detector. Two short nickel wires cross one another without touching inside a small ebonite box, and are just buried in a pinch of fine nickel filings — the whole sensitive element of the apparatus.]

Turning to the receiver B (Figure 73), we see that it consists of a metal box of similar shape with a board inside it carrying two short nickel wires. These cross one another without touching inside a small ebonite box (see Figure 74), and inside that box the wires are just covered by a very small quantity of fine nickel filings. To the end of the zinc receiver-box is fixed a long lead pipe carrying two insulated wires, c and d, inside it.

These wires are joined to the ends of the nickel wires in the receiver-box, and after passing along the lead pipe they enter another metal box containing a battery and an electric bell. The pinch of nickel filings in the little ebonite box is not a conductor in its ordinary condition, so the circuit including the battery and the bell is not complete. But if an electric oscillation is set up in the nickel receiver-wires, the mass of metal particles bridging them at once becomes a conductor, because the little granules stick, cohere, together. The battery is then able to send a current round the circuit that includes the coherer, and the bell rings.

It should be mentioned that in the apparatus actually used the arrangement is not quite so simple. The coherer would be permanently damaged if we tried to send a current through it strong enough to ring a bell. So we associate with it a contrivance called a relay. A single voltaic cell, E — a dry cell — is joined in series with the coherer C and the relay R (see Figure 75). The relay is a sort of switch, a circuit-closer, of such a kind that when a very feeble current passes through it, it closes a second circuit through which a much stronger current can pass. The passage of the nickel filings from a non-conducting to a conducting state is therefore only the means by which a very small current is let through the circuit of an electromagnet forming part of the relay. That action pulls a piece of iron over, which in turn closes another circuit, and so lets the current from a second battery, F, of five or six cells work the electric bell G. The arrangement of the two batteries, the relay, the coherer and the bell will be understood from the diagram of connections in Figure 75.

The really important condition for success with this apparatus is that the long wires connecting the receiver-box to the metal box holding the bell, battery and relay must be entirely enclosed in a lead pipe without a joint in it, soldered into the receiver-box at one end and into the battery-box at the other. Another practical point is that where these wires enter the battery-box there must be two little coils of insulated wire of a good many turns included in the circuit — the choking coils again. A third element of success is that the coherer, the sensitive conductor, should be sensitive enough but not too sensitive, a condition that can only be arrived at by trial and failure.

[Figure 75: The connections. The single dry cell E works only the coherer C and the relay R; the relay, closing on the feeblest current, throws in the second battery F of five or six cells to ring the bell G — so the coherer never has to carry a current strong enough to damage it.]

Equipped with these two pieces of apparatus, we can now go on to a series of experiments of great interest.

First, let the radiator-box and the receiver-box be placed a few feet apart with their open mouths facing one another, like two guns set to fire down each other's throats. Then, if all is in order, when we make an electric spark between the two balls of the radiator, the bell connected to the receiver will begin to ring — showing that the coherer in the receiver-box has been affected and made conducting by the electric wave sent out from the radiator. If the receiver-box is then given a smart rap, the clinging filings in the ebonite box are separated again, the circuit is broken, and the bell stops.

That done, the radiator-box is turned a little to one side on its hollow trunnions, like a gun, so that the open mouths of the two boxes no longer face each other. Repeating the experiment, we find that the bell does not ring when a spark is made. A little experimenting shows that the action which affects the coherer travels out from the radiator-box in straight lines, like the light from a lamp, and that we are dealing here with something that has all the character of radiation.

Next, let the two boxes be set mouth to mouth again. We make a spark and get the bell to answer once more. We shall now go on to prove that this effect, which is called electric radiation, passes quite freely through some substances but is more or less completely stopped by others.

If we hold a sheet of iron, or tinfoil, or even paper covered with silver leaf, between the open mouths of the radiator and receiver, we find the bell will not ring even when a rapid series of oscillatory sparks is made at the radiator. These sheets of metal, thick or thin, are quite opaque to the electric radiation coming from the spark-balls. On the other hand, a sheet of paper or card, a wooden board, a sheet of glass, a slab of wax or of bitumen, sulphur, marble, slate — all of these are quite pervious, quite transparent, and when held between radiator and receiver they do not perceptibly hinder the action of the one on the other.

We conclude that some bodies are opaque and some transparent to electric radiation. But the classification does not agree with the one we should make for light. Wood, marble and pitch are optically opaque but electrically transparent. The general law which settles the question of opacity or transparency for electric radiation is this: all good electrical conductors are opaque to electric radiation, and all good insulators, all non-conductors, are transparent.

So we see at once why metal sheets are opaque, and wood, wax and glass transparent, to the electric radiation from the spark-balls.

We may go a step further. If we take some sheets of perforated zinc or wire gauze, or even a large packet of pins, or a paper bag full of iron filings, we find that all of these are practically opaque to the electric rays. Moreover, we can show that the law holds not only for solids but for liquids as well. I have here a number of flat glass bottles filled with various liquids: salt water, fresh water, a solution of soda, paraffin oil, olive oil, turpentine and methylated spirits.

Testing an empty glass bottle between radiator and receiver, we can satisfy ourselves that the bottle itself is transparent to the electric radiation.

Then, testing the bottles of liquid one by one, we find that those holding the paraffin oil, the olive oil and the turpentine are transparent to the radiation, but that those holding the salt water, the fresh water, the soda solution and the methylated spirits are all opaque. The oils and liquids like them are all good non-conductors, whereas water and various watery solutions are fairly good conductors of electricity; and so these liquids, though all about equally transparent to light, behave very differently towards electric radiation. So far as the electric ray is concerned, a bottle of pure water is as opaque as it would be to light if it were filled with black ink.

Experiment shows that every object that contains water, or that is wet, is exceedingly opaque to the electric radiation we are using. If I take a dry duster folded in four and hold it in the path of the electric ray, you see it is quite transparent, and the bell on the receiver rings as easily as if the duster were not there at all. But if we dip the duster in water and then hold it between radiator and receiver, we find the wet duster is perfectly opaque.

The human body consists largely of water held in the tissues, so it is not surprising to find that a hand, or any other part of the body, put between radiator and receiver intercepts the electric ray. You see that if I hold my hand in front of the radiator, nothing can escape from it, when sparks are made between the balls, that is able to affect the receiver. In the same way it can be shown by experiment that the human head is perfectly opaque — in fact, far more opaque than an equally thick block of wood; and this opacity to the electric ray is in a very real sense due to the water in the brain. All dry animal tissues — leather, bone, gelatine, flesh, so long as they are dry — are very transparent to electric radiation of the kind we are using now; but make them thoroughly wet and they become intensely opaque.

[Figure 76: Reflecting the electric ray. With the radiator A pointing upwards and the receiver B lying on its side, nothing happens — until a metal plate P is held at 45° over the radiator's mouth, when the bell rings at once. Shift the plate a little either way and the ringing stops.]

We can go on to show that this electric radiation can be reflected, just like light or sound, from metal or other conducting surfaces, and that the law of reflection for the electric ray is the same as for rays of light or sound. If we set the radiator A with its mouth upwards, keeping the receiver B horizontal, it is possible to place the two quite close together and yet have the radiation from the one fail to affect the other. If I now hold a metal plate, P, at an angle of 45° above the mouth of the radiator, you will notice that the bell rings at once, showing that the radiation has been reflected into the receiver-box (see Figure 76). We also find that a very small departure from 45° is enough to destroy the effect. Careful experiments in the laboratory show that the electric ray is reflected according to the optical law: the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence.

Any good conducting surface will affect the electric radiation in this way. I can reflect it from a sheet of tinfoil, or even from my hand; and the fact that I can, so to speak, take hold of this electric radiation and turn it in different directions with the palm of my hand carries a very strong conviction that in experimenting with it we are dealing with something entirely real.

You will remember that in the chapter on waves in the air I showed you a very interesting experiment illustrating the refraction of rays of sound by a carbon dioxide prism. I have now to put before you an exactly analogous experiment with electric radiation. Here is a prism made of paraffin wax, a substance you have already seen to be transparent to the electric ray. If we set the radiator- and receiver-boxes at an angle to one another, it is possible to adjust them so that the radiation thrown out from the radiator A just misses the receiver B and so does not ring the bell (see Figure 77). Once that adjustment has been made, we bring the paraffin prism P into the path of the ray; and if everything has been properly set, we find that the electric ray is bent round, refracted, so that it now enters the receiver-box and rings the bell. This experiment was first performed by Hertz with a very large pitch prism, but his apparatus was too cumbersome for lecture purposes, and the smaller, more compact arrangement you see in front of you is preferable here.
