Chapter Six: Waves and Ripples in the Aether

(Part 3 of 6)

You will notice, on looking back at the table of frequencies, that the range of sensibility of the human eye is very much smaller than that of the ear. Our eyes are wonderful instruments for detecting wave-motion in the aether, and our ears are appliances for detecting wave-motion in the air. But the ear, as was explained in an earlier chapter, is sensitive to air-vibrations forming musical tones anywhere between 30 and 30,000 a second — numbers in the ratio of 1000 to 1, covering a range of about ten octaves. The eye is sensitive only to aether-vibrations whose frequency lies between 400 and 700 billions a second — numbers in the ratio of nearly 2 to 1, which is to say a single octave.

The question of course arises at once: what are the properties of aether waves whose frequency lies outside those limits?

Scientific investigation has made us acquainted with a vast range, a vast gamut, of aether-vibrations, and we can sum up our present knowledge as follows.

The physical effect we call light, and the one we have so far simply called electric radiation, are really identical in nature. Both consist of waves travelling through the space-filling aether, and the only difference between them lies in wave-length and wave-amplitude. Between these two classes of radiation comes a third, called dark-heat radiation; and beyond the limits of visible radiation we know of another group of aether waves which cannot affect the eye as light, but which are called actinic radiation from their power to affect a photographic plate. Briefly, then, four great groups of aether wave are known to us:

First, actinic, or photographic rays.

Second, luminous, or light rays.

Third, ultra-red, or dark-heat rays.

Fourth, electric, or Hertz rays.

Convincing proof has been given that these various rays are essentially the same in nature, and that they consist of periodic disturbances, waves, travelling through the aether — in every case at 186,500 miles, or 1000 million feet, or 30,000 million centimetres, a second.

We may therefore say that these classes of aether wave differ from one another only in the sense in which a bass note in music differs from a treble one: the difference is a difference of frequency.

So, just as we have a gamut, a scale, of musical tones — of air-vibrations of increasing frequency — we may set out a gamut, a scale, of aether waves arranged in order of their vibration rates. Our present knowledge of aether waves can best be displayed by arranging in a chart a series of numbers showing the wave-lengths of the waves we so far know of.

As our unit of length we shall take the thousandth part of a millimetre. Most people know that a millimetre is a thousandth of a metre, a short length nearly equal to a twenty-fifth of an inch. The thousandth part of a millimetre is called a micron, and is written 1μ. This is therefore an exceedingly short length, nearly equal to a twenty-five-thousandth of an inch.

Following the musical nomenclature again, we shall speak of all the waves lying between two wave-lengths, one of which is double the other, as an octave. So all the waves whose wave-lengths lie between 1μ and 2μ are said to make up an octave of radiation.

As a preliminary to further discussion, let us first consider the simple facts about the radiation which affects our eyes as light.

The light that reaches us from the sun is not a simple thing. It consists of aether waves of many different wave-lengths mingled together. Sir Isaac Newton first revealed the compound nature of white light to us by his celebrated experiment with a glass prism, and his optical discoveries were the starting point of everything we know on the subject.

If a beam of sunlight is allowed to fall on a glass prism, the rays of different wave-length composing it are each bent, refracted, to a different degree. In free space, aether waves of every wave-length travel, as far as we know, at the same rate; but this equality of speed is disturbed the moment the waves enter a transparent material substance such as glass. The velocity of travel is then reduced in every case, but it is generally reduced more for the shorter waves than for the longer ones; and as a consequence the rays of shorter wave-length are bent, refracted, more than the rays of longer wave-length. So we get a dispersion of the component rays — a sorting out, an analysis, of the mixture of rays of various wave-lengths. If we catch the light on a screen after it has passed through the prism, we have a band of coloured light called a spectrum, consisting of a series of patches of light each of a different wave-length. The component rays of the original beam have been spread out fan-fashion by the prism.

We may note in passing that not every transparent body, made into a prism, analyses light into a fan of rays arranged in order of wave-length. Substances that behave as glass or water do when made into prisms are said to show normal dispersive power. There are, however, some bodies — iodine, or an alcoholic solution of fuchsine — which show anomalous dispersion, and refract some of the longer waves of light more than some of the shorter ones.

The arrangements for forming a normal spectrum are these. We pass a beam of light from the electric lamp through a lens, and in front of that lens we put a metal plate with a narrow vertical slit in it. At the proper distance in front of the slit we place another lens, and throw a sharp image of the slit onto the screen as a bar of white light. Then, putting a hollow glass prism filled with bisulphide of carbon in front of the last lens, we find the various rays in the white light are dispersed, and we produce on the screen a band of rainbow-coloured light — the spectrum. That spectrum is really a series of differently coloured images of the slit, set side by side.

By using the principle of interference as Young disclosed it, it is possible to measure the wave-length of the rays of light which produce the sensation of the various colours when they fall on the eye. The wave-length of those aether waves which produce the sensation of deep red is 0·75μ, and that of the waves producing the sensation of violet when they fall on the retina is 0·43μ. The whole of the visible spectrum is therefore contained within a single octave of aether radiation. Within those limits, any change of wave-length makes itself felt in our eyes as a change of colour.

It is commonly said that there are seven colours in the spectrum — red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and violet. As a matter of fact a highly trained eye can distinguish about a thousand different tints in the spectrum of white light.

Time will not allow us to go into what is called colour-vision and the theory of colour sensations. The fact I want to impress on you here is that outside ourselves there is no such thing as colour. The rays of light which produce these sensations of colour when they enter the eye differ from one another only in wave-length and wave-amplitude. There is thus a complete analogy between light of different colours and sounds of different pitch. Red light differs from blue light only as a bass note in music differs from a treble note. You must therefore distinguish very carefully between a ray of light in itself and the sensation it produces when it falls on the retina of the eye. Our eyes are gifted with a marvellous power of detecting slight differences in the wave-length and the amplitude of rays stimulating two neighbouring portions of the retina.

That range of sensibility is, however, very limited. Suppose we let a ray with a wave-length greater than 0·75 or less than 0·43 enter the human eye: it produces no sensation of light at all. So if we form a spectrum with sunlight, we find a tolerably sharp limit to the visible part of it. But suppose we let the spectrum fall on a sensitive photographic plate. We find the plate is chemically acted upon far beyond the limit of the visible violet end. So we learn that beyond the violet there is radiation of a kind invisible to the eye which can nevertheless affect a photographic plate. This is called the ultra-violet, or actinic, radiation.

Schumann, in 1893, measured waves of actinic radiation as short as 0·1μ — a two-hundred-and-fifty-thousandth of an inch. So we may say we are acquainted with at least two octaves of invisible ultra-violet or actinic radiation: aether waves with wave-lengths between the limits 0·1μ and 0·4μ.

In the same way, very delicate heat-detecting instruments, thermometers called bolometers or thermopiles, show us that beyond the visible red end of the normal spectrum there is radiation called ultra-red radiation, or dark heat, which cannot affect the eye.

The wave-length of dark-heat radiation has been measured up to a limit of 67μ by Professor Rubens and Professor Nichols, in 1897 and 1898. So we can assert that beyond the red end of the spectrum we are acquainted with six octaves or more of ultra-red radiation — that lying between 0·75μ and 67μ in wave-length.

We may put all this another way. In most pianos the keyboard covers a range of seven or eight octaves. Imagine a piano with a keyboard of nine octaves, each key labelled to correspond with a light wave of a particular length. At the extreme treble end let the first key be labelled 0·1, and at the extreme bass end let the last be labelled 51·2. Then the various octaves will be marked off by the keys labelled 0·1, 0·2, 0·4, 0·8, 1·6, 3·2, 6·4, 12·8, 25·6 and 51·2 (see Figure 80).

Suppose each key, when struck, caused some kind of electric radiator to send out an aether wave whose wave-length in microns — in thousandths of a millimetre — is the number on the key. Out of all this great gamut of aether waves, only the notes of one octave, the third from the treble end, whose wave-lengths lie between 0·4μ and 0·8μ, affect the retina of the human eye as light.

The waves of the two octaves above that — those of wave-length less than 0·4μ — are able to affect a photographic plate powerfully; and so, indeed, are some of the waves in the visible octave. We may say that all the aether waves we know of whose wave-length is less than about 0·5μ are able to make an impression on a photographic plate. These rays, whatever their wave-length, are called the actinic rays.

On the other hand, all the aether waves of wave-length greater than about 0·8μ, and for six octaves further down, can only be recognised by their power to heat a delicate thermopile or other heat-measuring instrument. They cannot affect the eye, and they have little or no power to decompose silver salts and mark a sensitive photographic surface.

[Figure 80: The gamut of aether waves. A single ladder of octaves, from the shortest ultra-violet Schumann measured in 1893 at the top to the waves used in wireless telegraphy at the foot — with the whole of visible light occupying one rung between 0·4 and 0·8 microns, and the five hatched rungs marking the octaves nobody has yet made or caught.]

It should be noted, however, that while there are more or less definite limits to the wave-lengths of eye-affecting radiation, and probably to actinic, photographic radiation too — radiation of some wave-lengths being both visible and actinic — rays of every wave-length are to some degree thermal, heat-producing. The term dark-heat radiation is generally restricted to radiation of the wave-lengths that are neither visible nor actinic. Putting the facts this way draws your attention once again to how narrow the limits of the eye's sensibility are compared with the ear's.

The range of wave-lengths mentioned so far does not exhaust our powers of aether-wave production. If we skip over six octaves below the longest dark-heat wave we know of, we arrive at a wave whose wave-length is about 4000μ, or 4 millimetres. At this point we meet the shortest aether waves yet made by electrical oscillations in the manner Hertz first discovered.

It is not possible to define the exact wave-length limits of the radiation so far made by electrical oscillation. Lampa has experimented with aether waves made by the Hertz method whose wave-length was not more than 4 millimetres. Professors Lodge, Rhigi, Bose and Trouton, myself, and many others have carried out quasi-optical experiments with electrically made aether waves ranging from a few millimetres to several inches. Hertz's own work was chiefly done with aether waves from 1 or 2 feet up to 30 or 40 feet in wave-length. More recently, waves of 800 to 1000 feet have been used in wireless telegraphy. Perhaps we shall not be wrong in saying that we are acquainted with sixteen or seventeen octaves of electrically made aether-wave radiation, usually called Hertz radiation.

Between the longest radiation which comes from hot or incandescent bodies such as the sun, the electric arc or a hot ball, and the shortest that has been created by electrical oscillations in some form of Hertz oscillator, there lies a range of six octaves of aether waves which, so far as we know, have never yet been manufactured or detected. Here is an opportunity for a great deal of future scientific work. We have to discover how to create and how to recognise these connecting wave-lengths.

From the fact that all Hertz waves travel at the same speed as light, and from our ability — as you have seen — to imitate the well-known optical phenomena with Hertz radiation of short wave-length, the great induction has been made that all aether waves are of the same essential nature: that invisible actinic rays, light rays, dark-heat rays and Hertz rays are all of them aether waves of various wave-lengths and amplitudes.

So we see, as Maxwell long ago predicted, that light is in all probability an electro-magnetic phenomenon, and that all optical effects must therefore be capable of an electro-magnetic explanation. This bringing of the whole science of optics within the domain of electricity and magnetism is one of the grandest achievements of physical science. It stands second only to Newton's great discovery of universal gravitation, which reduced the whole of physical astronomy to pure dynamics, and showed that the force at work in the falling of a stone is the same as the force which holds the planets in their orbits and governs the motions of whole galaxies of suns.
