Chapter Six: Waves and Ripples in the Aether

(Part 4 of 6)

At the end of the last chapter it was explained that Hertz radiations are created in the aether by the sudden starting, stopping or reversing of the motion of crowds of electrons — electrons released, as it were, instantly from a state of pressure or tension, and set moving inside a straight insulated conductor forming an open electric circuit. The radiations we call light and dark heat are therefore probably started in a similar way, by the vibration of the electrons which form parts of atoms, or which build atoms up.

There are many physical phenomena which seem to show that the electrons we can detach from atoms in a high vacuum tube are capable, while still attached to their atom, of vibrating freely in definite periods. If the atoms are free to move, and each is practically independent — as they are in a gas — and if they are then made to radiate by any means, the radiation the vibrating electrons give out consists of certain definite wave-lengths. This is why, when we form the spectrum of an incandescent gas, we find it made up of several separate bright lines, each corresponding to one particular wave-length, instead of a uniformly graded band of coloured light.

If an atom is struck by colliding with another and then left to itself, it appears that the electrons composing it, forming part of it, are set vibrating, and that each performs its oscillation in some definite period of time. An atom has therefore been compared to a "collection of small tuning forks" which, if roughly struck, would give out a set of air-wave trains, each one matching in wave-length the particular fork that emitted it. So if we could strike such a bundle of tuning forks a blow and then analyse the compound sound, we should obtain a sound spectrum consisting of separated tones — a bright-line spectrum of the complex sound.

Suppose, however, that we have a mass of atoms much more closely in contact, as in a solid body. The continual collisions between them, and their closer contact, make the vibrations of the electrons "forced" rather than "free." The electrons are compelled to perform every variety of irregular motion, and these irregular motions predominate over their regular, free, natural vibrations. So the waves given out are of a great variety of wave-length, and when the radiation is analysed with a prism we get a continuous spectrum, a band of many-coloured light, as the different wave-lengths present in it are separated out.

It is this fact which makes our present method of creating artificial light so exceedingly uneconomical.

All our practical methods of making light consist in heating a solid body one way or another. With electric light we electrically heat a carbon rod or filament, or else — as in the Nernst lamp — a rod of magnesia and the rare earths. With limelight we heat a cylinder of lime. In an ordinary gas flame or candle flame we heat small particles of carbon; and the same is true even of the sun itself.

But this process manufactures not only the single octave of radiation which can affect our eyes as light, but a dozen other octaves our eyes are blind to. It follows that of the whole radiation from a gas flame only about 3 per cent is eye-affecting light, and the remainder is dark heat. With an incandescent electric lamp this luminous efficiency may reach 5 per cent, and with the electric arc 10 or 15 per cent. There is always a great dilution of the useful light with useless dark heat.

The proportion of light — of eye-affecting radiation — to dark heat in the total radiation from any source increases with temperature, though it is not merely a question of temperature. The electric arc is hotter than a candle flame, and the sun is hotter than the electric arc; and so, while the luminous rays make up only 3 parts in 100, 3 per cent, of a candle's radiation, they make up 10 to 15 per cent of the arc's and more than 30 per cent of the sun's.

On the other hand, the glow-worm and the firefly seem to be in possession of a knowledge and an art still denied to us. Professor Langley and Mr Very have shown that nearly the whole of the radiation from the firefly's natural torch is useful light, and none of it useless dark heat. These photogenic — light-producing — insects have the art, which we have not, of creating cold light: unadulterated luminous radiation.

At present, in ordinary incandescent or glow-lamp electric lighting, we have to spend an amount of power called one horse-power to produce an illumination equal to that of 600 candles. But suppose all our power could be used to generate nothing but the rays useful for vision, the rays that can affect our eyes. We might then create, for the same one horse-power, more than twenty times as much illumination — a light equal to 12,000 candles.

These figures show what rewards await the inventor who can find a way of generating aether waves strictly limited to the range between 0·4μ and 0·7μ, without at the same time being obliged to create radiation of longer wave-length which is of no use for making objects visible to us. For the purposes of artificial illumination we need the aether waves of that one particular octave and nothing else.

Such an increase in the efficiency of our sources of artificial light is only likely to come about when we give up the process of heating a solid substance to make it glow, and adopt some other means of setting the electrons vibrating.

It is almost impossible to discuss aether waves without some reference to the most modern use of them, in so-called wireless telegraphy. Without entering into vexed questions of priority, or the historical development of the art, we shall simply confine our attention here to the methods used by Mr Marconi, who has accomplished such wonderful feats in this department of invention.

We have already seen that when two insulated conductors are placed with their ends very close together, and are then electrified — one positively, the other negatively — and then suddenly connected by an electric spark, they constitute an arrangement called an electrical oscillator. If the conductors take the form of two long rods placed in one line, with their neighbouring ends carrying spark-balls separated by a small gap, we have shown that under those conditions electric currents of very high frequency are set up in the rods.

For creating these oscillations an instrument called an induction coil, or spark-coil, is generally used. You will understand the arrangements better if I first describe the spark-coil itself as it is used in wireless telegraphy.

[Figure 81: A 10-inch induction coil for wireless telegraphy. The primary winding lies on a bundle of fine iron wires inside an ebonite tube; over it goes the secondary, which may run to many miles of fine silk-covered wire. Its rating is simply the length of spark it will throw.]

The appliance consists of a large bundle of fine iron wires wound over with a long coil of insulated wire. This forms the primary coil, and it is entirely enclosed in an ebonite tube. At one end of the coil is a contact-breaker which automatically interrupts an electric current flowing from a battery through the primary (see Figure 81). A hand-key is also put in the circuit so the primary current can be stopped and started at will. Over the primary is a very long coil of much finer silk-covered copper wire, called the secondary coil. Its length is very considerable, and may amount to many miles. The secondary is divided into sections, all carefully insulated from one another.

Another important part is the condenser. This consists of sheets of tinfoil laid between sheets of waxed paper, alternate sheets of foil being connected together. The arrangement is virtually a Leyden jar, and one set of foils is connected to one side of the automatic break and the other set to the other side. So when the primary circuit is interrupted by the break, the condenser is at that moment thrown into series with the primary coil.

The rapid interruption of the primary current causes a secondary current in the fine-wire coil. The automatic contact-breaker makes from ten to fifty such interruptions a second. At every break of the primary, a very high electromotive force is generated in the secondary circuit, which may amount to many hundreds of thousands of volts. This very high secondary electromotive force is able to drive an electric discharge, in the form of a spark, between brass balls connected to the secondary terminals.

Coils are generally rated by the length in inches of the spark they can produce between brass balls about half an inch in diameter. The coil most commonly used in wireless telegraphy is technically called a "10-inch induction coil," from the length of spark that particular type can produce.

If the insulated brass balls — the spark-balls — connected to the secondary terminals are set an inch or so apart and the hand-key in the primary circuit is closed, then a battery connected to the primary will send a rapidly interrupted current through the primary coil, and a torrent of sparks will pass between the spark-balls. The primary current of the 10-inch coil is usually a current of 10 ampères supplied at a pressure of 10 volts.

By raising and pressing the hand-key it is possible to make long or short torrents of secondary sparks.

Suppose, then, that we connect two long insulated rods to the secondary spark-balls, with the balls about a quarter of an inch apart. On pressing the hand-key we get a peculiarly bright crackling spark between the balls, which is an oscillatory spark; and at the same time, as already described, electrical oscillations are set up in the rods and electric waves are given off.

We may picture these oscillations in the rods as being like the mechanical vibrations that would be set up in a long elastic wooden rod clamped at the middle and set vibrating at the ends. Or we may think of them as being like the fundamental vibrations of an open organ-pipe, the middle of the pipe corresponding to the middle of the rod. In comparing the mechanical vibrations of the rod, or the acoustic vibrations of the air in the organ-pipe, with the electrical oscillations in the long rods, we must remember that the displacement of the rod or of the air at any point corresponds to the electrical pressure, or potential as it is called, at any point of the long oscillator. So, bearing in mind what was said in the fourth lecture, it will be evident to you that just as the air wave given out by an open organ-pipe is twice the length of the pipe, so the electric wave thrown off by a pair of long rods is twice their total length.

Instead of using a pair of rods for the oscillator, Mr Marconi found it an improvement to use only one insulated rod, held upright, connected to one spark-ball of the coil, with the opposite spark-ball connected to a metal plate buried in the earth. Then, with the spark-balls set a little apart and the hand-key pressed, we get a torrent of oscillatory sparks between the "earthed ball" and the ball on the insulated rod. This sets up electrical oscillations which run up and down the rod. It is easy to show that a strong electric current is passing into and out of the rod, by connecting it to the spark-ball with a piece of fine wire: when the sparks are taken, we find this wire becomes hot — it may go red hot, and sometimes it may melt.

By applying the principles already explained, it is not difficult to show that with an oscillator consisting of a single rod connected to one spark-ball, the electric waves thrown off are four times the length of the rod.

The electrical actions taking place are therefore these. At each interruption of the primary current of the spark-coil, an electromotive force is created in the secondary circuit which gradually charges the insulated rod up until it reaches a state described as being at a potential, an electrical pressure, of several thousand volts. The spark then passes between the balls, and the rod begins to discharge.

This process consists, so to speak, of draining the electric charge out of the rod, and it takes the form of a current in the rod which is zero at the top insulated end and greatest at the spark-ball end. And as the oscillations take place, we have variations of electric pressure, of potential, which are greatest at the upper insulated end and zero at the spark-ball end. From the rod a hemispherical electric wave is radiated. In the language of the wireless telegraphists, a simple insulated rod of this kind is called an insulated aerial, or an insulated antenna.

A simple insulated aerial has, however, a very small electrical capacity, and can store so little electric energy that the whole of it is radiated in the first oscillation. So strictly speaking we do not radiate a train of electric waves at all, but merely a solitary wave, an electric impulse. The effect produced on the aether corresponds to the effect on the air of the crack of a whip or an explosion, not to a musical note or tone from an organ-pipe.

We can, however, make an arrangement with greater wave-making power, as follows.

[Figure 82: A transmitter for wireless telegraphy. The aerial A no longer hangs on the coil directly: it is fed through the oscillation transformer S/P, so that the wave draws on the whole store of energy in the Leyden jars L instead of the little the bare wire could hold by itself.]

The upright rod, the antenna A, is not insulated; it is connected at its lower end to one end of a coil of insulated wire, S, wound on a wooden frame (see Figure 82). The other end of that coil is connected to a metal plate, e, buried in the earth. Round the same wooden frame is wound a second insulated wire, P, one end of which goes to one spark-ball of the induction coil and the other to the outside of a Leyden jar, L, or a set of jars. This double coil on a frame is called an oscillation transformer. The inside of the condenser is connected to the second spark-ball of the induction coil I.

When these spark-balls S are set a short distance apart and the coil is started, we get a torrent of oscillatory sparks between the balls and powerful oscillations set up in one circuit of the oscillation transformer. Those oscillations induce further oscillations in the second circuit — the one connected to the aerial. The oscillations produced in the air-wire, the aerial, are therefore induced, secondary, oscillations. The aerial, the antenna, thus has a far larger store of electric energy to draw on — the energy stored in the Leyden jars — than it would have if it were charged directly by the coil.

To get the best results, however, certain adjustments have to be made. It has already been explained that every open electric circuit has a certain natural time-period for the oscillations that can be set up in it. This is technically called its tune.

If we give a hanging pendulum a blow, we have seen that, left to itself, it vibrates in a definite period of time called its natural period. In the same way, if we have a condenser or Leyden jar with a certain electrical capacity joined in series with a coil of wire having electrical inertia, inductance, and we apply a sudden electromotive force, a sudden impulse, to the circuit so formed and then leave it to itself, the electric charge in it vibrates in a certain definite period, called its natural electrical periodic time.
