Chapter Six: Waves and Ripples in the Aether

(Part 6 of 6)

Take two places on the sea 200 miles apart. The surface of the sea halfway between them stands just 1¼ miles above the straight line joining the two. In other words, the roundness of the earth puts a mountain of water 1¼ miles high between them. The electric waves used in wireless telegraphy are about 600 to 1000 feet long — say five or six to the mile. So an obstacle whose height is a fortieth of the distance is not enough to cast a complete electric shadow.

If, for instance, we were blowing a trumpet and making air waves 5 feet long, and a cliff stood between two places a mile apart, jutting 40 yards across the line joining them, it would not cut off all the sound. There would be diffraction, diffusion, enough to let the sound be heard round the corner. In the same way electric waves are, so to speak, propagated round the corner of the earth. More remarkable still, when they are powerful enough they have been detected 6000 miles from the station that generated them — in which case they must have travelled a quarter of the way round the world.

A good idea of the relative speeds of water waves, air waves and aether waves can be got by considering how long each would take to cross the Atlantic, travelling in its own medium.

Suppose we could make a splash in the sea off England big enough to raise a wave that would travel across the surface of the Atlantic at the speed of many ocean waves — say 30 miles an hour. To cover 3000 miles that water wave would need 100 hours. Imagine that at the same moment we could make a sound loud enough to be heard across the same ocean: travelling at 1100 feet a second, or about 700 miles an hour, the sound wave would cross from England to the coast of the United States in about four hours. But if we were to make an aether wave, it would flit across that same distance in about a sixtieth of a second.

If you have been able to follow me in these descriptions, you will see that the progress of scientific investigation has led us from simple beginnings to a wonderful conclusion: that all space is filled with what we may call an ocean of aether, which can be tossed into waves and ripples, just as the air we breathe is crossed in every direction by aerial vibrations and the restless sea by waves and ripples on its surface. We cannot feel this imponderable aether or handle it, but we have indubitable proof that we can create waves in it by suddenly applying or reversing something we call electric force, just as we can produce waves in air or water by very suddenly applying mechanical force or pressure. And these aether waves, once started, not only travel through the ocean of aether at astonishing speed; they are the means by which enormous quantities of energy are carried across space.

From every square yard of the sun's surface, energy is flung out at a rate equal to that produced by burning eleven tons of the best Welsh coal an hour, and it is carried away into the surrounding space by aether ripples, to warm and light the sun's family of planets. Every plant that grows on the surface of the earth is nourished to maturity by energy delivered to it in this way. Every animal that basks in the sunlight is kept warm by the beating of these aether waves upon the earth. All the coal we possess, buried in the earth's crust and in this age of steam forming the life-blood of the world, was originally manufactured by aether ripples beating in their millions, in ages long past, on the vegetation of the primeval world.

In another way, too, the aether serves as a vehicle of energy — in the form of an electric current. Every electric lamp that is lit, every electric tram-car that glides along, is drawing its supply of energy through the aether. The wire, the conductor as we call it, serves to guide and direct the path along which the energy is carried; but the energy is not in the wire, it is around it. We have lately learnt to make what we may best describe as billows in the aether, and these are the long waves we use in wireless telegraphy. But in telegraphy, whether with wires or without them, we are merely handling the aether as a medium of communication, just as in speech and hearing we use the air.

Our physical investigations therefore lead us to three great final questions, when we ask: what is the nature of electricity, of aether, and of energy? It seems possible that we may already have some clue to an answer to the first, in the study of the electrons, the tiny corpuscles that build up atoms. As for the structure of the aether, physical investigation, having revealed its existence, may be able to analyse its workings a little more deeply. But the question What is energy? seems to take us to the very edge of physical inquiry, where problems about the structure of the material universe begin to merge into questions about its origin and its mystery. In its ultimate essence, energy may be incomprehensible to us except as a display of the direct operation of what we call Mind and Will. In these final inquiries into the nature of things, the wisest of us can merely speculate, and most of us can only dimly apprehend.

We must not, however, travel beyond the limits of thought proper to these elementary lectures. Their chief object has been to show you that the swiftly moving ocean waves which dash and roll unceasingly against the coasts of our island home are only instances of one form of wave-motion, and that we find other varieties of it in other media, giving rise to all the entrancing effects of sound and of light.

In these expositions we have been able to do no more than touch the fringe of a great subject. Their object will have been fulfilled if they have stirred in you a desire to know more about these interesting things. Every star and every flower, every wave and every bird that hovers over it, can tell us a marvellous story, if only we have eyes to see and ears to hear. We may find in the commonest things around us a limitless opportunity for intelligent study and delight.

So when you next sail your boat on a pond, or watch ducks or swans swimming, or throw stones into a pool, or go to the seaside, may I hope that some of the matters discussed here will come back to your minds, and that you will find a fresh meaning and a new interest in these everyday things. You may perhaps receive in that way an impulse drawing you to the study of some chapters of the "Fairy Tale of Science" — more wonderful than any romance ever woven by the imaginations of men — and open for yourselves a source of elevating pleasure which time will neither diminish nor destroy.
