We shall have to pay a little more attention to the forces existing in water before we can have a clear idea on the subject. Besides the attraction which there is between its particles to make it hold together as a liquid or a solid, there is also another force, different from the former--one which, yesterday, by means of the voltaic battery, we overcame, drawing from the water two different substances--which, when heated by means of the electric spark, attracted each other, and rushed into combination to reproduce water. Now, I propose to-day to continue this subject, and trace the various phenomena of chemical affinity; and for this purpose, as we yesterday considered the character of oxygen, of which I have here two jars (oxygen being those particles derived from the water which enable other bodies to burn), we will now consider the other constituent of water; and, without embarrassing you too much with the way in which these things are made, I will proceed now to shew you our common way of making hydrogen. (I called it hydrogen yesterday--it is so called because it helps to generate water.)[A] I put into this retort some zinc, water, and oil of vitriol, and immediately an action takes place, which produces an abundant evolution of gas, now coming over into this jar, and bubbling up in appearance exactly like the oxygen we obtained yesterday.

[A] ὕδωρ, “water,” and γενναω, “I generate.”

[Figure 27]

The processes, you see, are very different, though the result is the same, in so far as it gives us certain gaseous particles. Here, then, is the hydrogen. I shewed you yesterday certain qualities of this gas; now let me exhibit you some other properties. Unlike oxygen, which is a supporter of combustion, and will not burn, hydrogen itself is combustible. There is a jar full of it; and if I carry it along in this manner, and put a light to it, I think you will see it take fire, not with a bright light--you will at all events hear it, if you do not see it. Now, that is a body entirely different from oxygen: it is extremely light; for although yesterday you saw twice as much of this hydrogen produced on the one side as on the other, by the voltaic battery, it was only one-eighth the weight of the oxygen. I carry this jar upside-down. Why? Because I know that it is a very light body, and that it will continue in this jar upside-down quite as effectually as the water will in that jar which is not upside-down; and just as I can pour water from one vessel into another in the right position to receive it, so can I pour this gas from one jar into another when they are upside-down. See what I am about to do. There is no hydrogen in this jar at present, but I will gently turn this jar of hydrogen up under this other jar (fig. 28), and then we will examine the two. We shall see, on applying a light, that the hydrogen has left the jar in which it was at first, and has poured upwards into the other, and there we shall find it.

[Figure 28]

You now understand that we can have particles of very different kinds, and that they can have different bulks and weights; and there are two or three very interesting experiments which serve to illustrate this. For instance, if I blow soap bubbles with the breath from my mouth, you will see them fall, because I fill them with common air, and the water which forms the bubble carries it down. But now, if I inhale hydrogen gas into my lungs (it does no harm to the lungs, although it does no good to them), see what happens. [The Lecturer inhaled some hydrogen, and after one or two ineffectual attempts, succeeded in blowing a splendid bubble, which rose majestically and slowly to the ceiling of the theatre, where it burst.] That shews you very well how light a substance this is; for, notwithstanding all the heavy bad air from my lungs, and the weight of the bubble, you saw how it was carried up. I want you now to consider this phenomenon of weight as indicating how exceedingly different particles are one from the other; and I will take as illustrations these very common things--air, water, the heaviest body, platinum, and this gas: and observe how they differ in this respect; for if I take a piece of platinum of that size (fig. 29), it is equal to the weight of portions of water, air, and hydrogen of the bulks I have represented in these spheres. And this illustration gives you a very good idea of the extraordinary difference with regard to the gravity of the articles having this enormous difference in bulk. [The following tabular statement having reference to this illustration appeared on the diagram board.]

[Figure 29]

+------------+----------+-------+------+ | Hydrogen, | 1 | | | +------------+----------+-------+------+ | Air, | 14.4 | 1 | | +------------+----------+-------+------+ | Water, | 11943 | 829 | 1 | +------------+----------+-------+------+ | Platinum, | 256774 | 17831 | 21.5 | +------------+----------+-------+------+

Whenever oxygen and hydrogen unite together they produce water; and you have seen the extraordinary difference between the bulk and appearance of the water so produced, and the particles of which it consists chemically. Now, we have never yet been able to reduce either oxygen or hydrogen to the liquid state; and yet their first impulse, when chemically combined, is to take up first this liquid condition, and then the solid condition. We never combine these different particles together without producing water; and it is curious to think how often you must have made the experiment of combining oxygen and hydrogen to form water without knowing it. Take a candle, for instance, and a clean silver spoon (or a piece of clean tin will do), and if you hold it over the flame, you immediately cover it with dew--not a smoke--which presently evaporates. This perhaps will serve to shew it better. Mr. Anderson will put a candle under that jar, and you will see how soon the water is produced (fig. 30). Look at that dimness on the sides of the glass, which will soon produce drops, and trickle down into the plate. Well, that dimness and these drops are water, formed by the union of the oxygen of the air with the hydrogen existing in the wax of which that candle is formed.

[Figure 30]

And now, having brought you in the first place to the consideration of chemical attraction, I must enlarge your ideas so as to include all substances which have this attraction for each other--for it changes the character of bodies, and alters them in this way and that way in the most extraordinary manner, and produces other phenomena wonderful to think about. Here is some chlorate of potash, and there some sulphuret of antimony. We will mix these two different sets of particles together; and I want to shew you in a general sort of way some of the phenomena which take place when we make different particles act together. Now, I can make these bodies act upon each other in several ways. In this case I am going to apply heat to the mixture; but if I were to give a blow with a hammer, the same result would follow. [A lighted match was brought to the mixture, which immediately exploded with a sudden flash, evolving a dense white smoke.] There you see the result of the action of chemical affinity overcoming the attraction of cohesion of the particles. Again, here is a little sugar, quite a different substance from the black sulphuret of antimony, and you shall see what takes place when we put the two together. [The mixture was touched with sulphuric acid, when it took fire and burnt gradually, and with a brighter flame than in the former instance.] Observe this chemical affinity travelling about the mass, and setting it on fire, and throwing it into such wonderful agitation!

Editor's note: Chlorate of Potash and Sulphuret of Antimony.--Great care must be taken in mixing these substances, as the mixture is dangerously explosive. They must be powdered separately, and mixed together with a feather on a sheet of paper, or by passing them several times through a small sieve.

Editor's note: The mixture of chlorate of potash and sugar does not require the same precautions. They may be rubbed together in a pestle and mortar without fear. One part of chlorate of potash and three parts of sugar will answer. The mixture need only be touched with a glass rod dipped in oil of vitriol.

I must now come to a few circumstances which require careful consideration. We have already examined one of the effects of this chemical affinity; but to make the matter more clear we must point out some others. And here are two salts dissolved in water. They are both colourless solutions, and in these glasses you cannot see any difference between them. But if I mix them, I shall have chemical attraction take place. I will pour the two together into this glass, and you will at once see, I have no doubt, a certain amount of change. Look, they are already becoming milky, but they are sluggish in their action--not quick as the others were--for we have endless varieties of rapidity in chemical action. Now, if I mix them together, and stir them, so as to bring them properly together, you will soon see what a different result is produced. As I mix them, they get thicker and thicker, and you see the liquid is hardening and stiffening, and before long I shall have it quite hard; and before the end of the lecture it will be a solid stone--a wet stone, no doubt, but more or less solid--in consequence of the chemical affinity. Is not this changing two liquids into a solid body a wonderful manifestation of chemical affinity?

Editor's note: Two Salts Dissolved in Water.--Sulphate of soda and chloride of calcium. The solutions must be saturated for the experiment to succeed well.

There is another remarkable circumstance in chemical affinity, which is, that it is capable of either waiting or acting at once. And this is very singular, because we know of nothing of the kind in the forces either of gravitation or cohesion. For instance, here are some oxygen particles, and here is a lump of carbon particles. I am going to put the carbon particles into the oxygen; they can act, but they do not--they are just like this unlighted candle. It stands here quietly on the table, waiting until we want to light it. But it is not so in this other case. Here is a substance, gaseous like the oxygen, and if I put these particles of metal into it, the two combine at once. The copper and the chlorine unite by their power of chemical affinity, and produce a body entirely unlike either of the substances used. And in this other case, it is not that there is any deficiency of affinity between the carbon and oxygen; for the moment I choose to put them in a condition to exert their affinity, you will see the difference. [The piece of charcoal was ignited, and introduced into the jar of oxygen, when the combustion proceeded with vivid scintillations.]

Now, this chemical action is set going exactly as it would be if I had lighted the candle, or as it is when the servant puts coals on and lights the fire: the substances wait until we do something which is able to start the action. Can anything be more beautiful than this combustion of charcoal in oxygen? You must understand that each of these little sparks is a portion of the charcoal, or the bark of the charcoal, thrown off white-hot into the oxygen, and burning in it most brilliantly, as you see. And now let me tell you another thing, or you will go away with a very imperfect notion of the powers and effects of this affinity. There you see some charcoal burning in oxygen. Well, a piece of lead will burn in oxygen just as well as the charcoal does, or indeed better; for absolutely that piece of lead will act at once upon the oxygen as the copper did in the other vessel with regard to the chlorine. And here also a piece of iron: if I light it and put it into the oxygen, it will burn away just as the carbon did. And I will take some lead, and shew you that it will burn in the common atmospheric oxygen at the ordinary temperature. These are the lumps of lead which, you remember, we had the other day--the two pieces which clung together. Now these pieces, if I take them to-day and press them together, will not stick; and the reason is, that they have attracted from the atmosphere a part of the oxygen there present, and have become coated as with a varnish by the oxide of lead, which is formed on the surface by a real process of combustion or combination. There you see the iron burning very well in oxygen; and I will tell you the reason why those scissors and that lead do not take fire whilst they are lying on the table. Here the lead is in a lump, and the coating of oxide remains on its surface; whilst there you see the melted oxide is clearing itself off from the iron, and allowing more and more to go on burning. In this case, however [holding up a small glass tube containing lead pyrophorus.], the lead has been very carefully produced in fine powder, and put into a glass tube, and hermetically sealed, so as to preserve it; and I expect you will see it take fire at once. This has been made about a month ago, and has thus had time enough to sink down to its normal temperature. What you see, therefore, is the result of chemical affinity alone. [The tube was broken at the end, and the lead poured out on to a piece of paper, whereupon it immediately took fire.] Look, look at the lead burning; why, it has set fire to the paper! Now, that is nothing more than the common affinity always existing between very clean lead and the atmospheric oxygen; and the reason why this iron does not burn until it is made red-hot is, because it has got a coating of oxide about it, which stops the action of the oxygen--putting a varnish, as it were, upon its surface, as we varnish a picture, absolutely forming a substance which prevents the natural chemical affinity between the bodies from acting.
