I wonder whether we shall be too deep to-day or not. Remember that we spoke of the attraction by gravitation of all bodies to all bodies by their simple approach. Remember that we spoke of the attraction of particles of the same kind to each other,--that power which keeps them together in masses,--iron attracted to iron, brass to brass, or water to water. Remember that we found, on looking into water, that there were particles of two different kinds attracted to each other; and this was a great step beyond the first simple attraction of gravitation; because here we deal with attraction between different kinds of matter. The hydrogen could attract the oxygen, and reduce it to water, but it could not attract any of its own particles; so that there we obtained a first indication of the existence of two attractions.

To-day we come to a kind of attraction even more curious than the last, namely, the attraction which we find to be of a double nature--of a curious and dual nature. And I want first of all to make the nature of this doubleness clear to you. Bodies are sometimes endowed with a wonderful attraction, which is not found in them in their ordinary state. For instance, here is a piece of shell-lac, having the attraction of gravitation, having the attraction of cohesion; and if I set fire to it, it would have the attraction of chemical affinity to the oxygen in the atmosphere. Now, all these powers we find in it as if they were parts of its substance; but there is another property which I will try and make evident by means of this ball, this bubble of air [a light india-rubber ball, inflated and suspended by a thread]. There is no attraction between this ball and this shell-lac at present: there may be a little wind in the room slightly moving the ball about, but there is no attraction. But if I rub the shell-lac with a piece of flannel [rubbing the shell-lac, and then holding it near the ball], look at the attraction which has arisen out of the shell-lac, simply by this friction, and which I may take away as easily by drawing it gently through my hand. [The Lecturer repeated the experiment of exciting the shell-lac, and then removing the attractive power by drawing it through his hand.] Again, you will see I can repeat this experiment with another substance; for if I take a glass rod and rub it with a piece of silk covered with what we call amalgam, look at the attraction which it has, how it draws the ball towards it; and then, as before, by quietly rubbing it through the hand, the attraction will be all removed again, to come back by friction with this silk.

[Figure 33]

But now we come to another fact. I will take this piece of shell-lac and make it attractive by friction; and remember that whenever we get an attraction of gravity, chemical affinity, adhesion, or electricity (as in this case), the body which attracts is attracted also; and just as much as that ball was attracted by the shell-lac, the shell-lac was attracted by the ball. Now, I will suspend this piece of excited shell-lac in a little paper stirrup, in this way (fig. 33), in order to make it move easily, and I will take another piece of shell-lac, and after rubbing it with flannel, will bring them near together. You will think that they ought to attract each other; but now what happens? It does not attract; on the contrary, it very strongly repels, and I can thus drive it round to any extent. These, therefore, repel each other, although they are so strongly attractive--repel each other to the extent of driving this heavy piece of shell-lac round and round in this way. But if I excite this piece of shell-lac, as before, and take this piece of glass and rub it with silk, and then bring them near, what think you will happen? [The Lecturer held the excited glass near the excited shell-lac, when they attracted each other strongly.] You see, therefore, what a difference there is between these two attractions,--they are actually two kinds of attraction concerned in this case, quite different to anything we have met with before; but the force is the same. We have here, then, a double attraction--a dual attraction or force--one attracting, and the other repelling.

Again, to shew you another experiment which will help to make this clear to you. Suppose I set up this rough indicator again [the excited shell-lac suspended in the stirrup]--it is rough, but delicate enough for my purpose; and suppose I take this other piece of shell-lac, and take away the power, which I can do by drawing it gently through the hand; and suppose I take a piece of flannel (fig. 34), which I have shaped into a cap for it and made dry. I will put this shell-lac into the flannel, and here comes out a very beautiful result. I will rub this shell-lac and the flannel together (which I can do by twisting the shell-lac round), and leave them in contact; and then, if I ask, by bringing them nearer our indicator, what is the attractive force?--it is nothing! But if I take them apart, and then ask what will they do when they are separated--why, the shell-lac is strongly repelled, as it was before, but the cap is strongly attractive; and yet if I bring them both together again, there is no attraction--it has all disappeared [the experiment was repeated]. Those two bodies, therefore, still contain this attractive power: when they were parted, it was evident to your senses that they had it, though they do not attract when they are together.

[Figure 34]

[Figure 35]

This, then, is sufficient in the outset to give you an idea of the nature of the force which we call ELECTRICITY. There is no end to the things from which you can evolve this power. When you go home, take a stick of sealing-wax--I have rather a large stick, but a smaller one will do--and make an indicator of this sort (fig. 35). Take a watch-glass (or your watch itself will do; you only want something which shall have a round face), and now, if you place a piece of flat glass upon that, you have a very easily moved centre. And if I take this lath and put it on the flat glass (you see I am searching for the centre of gravity of this lath--I want to balance it upon the watch-glass), it is very easily moved round; and if I take this piece of sealing-wax and rub it against my coat, and then try whether it is attractive [holding it near the lath], you see how strong the attraction is; I can even draw it about. Here, then, you have a very beautiful indicator, for I have, with a small piece of sealing-wax and my coat, pulled round a plank of that kind; so you need be in no want of indicators to discover the presence of this attraction. There is scarcely a substance which we may not use. Here are some indicators (fig. 36). I bend round a strip of paper into a hoop, and we have as good an indicator as can be required. See how it rolls along, travelling after the sealing-wax. If I make them smaller, of course we have them running faster, and sometimes they are actually attracted up into the air. Here also is a little collodion balloon. It is so electrical that it will scarcely leave my hand unless to go to the other. See, how curiously electrical it is: it is hardly possible for me to touch it without making it electrical; and here is a piece which clings to anything it is brought near, and which it is not easy to lay down. And here is another substance, gutta-percha, in thin strips: it is astonishing how, by rubbing this in your hands, you make it electrical. But our time forbids us to go further into this subject at present. You see clearly there are two kinds of electricities which may be obtained by rubbing shell-lac with flannel, or glass with silk.

[Figure 36]

Now, there are some curious bodies in nature (of which I have two specimens on the table) which are called magnets or loadstones--ores of iron, of which there is a great deal sent from Sweden. They have the attraction of gravitation, and attraction of cohesion, and certain chemical attraction; but they also have a great attractive power, for this little key is held up by this stone. Now, that is not chemical attraction,--it is not the attraction of chemical affinity, or of aggregation of particles, or of cohesion, or of electricity (for it will not attract this ball if I bring it near it); but it is a separate and dual attraction--and, what is more, one which is not readily removed from the substance, for it has existed in it for ages and ages in the bowels of the earth. Now, we can make artificial magnets (you will see me to-morrow make artificial magnets of extraordinary power). And let us take one of these artificial magnets, and examine it, and see where the power is in the mass, and whether it is a dual power. You see it attracts these keys, two or three in succession, and it will attract a very large piece of iron. That, then, is a very different thing indeed to what you saw in the case of the shell-lac; for that only attracted a light ball, but here I have several ounces of iron held up. And if we come to examine this attraction a little more closely, we shall find it presents some other remarkable differences: first of all, one end of this bar (fig. 37) attracts this key, but the middle does not attract. It is not, then, the whole of the substance which attracts. If I place this little key in the middle, it does not adhere; but if I place it there, a little nearer the end, it does, though feebly. Is it not, then, very curious to find that there is an attractive power at the extremities which is not in the middle--to have thus in one bar two places in which this force of attraction resides! If I take this bar and balance it carefully on a point, so that it will be free to move round, I can try what action this piece of iron has on it. Well, it attracts one end, and it also attracts the other end, just as you saw the shell-lac and the glass did, with the exception of its not attracting in the middle. But if now, instead of a piece of iron, I take a magnet, and examine it in a similar way, you see that one of its ends repels the suspended magnet--the force then is no longer attraction, but repulsion; but if I take the other end of the magnet and bring it near, it shews attraction again.

[Figure 37-38]

You will see this better, perhaps, by another kind of experiment. Here (fig. 38) is a little magnet, and I have coloured the ends differently, so that you may distinguish one from the other. Now this end (S) of the magnet (fig. 37) attracts the uncoloured end of the little magnet. You see it pulls it towards it with great power; and as I carry it round, the uncoloured end still follows. But now, if I gradually bring the middle of the bar magnet opposite the uncoloured end of the needle, it has no effect upon it, either of attraction or repulsion, until, as I come to the opposite extremity (N), you see that it is the coloured end of the needle which is pulled towards it. We are now therefore dealing with two kinds of power, attracting different ends of the magnet--a double power, already existing in these bodies, which takes up the form of attraction and repulsion. And now, when I put up this label with the word MAGNETISM, you will understand that it is to express this double power.

Now, with this loadstone you may make magnets artificially. Here is an artificial magnet (fig. 39) in which both ends have been brought together in order to increase the attraction. This mass will lift that lump of iron; and, what is more, by placing this keeper, as it is called, on the top of the magnet, and taking hold of the handle, it will adhere sufficiently strongly to allow itself to be lifted up--so wonderful is its power of attraction. If you take a needle, and just draw one of its ends along one extremity of the magnet, and then draw the other end along the other extremity, and then gently place it on the surface of some water (the needle will generally float on the surface, owing to the slight greasiness communicated to it by the fingers), you will be able to get all the phenomena of attraction and repulsion, by bringing another magnetised needle near to it.
