[Figure 39]

I want you now to observe, that although I have shewn you in these magnets that this double power becomes evident principally at the extremities, yet the whole of the magnet is concerned in giving the power. That will at first seem rather strange; and I must therefore shew you an experiment to prove that this is not an accidental matter, but that the whole of the mass is really concerned in this force, just as in falling the whole of the mass is acted upon by the force of gravitation. I have here (fig. 40) a steel bar, and I am going to make it a magnet, by rubbing it on the large magnet (fig. 39). I have now made the two ends magnetic in opposite ways. I do not at present know one from the other, but we can soon find out. You see when I bring it near our magnetic needle (fig. 38) one end repels and the other attracts; and the middle will neither attract nor repel--it cannot, because it is half-way between the two ends. But now, if I break out that piece (n s), and then examine it--see how strongly one end (n) pulls at this end (S, fig. 38), and how it repels the other end (N). And so it can be shewn that every part of the magnet contains this power of attraction and repulsion, but that the power is only rendered evident at the end of the mass. You will understand all this in a little while; but what you have now to consider is, that every part of this steel is in itself a magnet. Here is a little fragment which I have broken out of the very centre of the bar, and you will still see that one end is attractive and the other is repulsive. Now, is not this power a most wonderful thing? and very strange the means of taking it from one substance and bringing it to other matters? I cannot make a piece of iron or anything else heavier or lighter than it is. Its cohesive power it must and does have; but, as you have seen by these experiments, we can add or subtract this power of magnetism, and almost do as we like with it.

[Figure 40]

[Figure 41]

And now we will return for a short time to the subject treated of at the commencement of this lecture. You see here (fig. 41) a large machine, arranged for the purpose of rubbing glass with silk, and for obtaining the power called electricity; and the moment the handle of the machine is turned, a certain amount of electricity is evolved, as you will see by the rise of the little straw indicator (at A). Now, I know from the appearance of repulsion of the pith ball at the end of the straw, that electricity is present in those brass conductors (B B), and I want you to see the manner in which that electricity can pass away. [Touching the conductor (B) with his finger, the Lecturer drew a spark from it, and the straw electrometer immediately fell.] There, it has all gone; and that I have really taken it away, you shall see by an experiment of this sort. If I hold this cylinder of brass by the glass handle, and touch the conductor with it, I take away a little of the electricity. You see the spark in which it passes, and observe that the pith-ball indicator has fallen a little, which seems to imply that so much electricity is lost; but it is not lost: it is here in this brass; and I can take it away and carry it about, not because it has any substance of its own, but by some strange property which we have not before met with as belonging to any other force. Let us see whether we have it here or not. [The Lecturer brought the charged cylinder to a jet from which gas was issuing; the spark was seen to pass from the cylinder to the jet, but the gas did not light.] Ah! the gas did not light, but you saw the spark; there is, perhaps, some draught in the room which blew the gas on one side, or else it would light. We will try this experiment afterwards. You see from the spark that I can transfer the power from the machine to this cylinder, and then carry it away and give it to some other body. You know very well, as a matter of experiment, that we can transfer the power of heat from one thing to another; for if I put my hand near the fire it becomes hot. I can shew you this by placing before us this ball, which has just been brought red-hot from the fire. If I press this wire to it, some of the heat will be transferred from the ball; and I have only now to touch this piece of gun-cotton with the hot wire, and you see how I can transfer the heat from the ball to the wire, and from the wire to the cotton. So you see that some powers are transferable, and others are not. Observe how long the heat stops in this ball. I might touch it with the wire, or with my finger, and if I did so quickly, I should merely burn the surface of the skin; whereas, if I touch that cylinder, however rapidly, with my finger, the electricity is gone at once--dispersed on the instant, in a manner wonderful to think of.

[Figure 42]

I must now take up a little of your time in shewing you the manner in which these powers are transferred from one thing to another; for the manner in which force may be conducted or transmitted is extraordinary, and most essential for us to understand. Let us see in what manner these powers travel from place to place. Both heat and electricity can be conducted; and here is an arrangement I have made to shew how the former can travel. It consists of a bar of copper (fig. 42); and if I take a spirit-lamp (this is one way of obtaining the power of heat), and place it under that little chimney, the flame will strike against the bar of copper and keep it hot. Now, you are aware that power is being transferred from the flame of that lamp to the copper, and you will see by-and-by that it is being conducted along the copper from particle to particle; for, inasmuch as I have fastened these wooden balls by a little wax at particular distances from the point where the copper is first heated, first one ball will fall, and then the more distant ones, as the heat travels along--and thus you will learn that the heat travels gradually through the copper. You will see that this is a very slow conduction of power, as compared with electricity. If I take cylinders of wood and metal, joined together at the ends, and wrap a piece of paper round, and then apply the heat of this lamp to the place where the metal and wood join, you will see how the heat will accumulate where the wood is, and burn the paper with which I have covered it; but where the metal is beneath, the heat is conducted away too fast for the paper to be burned. And so, if I take a piece of wood and a piece of metal joined together, and put it so that the flame should play equally both upon one and the other, we shall soon find that the metal will become hot before the wood; for if I put a piece of phosphorus on the wood, and another piece on the copper, you will find that the phosphorus on the copper will take fire before that on the wood is melted--and this shews you how badly the wood conducts heat. But with regard to the travelling of electricity from place to place, its rapidity is astonishing. I will, first of all, take these pieces of glass and metal, and you will soon understand how it is that the glass does not lose the power which it acquired when it is rubbed by the silk. By one or two experiments I will shew you. If I take this piece of brass and bring it near the machine, you see how the electricity leaves the latter, and passes to the brass cylinder. And, again, if I take a rod of metal and touch the machine with it, I lower the indicator; but when I touch it with a rod of glass, no power is drawn away,--shewing you that the electricity is conducted by the glass and the metal in a manner entirely different: and to make you see that more clearly, we will take one of our Leyden jars. Now, I must not embarrass your minds with this subject too much; but if I take a piece of metal, and bring it against the knob at the top and the metallic coating at the bottom, you will see the electricity passing through the air as a brilliant spark. It takes no sensible time to pass through this; and if I were to take a long metallic wire, no matter what the length--at least as far as we are concerned--and if I make one end of it touch the outside, and the other touch the knob at the top, see how the electricity passes!--it has flashed instantaneously through the whole length of this wire. Is not this different from the transmission of heat through this copper bar (fig. 42), which has taken a quarter of an hour or more to reach the first ball?

[Figure 43]

Here is another experiment, for the purpose of shewing the conductibility of this power through some bodies, and not through others. Why do I have this arrangement made of brass? [pointing to the brass work of the electrical machine, fig. 41]. Because it conducts electricity. And why do I have these columns made of glass? Because they obstruct the passage of electricity. And why do I put that paper tassel (fig. 43) at the top of the pole, upon a glass rod, and connect it with this machine by means of a wire? You see at once that as soon as the handle of the machine is turned, the electricity which is evolved travels along this wire and up the wooden rod, and goes to the tassel at the top, and you see the power of repulsion with which it has endowed these strips of paper, each spreading outwards to the ceiling and sides of the room. The outside of that wire is covered with gutta-percha. It would not serve to keep the force from you when touching it with your hands, because it would burst through; but it answers our purpose for the present. And so you perceive how easily I can manage to send this power of electricity from place to place, by choosing the materials which can conduct the power. Suppose I want to fire a portion of gunpowder, I can readily do it by this transferable power of electricity. I will take a Leyden jar, or any other arrangement which gives us this power, and arrange wires so that they may carry the power to the place I wish; and then placing a little gunpowder on the extremities of the wires, the moment I make the connection by this discharging rod, I shall fire the gunpowder. [The connection was made, and the gunpowder ignited.] And if I were to shew you a stool like this, and were to explain to you its construction, you could easily understand that we use glass legs, because these are capable of preventing the electricity from going away to the earth. If, therefore, I were to stand on this stool, and receive the electricity through this conductor, I could give it to anything that I touched. [The Lecturer stood upon the insulating stool, and placed himself in connection with the conductor of the machine.] Now, I am electrified--I can feel my hair rising up as the paper tassel did just now. Let us see whether I can succeed in lighting gas by touching the jet with my finger. [The Lecturer brought his finger near a jet from which gas was issuing, when, after one or two attempts, the spark which came from his finger to the jet set fire to the gas.] You now see how it is that this power of electricity can be transferred from the matter in which it is generated, and conducted along wires and other bodies, and thus be made to serve new purposes utterly unattainable by the powers we have spoken of on previous days; and you will not now be at a loss to bring this power of electricity into comparison with those which we have previously examined; and to-morrow we shall be able to go further into the consideration of these transferable powers.
