We have frequently seen, during the course of these lectures, that one of those powers or forces of matter, of which I have written the names on that board, has produced results which are due to the action of some other force. Thus, you have seen the force of electricity acting in other ways than in attracting: you have also seen it combine matters together, or disunite them, by means of its action on the chemical force; and in this case, therefore, you have an instance in which these two powers are related. But we have other and deeper relations than these; we have not merely to see how it is that one power affects another--how the force of heat affects chemical affinity, and so forth--but we must try and comprehend what relation they bear to each other, and how these powers may be changed one into the other; and it will to-day require all my care, and your care too, to make this clear to your minds. I shall be obliged to confine myself to one or two instances, because, to take in the whole extent of this mutual relation and conversion of forces, would surpass the human intellect.

In the first place, then, here is a piece of fine zinc-foil; and if I cut it into narrow strips and apply to it the power of heat, admitting the contact of air at the same time, you will find that it burns; and then, seeing that it burns, you will be prepared to say that there is chemical action taking place. You see all I have to do is to hold the piece of zinc at the side of the flame, so as to let it get heated, and yet to allow the air which is flowing into the flame from all sides to have access to it;--there is the piece of zinc burning just like a piece of wood, only brighter. A part of the zinc is going up into the air, in the form of that white smoke, and part is falling down on to the table. This, then, is the action of chemical affinity exerted between the zinc and the oxygen of the air. I will shew you what a curious kind of affinity this is by an experiment, which is rather striking when seen for the first time. I have here some iron filings and gunpowder, and will mix them carefully together, with as little rough handling as possible. Now, we will compare the combustibility, so to speak, of the two. I will pour some spirit of wine into a basin, and set it on fire: and, having our flame, I will drop this mixture of iron filings and gunpowder through it, so that both sets of particles will have an equal chance of burning. And now, tell me which of them it is that burns? You see a plentiful combustion of the iron-filings. But I want you to observe that, though they have equal chances of burning, we shall find that by far the greater part of the gunpowder remains untouched. I have only to drain off this spirit of wine, and let the powder which has gone through the flame dry, which it will do in a few minutes, and I will then test it with a lighted match. So ready is the iron to burn, that it takes, under certain circumstances, even less time to catch fire than gunpowder. [As soon as the gunpowder was dry, Mr. Anderson handed it to the Lecturer, who applied a lighted match to it, when a sudden flash shewed how large a proportion of gunpowder had escaped combustion when falling through the flame of alcohol.]

These are all cases of chemical affinity; and I shew them to make you understand that we are about to enter upon the consideration of a strange kind of chemical affinity, and then to see how far we are enabled to convert this force of affinity into electricity or magnetism, or any other of the forces which we have discussed. Here is some zinc (I keep to the metal zinc, as it is very useful for our purpose), and I can produce hydrogen gas by putting the zinc and sulphuric acid together, as they are in that retort. There you see the mixture which gives us hydrogen--the zinc is pulling the water to pieces and setting free hydrogen gas. Now, we have learned by experience that, if a little mercury is spread over that zinc, it does not take away its power of decomposing the water, but modifies it most curiously. See how that mixture is now boiling; but when I add a little mercury to it, the gas ceases to come off. We have now scarcely a bubble of hydrogen set free, so that the action is suspended for the time. We have not destroyed the power of chemical affinity, but modified it in a wonderful and beautiful manner. Here are some pieces of zinc covered with mercury, exactly in the same way as the zinc in that retort is covered; and if I put this plate into sulphuric acid, I get no gas--but this most extraordinary thing occurs, that if I introduce along with the zinc another metal which is not so combustible, then I reproduce all the action. I am now going to put to the amalgamated zinc in this retort some portions of copper wire (copper not being so combustible a metal as the zinc), and observe how I get hydrogen again. As in the first instance, there the bubbles are coming over through the pneumatic trough, and ascending faster and faster in the jar. The zinc now is acting by reason of its contact with the copper.

Every step we are now taking brings us to a knowledge of new phenomena. That hydrogen which you now see coming off so abundantly does not come from the zinc, as it did before, but from the copper. Here is a jar containing a solution of copper. If I put a piece of this amalgamated zinc into it, and leave it there, it has scarcely any action; and here is a plate of platinum, which I will immerse in the same solution, and might leave it there for hours, days, months, or even years, and no action would take place. But by putting them both together, and allowing them to touch (fig. 44), you see what a coating of copper there is immediately thrown down on the platinum. Why is this? The platinum has no power of itself to reduce that metal from that fluid, but it has in some mysterious way received this power by its contact with the metal zinc. Here, then, you see a strange transfer of chemical force from one metal to another--the chemical force from the zinc is transferred, and made over to the platinum by the mere association of the two metals. I might take, instead of the platinum, a piece of copper or of silver, and it would have no action of its own on this solution; but the moment the zinc was introduced and touched the other metal, then the action would take place, and it would become covered with copper. Now, is not this most wonderful and beautiful to see? We still have the identical chemical force of the particles of zinc acting, and yet in some strange manner we have power to make that chemical force, or something it produces, travel from one place to another--for we do make the chemical force travel from the zinc to the platinum by this very curious experiment of using the two metals in the same fluid in contact with each other.

[Figure 44-45]

Let us now examine these phenomena a little more closely. Here is a drawing (fig. 45) in which I have represented a vessel containing the acid liquid, and the slips of zinc and platinum or copper, and I have shewn them touching each other outside by means of a wire coming from each of them (for it matters not whether they touch in the fluid or outside--by pieces of metal attached--they still by that communication between them have this power transferred from one to another). Now, if instead of only using one vessel, as I have shewn there, I take another, and another, and put in zinc and platinum, zinc and platinum, zinc and platinum, and connect the platinum of one vessel with the zinc of another, the platinum of this vessel with the zinc of that, and so on, we should only be using a series of these vessels instead of one. This we have done in that arrangement which you see behind me. I am using what we call a Grove’s voltaic battery, in which one metal is zinc, and the other platinum, and I have as many as forty pairs of these plates all exercising their force at once in sending the whole amount of chemical power there evolved through these wires under the floor, and up to these two rods coming through the table. We need do no more than just bring these two ends in contact, when the spark shews us what power is present; and what a strange thing it is to see that this force is brought away from the battery behind me, and carried along through these wires. I have here an apparatus (fig. 46) which Sir Humphry Davy constructed many years ago, in order to see whether this power from the voltaic battery caused bodies to attract each other in the same manner as the ordinary electricity did. He made it in order to experiment with his large voltaic battery, which was the most powerful then in existence. You see there are in this glass jar two leaves of gold, which I can cause to move to and fro by this rack-work. I will connect each of these gold leaves with separate ends of this battery; and, if I have a sufficient number of plates in the battery, I shall be able to shew you that there will be some attraction between those leaves, even before they come in contact. If I bring them sufficiently near when they are in communication with the ends of the battery, they will be drawn gently together; and you will know when this takes place, because the power will cause the gold leaves to burn away, which they could only do when they touched each other. Now, I am going to cause these two leaves of gold to approach gradually, and I have no doubt that some of you will see that they approach before they burn; and those who are too far off to see them approach will see by their burning that they have come together. Now they are attracting each other, long before the connection is complete; and there they go! burnt up in that brilliant flash--so strong is the force. You thus see, from the attractive force at the two ends of this battery, that these are really and truly electrical phenomena.

[Figure 46-47]

Now, let us consider what is this spark. I take these two ends and bring them together, and there I get this glorious spark, like the sunlight in the heavens above us. What is this? It is the same thing which you saw when I discharged the large electrical machine, when you saw one single bright flash; it is the same thing, only continued, because here we have a more effective arrangement. Instead of having a machine which we are obliged to turn for a long time together, we have here a chemical power which sends forth the spark; and it is wonderful and beautiful to see how this spark is carried about through these wires. I want you to perceive, if possible, that this very spark and the heat it produces (for there is heat) is neither more nor less than the chemical force of the zinc--its very force carried along wires and conveyed to this place. I am about to take a portion of the zinc and burn it in oxygen gas, for the sake of shewing you the kind of light produced by the actual combustion in oxygen gas of some of this metal. [A tassel of zinc-foil was ignited at a spirit-lamp, and introduced into a jar of oxygen, when it burnt with a brilliant light.] That shews you what the affinity is when we come to consider it in its energy and power. And the zinc is being burned in the battery behind me at a much more rapid rate than you see in that jar, because the zinc is there dissolving and burning, and produces here this great electric light. That very same power, which in that jar you saw evolved from the actual combustion of the zinc in oxygen, is carried along these wires and made evident here; and you may, if you please, consider that the zinc is burning in those cells, and that this is the light of that burning [bringing the two poles in contact, and shewing the electric light]; and we might so arrange our apparatus as to shew that the amounts of power evolved in either case are identical. Having thus obtained power over the chemical force, how wonderfully we are able to convey it from place to place! When we use gunpowder for explosive purposes, we can send into the mine chemical affinity by means of this electricity; not having provided fire beforehand, we can send it in at the moment we require it. Now, here (fig. 47) is a vessel containing two charcoal points, and I bring it forward as an illustration of the wonderful power of conveying this force from place to place. I have merely to connect these by means of wires to the opposite ends of the battery, and bring the points in contact. See what an exhibition of force we have! We have exhausted the air so that the charcoal cannot burn; and, therefore, the light you see is really the burning of the zinc in the cells behind me--there is no disappearance of the carbon, although we have that glorious electric light; and the moment I cut off the connection, it stops. Here is a better instance to enable some of you to see the certainty with which we can convey this force, where, under ordinary circumstances, chemical affinity would not act. We may absolutely take these two charcoal poles down under water, and get our electric light there;--there they are in the water, and you observe, when I bring them into connection, we have the same light as we had in that glass vessel.
