Now, besides this production of light, we have all the other effects and powers of burning zinc. I have a few wires here which are not combustible, and I am going to take one of them, a small platinum wire, and suspend it between these two rods, which are connected with the battery; and, when contact is made at the battery, see what heat we get (fig. 48). Is not that beautiful?--it is a complete bridge of power. There is metallic connection all the way round in this arrangement; and where I have inserted the platinum, which offers some resistance to the passage of the force, you see what an amount of heat is evolved,--this is the heat which the zinc would give if burnt in oxygen; but as it is being burnt in the voltaic battery, it is giving it out at this spot. I will now shorten this wire for the sake of shewing you, that the shorter the obstructing wire is, the more and more intense is the heat, until at last our platinum is fused and falls down, breaking off the circuit.

[Figure 48]

[Figure 49]

Here is another instance. I will take a piece of the metal silver, and place it on charcoal, connected with one end of the battery, and lower the other charcoal pole on to it. See how brilliantly it burns (fig. 49). Here is a piece of iron on the charcoal--see what a combustion is going on; and we might go on in this way, burning almost everything we place between the poles. Now, I want to shew you that this power is still chemical affinity--that if we call the power which is evolved at this point heat, or electricity, or any other name referring to its source, or the way in which it travels, we still shall find it to be chemical action. Here is a coloured liquid which can shew by its change of colour the effects of chemical action. I will pour part of it into this glass, and you will find that these wires have a very strong action. I am not going to shew you any effects of combustion or heat; but I will take these two platinum plates, and fasten one to the one pole, and the other to the other end, and place them in this solution, and in a very short time you will see the blue colour will be entirely destroyed. See, it is colourless now!--I have merely brought the end of the wires into the solution of indigo, and the power of electricity has come through these wires, and made itself evident by its chemical action. There is also another curious thing to be noticed, now we are dealing with the chemistry of electricity, which is, that the chemical power which destroys the colour is only due to the action on one side. I will pour some more of this sulpho-indigotic acid into a flat dish, and will then make a porous dyke of sand, separating the two portions of fluid into two parts (fig. 50); and now we shall be able to see whether there is any difference in the two ends of the battery, and which it is that possesses this peculiar action. You see it is the one on my right hand which has the power of destroying the blue--for the portion on that side is thoroughly bleached--while nothing has apparently occurred on the other side. I say apparently, for you must not imagine that, because you cannot perceive any action, none has taken place.

Editor's note: Sulpho-indigotic Acid.--A mixture of one part of indigo and fifteen parts of concentrated oil of vitriol. It is bleached on the side at which hydrogen gas is evolved, in consequence of the liberated hydrogen withdrawing oxygen from the indigo, thereby forming a colourless deoxidised indigo. In making the experiment, only enough of the sulpho-indigotic acid must be added to give the water a decided blue colour.

[Figure 50]

Here we have another instance of chemical action. I take these platinum plates again, and immerse them in this solution of copper, from which we formerly precipitated some of the metal, when the platinum and zinc were both put in it together. You see that these two platinum plates have no chemical action of any kind--they might remain in the solution as long as I liked, without having any power of themselves to reduce the copper;--but the moment I bring the two poles of the battery in contact with them, the chemical action, which is there transformed into electricity and carried along the wires, again becomes chemical action at the two platinum poles; and now we shall have the power appearing on the left-hand side, and throwing down the copper in the metallic state on the platinum plate; and in this way I might give you many instances of the extraordinary way in which this chemical action, or electricity, may be carried about. That strange nugget of gold, of which there is a model in the other room--and which has an interest of its own in the natural history of gold, and which came from Ballarat, and was worth £8,000, or £9,000, when it was melted down last November--was brought together in the bowels of the earth, perhaps ages and ages ago, by some such power as this. And there is also another beautiful result dependent upon chemical affinity in that fine lead-tree--the lead growing and growing by virtue of this power. The lead and the zinc are combined together in a little voltaic arrangement, in a manner far more important than the powerful one you see here; because, in nature, these minute actions are going on for ever, and are of great and wonderful importance in the precipitation of metals and formation of mineral veins, and so forth. These actions are not for a limited time, like my battery here, but they act for ever in small degrees, accumulating more and more of the results.

Editor's note: Lead Tree.--To make a lead tree, pass a bundle of brass wires through the cork of a bottle, and fasten a plate of zinc round them just as they issue from the cork, so that the zinc may be in contact with every one of the wires. Make the wires to diverge so as to form a sort of cone, and having filled the bottle quite full of a solution of sugar of lead, insert the wires and cork, and seal it down, so as to perfectly exclude the air. In a short time the metallic lead will begin to crystallise around the divergent wires, and form a beautiful object.

I have here given you all the illustrations that time will permit me to shew you of chemical affinity producing electricity, and electricity again becoming chemical affinity. Let that suffice for the present, and let us now go a little deeper into the subject of this chemical force, or this electricity--which shall I name first--the one producing the other in a variety of ways? These forces are also wonderful in their power of producing another of the forces we have been considering, namely, that of magnetism; and you know that it is only of late years, and long since I was born, that the discovery of the relations of these two forces of electricity and chemical affinity to produce magnetism have become known. Philosophers had been suspecting this affinity for a long time, and had long had great hopes of success; for in the pursuit of science we first start with hopes and expectations. These we realise and establish, never again to be lost, and upon them we found new expectations of further discoveries, and so go on pursuing, realising, establishing, and founding new hopes again and again.

[Figure 51]

[Figure 52]

Now, observe this: here is a piece of wire which I am about to make into a bridge of force--that is to say, a communicator between the two ends of the battery. It is copper wire only, and is therefore not magnetic of itself. We will examine this wire with our magnetic needle (fig. 51); and though connected with one extreme end of the battery, you see that, before the circuit is completed, it has no power over the magnet. But observe it when I make contact; watch the needle--see how it is swung round, and notice how indifferent it becomes if I break contact again; so you see we have this wire evidently affecting the magnetic needle under these circumstances. Let me shew you that a little more strongly. I have here a quantity of wire, which has been wound into a spiral; and this will affect the magnetic needle in a very curious manner, because, owing to its shape, it will act very like a real magnet. The copper spiral has no power over that magnetic needle at present; but if I cause the electric current to circulate through it, by bringing the two ends of the battery in contact with the ends of the wire which forms the spiral, what will happen? Why, one end of the needle is most powerfully drawn to it; and if I take the other end of the needle, it is repelled: so you see I have produced exactly the same phenomena as I had with the bar magnet,--one end attracting, and the other repelling. Is not this, then, curious, to see that we can construct a magnet of copper? Furthermore, if I take an iron bar, and put it inside the coil, so long as there is no electric current circulating round, it has no attraction,--as you will observe if I bring a little iron filings or nails near the iron. But now, if I make contact with the battery, they are attracted at once. It becomes at once a powerful magnet--so much so, that I should not wonder if these magnetic needles on different parts of the table pointed to it. And I will shew you by another experiment what an attraction it has. This piece and that piece of iron, and many other pieces, are now strongly attracted (fig. 52); but as soon as I break contact, the power is all gone, and they fall. What, then, can be a better or a stronger proof than this of the relation of the powers of magnetism and electricity? Again, here is a little piece of iron which is not yet magnetised. It will not at present take up any one of these nails; but I will take a piece of wire and coil it round the iron (the wire being covered with cotton in every part, it does not touch the iron), so that the current must go round in this spiral coil. I am, in fact, preparing an electro-magnet (we are obliged to use such terms to express our meaning, because it is a magnet made by electricity--because we produce by the force of electricity a magnet of far greater power than a permanent steel one). It is now completed, and I will repeat the experiment which you saw the other day, of building up a bridge of iron nails. The contact is now made, and the current is going through; it is now a powerful magnet. Here are the iron nails which we had the other day; and now I have brought this magnet near them, they are clinging so hard that I can scarcely move them with my hand (fig. 53). But when the contact is broken, see how they fall. What can shew you better than such an experiment as this the magnetic attraction with which we have endowed these portions of iron? Here, again, is a fine illustration of this strong power of magnetism. It is a magnet of the same sort as the one you have just seen. I am about to make the current of electricity pass through the wires which are round this iron for the purpose of shewing you what powerful effects we get. Here are the poles of the magnet; and let us place on one of them this long bar of iron. You see, as soon as contact is made, how it rises in position (fig. 54); and if I take such a piece as this cylinder, and place it on, woe be to me if I get my finger between: I can roll it over, but if I try to pull it off, I might lift up the whole magnet; but I have no power to overcome the magnetic power which is here evident. I might give you an infinity of illustrations of this high magnetic power. There is that long bar of iron held out; and I have no doubt that, if I were to examine the other end, I should find that it was a magnet. See what power it must have to support not only these nails but all those lumps of iron hanging on to the end. What, then, can surpass these evidences of the change of chemical force into electricity, and electricity into magnetism? I might shew you many other experiments whereby I could obtain electricity and chemical action, heat and light, from a magnet; but what more need I shew you to prove the universal correlation of the physical forces of matter, and their mutual conversion one into another?

[Figure 53]

[Figure 54]

And now, let us give place, as juveniles, to the respect we owe to our elders; and for a time let me address myself to those of our seniors who have honoured me with their presence during these lectures. I wish to claim this moment for the purpose of tendering our thanks to them, and my thanks to you all, for the way in which you have borne the inconvenience that I at first subjected you to. I hope that the insight which you have here gained into some of the laws by which the universe is governed, may be the occasion of some amongst you turning your attention to these subjects; for what study is there more fitted to the mind of man than that of the physical sciences? And what is there more capable of giving him an insight into the actions of those laws, a knowledge of which gives interest to the most trifling phenomenon of nature, and makes the observing student find--

“----tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, Sermons in stones, and good in everything?”
