page: 1

aan. 1. Ais used before all consonants except silent h (a history, an hour); an was formerly usual before an unaccented syllable beginning with h (an historical work), but now that the h in such words is pronounced the distinction has become pedantic, & a historical should be said & written; similarly an humble is how meaningless & undesirable. A is now usual also before vowels preceded in fact though not in appearance by the sound of y or w (a unit, @ eulogy, a one).

2 The combinations of a with few & many are a matter of arbitrary but established usage: a few, a great many, a good many, are idiomatic, but a many, a good few, are now illiterate or facetious or colloquial; a very feo is permissible (in the sense some-though-not-at-all-many, whereas very few means not-at-all-manythough-some), but an extremely few 1S ot; see FEW.

8. A, an, follow instead of preceding the adjectives many, such, & what (many an artist, such a task, what an infernal bore!); they also follow any adjective preceded by as or how (1 em as good a man as he; knew how great a labour he had undertaken), Usually any adjective preceded by % (80 resolute an attempt deserved success; a 80 resolute attempt is also English, but suggests affectation), & often any adjective preceded by too (too exact an, or a too exact, adherence o instructions), The late ition should not be adopted with other Words than as, how, so, too; e.g., in

Vhich was quite sufficient an indicahon/Can anyone choose more glorious

1351

/

i

+ an exit?/ Have before them far more brilliant a future/, the normal order (a quite or qutte a sufficient, a more

lous, a fa more brilliant) is also the right one. |

4. , an, are sometimes ungrammatically inserted, especially after no adj.» to do over again work that has already been done; so in No more signal a defeat was ever inflicted (no = not a; with this ungrammatical use cf. the merely ill-advised arrangement in Suffered no less signal @ defeat, where no is an adverb & a should precede it as laid down in 8 above)./ The defendant was no other a person than Mr Benjamin Disraeli (no other = not another)./Glimmerings of such a royally suggested even when not royally edited an institution are to be traced (even... edited being parenthetic, we get such a royally suggested an institution).

a, an-, not or without, should be prefixed only to Greek stems; of such compounds there are some hundreds, whereas Latin-stemmed words having any currency even in scientific use do not perhaps excecd four. There are the botanical acapsular & acaulous, the biological asexual, & the literary amoral. The last, being literary, is inexcusable, & non-moral should be used instead. The other three should not be treated as precedents for future word-making.

abandon, n., abattoir. See FRENCH WORDS. ;

abbreviate, abdicate, make abbreviable, abdicable: see -ABLE 1.

abdomen. Pronounce abd6’mén. B
