page: 2

abetter, -or. See -or.

Abigail. See SospRriqueErTs.

abjection, abjectness. See -10N & “NESS.

ablatively, ablativally, &c. Adverbs from the names of grammatical cases are best formed in -ively. There is no doubt about the names used in modern English grammar; everyone would say subjectively, objectively, & possessively. And, though the Latin case-names have adjectives in -ival, as datival, it will be admitted that ‘used vocativally ” at any rate is hardly tolerable, that none of the forms in -ively is very objectionable, & that it is worth while to secure consistency. The adjectives, then, should be nominatival, vocatival, accusatival, genitival, datival, ablatiwval, subjective, objcclive, & possessive (though the attributive use of the noun, as in the genilive termination, must still be common), & the adverbs nominatwely &c., subjectively &c.

-ABLE, -IBLE, &c. 1. Normal use of -able as living suffix. 2. -able & other -ble forms. 3. Negative forms of adjectives in-ble. 4. -ble words of exceptional form or sense.

1. Normal use of -able as living suffix. The suffix -able is a living one, & may be appended to any transitive verb to make an adjective with the sense able, or liable, or allowed, or worthy, or requiring, OF bound, to be ———ed. If the verb ends in mute -e, this is dropped except after soft c or g (usable, likable, dyable, pronounceable, manageable, bridgeable). Verbs ending in -y preceded by a consonant change y intoi (justifiable, triable; but buyabdle). Verbs with the Latin-derived ending -ate that have established adjectives drop the -ale (demonstrable, abominable, alienable, appreciable, calculable, expiable, execrable, &c.); & nonceadjectives from such verbs should be similarly formed (accumulable, adulterable, educable, confiscaole, saturable, &c.) except when the verb is disyllabic (dictatable, creatable, cas-

+ tratable, crematable, locatable; not dictable &c. on the analogy of placable or probable); but see alto “-ATABLE; administer & register form similarly administrable & registrable. No verbs in -ble, -cle, -dle, -fle, -gle, -kle, -ple, -sle, -tle, -zlc, have established adjectives in -able; but adjectives made for the nonce from them should drop the -e (bafflable, hustlable, muzzlable, &c.).

Nonce-adjectives in -able may be formed even from those verbs whose established representatives are in the list of words in -ible &c. given in 2, especially when the established word has to some extent lost the verbal or contracted a special sense. Thus a mistake may be called uncorrectable, because incorrigible has become ethical in sense; solvable may be

referred because soluble has entered into an alliance with dissolve; & destroyable by dynamite may seem less pedantic than destructible by because destructible tends to be purely adjectival.

2. -able & other -ble forms. The following list (to which are to be added the negative or positive forms made by adding or omitting tn-, un-, non-, is intended to include all the existing -ble adjectives other than those in -able; words not found in it should be spelt with -able; & for the italicized words, though they exist, it is recommended to substitute the accompanying form in -able. It may be observed that there is only one word in the list, gullible, of which the stem is not ultimately Latin; but the form, which should have been gullable, may perhaps be thought too firmly established to be

ae ee i » meddled with; & the same plea may prevent the rejection of such words

a as conductible, distensible, & refrangible, which, though it is a pity they were not originally made of the more easily understood & equally legitimate -able type (refrangible, which should be refringible, is actually less correct than i (erent have at least a technical, though hardly a

ie ae general currency.
