page: 10

+ state of mind may have _ been, whereas an accession of any of them can only mean a heightened degree of the one that already existed; our forces have had no accession, have not been augmented in numbers, have had no access, have not been able to enter.

accessary, accessory. The words, though they have separate histories, are often confused; but a fairly clear line of distinction can be made out. Accessary involves the notion of complicity or intentional aid or consent, & is accordingly used only where that notion is applicable, i.e. chiefly (as a noun) of persons & (as an adjective) of persons or their actions (he was an accessary, if not the principal; the accessaries also were punished; this course has made us accessary to the crime; was guilty of accessary action). Accessory has no such implication of consent, &, though it includes the notion of contributing to a result, emphasizes especially the subordinate nature of the contribution; it is applied chiefly to things (the accessory details of the picture; that is only an accessory, an unessential feature; the accessories, the not indispensable accompaniments).

accidence. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

acelimatize, -imate, -imatization, -imatation, -imation. Acclimatize, acclimatization, are the forms for

which general usage seems to have

decided. Some writers wish to

retain the others with reference to

the process when brought about by

natural as opposed to human

agency; but it is doubtful whether

the words are in common enough

use for the differentiation to gain

currency; &, failing differentiation,

it is better that the by-forms should

perish.

accommodate makes -dable; see

-ABLE 1,

inflexions see

accompany. For

VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

accompan(y)ist. See -IsT.

accomplice, accomplish. The OED

+ gives the pronunciation with -6m-, not -iim-, as the established one for both words, though ‘ the historical pronunciation’ of accomplish was with -tim-.

accord, account. The phrases are of one’s own accord, on one’s own account; of one’s own account is a confusion. See CAST-IRON IDIOM.

according as. There is a tendency to repeat the phrase (like BETWEEN), with a mistaken idea of making the construction clearer, in contexts where the repetition is not merely needless, but wrong. For instance, the second according as tt should be omitted in

The big production will be harmful or the reverse, according as tt can command the Government to insure tf a monopoly in all circumstances, OT according as it works with the knowledge that, if it abuses ws trust, the door is freely open to the competing products of other countries.

The error is at once apparent if the clause (for it is a single clause, In fact) is reduced to its simplest expression—(will be harmful or the reverse) according as it is irresponsible or responsible; no-one would write or according as it is responsible; the temptation comes in long sentences only, & must be resisted.

Or according as is legitimate only when what is to be introduced is not, as in the ae the necessarily implied alternative or the other extreme of the same scale, but another scale or pair of alternatives. Man attains happiness or not according as he deserves tt or not (right), according as he deserves it or does not

deserve it (right), according as he

deserves it or according as he does not

deserve it (wrong), according as he

deserves tt or according as he can

digest his food (right).

accouchement &c. See FRENCH

WORDS.

account. Unlike regard, & like

consider, this verb does not in good

modern usage admit of as before its

complement; I account it a picce of
