page: 12

=fE, -AS obviously be kept; whether it is kept or not in manoeuvre, where the pronunciation is anomalous, is of

no great importance. ~AE, ~AS, in plurals of nouns in -a. Most English nouns in -a are from Latin (or latinized Greek) nomina- tive feminine singular nouns, which have in Latin the plural ending -ae; €.g., sofa is from stanza & vista are from Italian; subpoena is not nomina- tive; drama & comma are neuter; stamina & prolegomena are plural; & with all such words -ae is impos- Of the majority, again, some

but not all;

Arabic;

sible.

retain the Latin -ae in English

either as the only or as an alterna-

tive plural ending (antennae only,

formulae or -las), & some have

always -as (ideas, areas, villas).

The use of plurals in -ae therefore

pecs some difficulty to non-

atinists. For most words with

which -ae is possible or desirable,

the information is given in their

dictionary places; for the principle

of choice when both -ae & -as are

current, see LATIN PLURALS 1, 8,

acon, #on, eon. The first form is

recommended; see 2, @.

aerate, aérate. The first form is recommended; see 2, @. The form @rated is a mere blunder, but very common.

aerial, aérial. The first form is recommended; see «, a.

aery, aerie, eyry, eyrie. The first two forms are preferable to the others, which according to the OED & Professor Skeat are due to a theory of the derivation (from ee: = egacry) that is known (t ough the ultimate origin of aery is doubtful) to be wrong.

aesthetic. The word, which means etymologically concerned with sensuous poephon, was introduced into English to supply sense of beauty with an adjective. It is in place in such contexts as a. principles, from an a. Point of view, an a. revival occurred, a. considerations do

not appeal to him. It is less so in

the meanings Professing Or gifted

with this sense (I am not a. : a. peo-

ple), dictated by or approved by or

evidencing this sense (a very a. com-

chintzes & wallpapers; flowers on

a@ table are not so a. a decoration as

a well-filled bookcase); & still less

so when it is little more than a pre-

tentious substitute for beautiful

that green is 80 a.; a not very a.

title town).

aetat., aet. The words, being

abbreviations of aetatts suae (of his,

her, their, age) must be written

with the period, & not as in: The

Die-Hards had as their leader Lord

Halsbury, aetat 86./Ii was Mr.

Chaplin, aetat 70, who./ A mani.

festo from Lord Roberts, aetat 79.

For aet-, xt-, see 2, a.

affaire de cour. See FRENcH

WORDS.

affect, effect. These verbs are not

Synonyms requiring differentiation,

but words of totally different meaning, neither of which can ever be substituted for the other. Affect (apart from other senses in which it is not liable to confusion with effect) means have an influence on, produce an effect on, concern, effect a change in: effect means bring about, cause, produce, result in, have as result. These measures chiefly a. the great landowners. It does not a. me. It may seriously a. (i.e. injure) his health A single glass of brandy

e may a. (alter for better or worse the Prospects of) his recovery. A single

lass of brandy may e. (bring about)

ts recovery. This will not a. (change) his purpose. This will not €. (secure) his purpose. We hope to e. an tmprovement. I effected my escape. affectionately. See LETTER FORMS, affillate makes -liable; see -ARLE i affinity. The prepositions normally used after this are, according to context, between & with. When the sense is less relationship or likeness 12 AFFINITY than attraction or liking, to or for
