page: 13

+ AFFIX are sometimes used instead of with; this should not be done; in places where with is felt to be inappropriate, the truth is that affinity, which properly describes a reciprocal relationship only, has been used of a one-sided one, & should itself be replaced by another word. Cf. sympathy with & for.

affix, n. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

a@ fond. See FRENCH worps. It should be remembered that a fond & au fond mean different things, a fond to the botton, i.e. thoroughly, & au fond at bottom, i.e. when one penetrates below the surface.

aforesaid. See PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

a fortiori. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

afterward(s). Afterward, once the

revalent form, is now obsolete in

ritish use, but survives in U.S.

age. For synonymy see TIME.

A. 54 &., ajd; an a. man &c., a’jld.

If a singular is required (=one item of the agenda) it is now agendum, the former singular agend being obsolete.

agent provocateur. See FRENCH WORDS.

ment). The accent of the verb is on the first & of the noun on the second syllable. See RE- CESSIVE ACCENT.

vate, vation. 1. The use of these in the sense annoy, vez, annoyance, vezation, should be left to the uneducated. It is for the most part a feminine or childish colloquialism, but intrudes occasionally into the newspapers. To aggravate has properly only one meaning—to make at evil) worse or more serious. e right & the wrong use are shown in: (right)

A premature initiative would be calculated rather to a. than to simplify the situation; (wrong) The reopening of the contest by fresh measures that would a. their is the last thing that is red in Miniiterial circles. It is in the participle (and

+ a very stupid, tiresome, aggravating man he is) that the vulgarism is commonest.

2. Aggravate makes aggravable; see -ABLE 1.

aggrievedly. Four syllables if used; see -EDLY.

agio. Pl. -os; see -0(E)s 4.

agitate makes agitable; see -ABLE 1.

ago. If ago is used, & the event to be dated is given by a clause, it must be by one beginning with that & not since. The right forms are «— He died 20 years ago (no clause); It is 20 years since he died-(no ago); It was 20 years ago that he died. The following examples are wrong; the tautolo 0 stnce is natucally commoner, but is equally wrong, in sentences like the second, where a parenthesis intervenes:—It is barely 150 years ago since it was introduced. /

Yet tt is only just over sixty years ago, as an article in the new edition of the * Encyclopaedia Britannica’ reminds us, since facilities for cheap travel were ioe introduced. For similar mistakes, see HAZINESS.

agréments. See FRENCH WORDS.

agricultur(al)ist. See -1stT. ;

aide-de-camp. See FRENCH WORDS.

aiguille. See FRENCH WORDS.

aim. The verb in the metaphorical sense of purpose or design or endeavour is idiomatically followed by at with the gerund & not by to with the infinitive. Probably no-one will doubt this who sees the two constructions side by side:—he aimed at being, he aimed to be, the power behind the throne; arguments are aimed to produce, arguments are aimed at producing, conviction; what do you aim at doing? what do you aim to do? But the analogy of purpose &c., which take the infinitive & not the gerund, leads unobservant writers wrong. And the infinitive construction, though not good British, appears to be good American, since it is certainly a favourite with Emerson, & is given in Webster's & the Century & Standard Dictionaries as the normal verb-construc-
