page: 16

+ however, are the same as those of admit of.

almighty. So spelt; see -LL-, -L-, 4.

allright. The words should always be written separate; there are no such forms as all-right, allright, or alright, though even the last, if seldom allowed by the compositors to appear in print, is often seen (through confusion with already & ALTOGETHER)in MS. This rule holds not only when the two words are completely independent, as in The three answers, though different, are all right, but also where they may be regarded as forming a more or less fixed phrase. So: The scout’s report was * All right’ (i.e. all is right). /Is he all right? / ‘ Will you come for a walk?’ * All right’./ All i tag you shall hear of this again./ Oh, I know them apart all right.

all the time. The phrase is idiomatic English only when the time in question is a definite period fixed by the context, as in:—I did not see you because I was looking at her a. t. t. (that you were present); Well, I knew that a. t. t. (that you were supposing I did not); Ile pretends friendship, & a. t. t. (that he pretends it) he is plotting against une; I been a free-trader a. t. t. (that others have been wavering). Used generally without such implied definition, au the sense all day & every day (Actors act while they are on the stage, but he acts a. t. t.; We hold that a Tariff Reformer must be a Tariff Reformer all the ime, & not an opportunist), it is slang.

allusion, allude. 1. For pronunciation see LU,

2. The words are much misused by journalists & others. An allusion is a covert or indirect reference, in which the application of a generality to the person or thing it is really nimed at, or the identification of something that the speaker or writer appears by his words to have in mind but does not name, is left for the hearer or reader to make; it is never an outright or explicit men-

~

+ tion. Allude to has the same limitations. Examples of the legitimate use are:—We looked at cach other wondering which of us he was alluding to; Though he never uses your name, the allusion to you is obvious; He is obscure only because he so often alludes (or only owing to his frequent allusions) to coniemporary events novo forgotten.

The misuse is seen in:—VWWhen the speaker happened to name Mr. Gladstone, the allusion was received with loud cheers./ The lecturer then alluded at some length to the question of strikes.

It may be added that allude to is often chosen, out of foolish verbosity, when the direct mean would do better; so When you said ‘ some people cannot tell the truth’, were you alluding to (did you mean) me? ; but this is rather an abuse than a misuse.

ally, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

alma mater. See BATTERED ORNA- MENTS, & SOBRIQUETS.

almanac. The OED recognizcs this spelling only.

almoner. The OED gives the pronunciation &’Imoner. But as the word, though existing as (part of) the title of certain functionaries, is better known in transferred & general uses, it is perhaps safe to prophesy that the pronunciation ah’moner, already common owing to alms, will prevail.

almost. For a. quite see INcom- PATIBLES,

alone. The adverbial use of alone with not in ea of the usual only (more might be done, & not alone by the authorities, but...) is a survival, & like other archaisms is to be avoided except in poetry or in prose of a really poetic type. In ordinary writing it is one of the thousand little mechanical devices by which ‘distinction of style’ is vainly sought; the following passage shows it in characteristic surroundings:— Recourse to porters, whose limited
