page: 17

+ loads are carried on the head, savours more of operations in the West African bush than on the Indian frontier, so that not alone in the region passed through, but in its transport will our st little war wear an interesting & unusual aspect.

This censure does not apply to the adjectival use (Ji is not youth alone that needs .. .), in which not & alone are usually separated.

& Poutrance. The French phrase is a outrance or @ toute outrance, never a (outrance. Those who use French alarage to suggest that they are at

ome with French should accordingly be careful to write @ outrance. For those who use them merely as the handiest way of expressing themselves the form that is commoner in English is as good as the other, & does not lay them open to the charge of pedantry. So with double entendre for French double entente, nom de plume for nom de

uerre, morale for moral, locale for

l, chorale for German Chora, & others.

already. The adverb is so spelt; set -LL-, -L-, 4; this does not affect the use of the two separate words, as in Tell me when ti is all ready; cf. ALTOGETHER.

alright. See ALL RIGHT.

also. The word is an adverb, & not &@ conjunction; nevertheless, it is often used in the latter ig agi | where and (also), but also, or as we as, would be in place. In_ talk, where the info stringing on of after-thoughts is legitimate, there is often no objection to this (Remember your watch & money; also the tickets); & the deliberate afterthought may appear similarly in print (The chief products are hemp & cigars; also ea But it is the writer’s ordinary duty to settle up with his after-thoughts before he writes his sentence, & consequently the unassisted also that is proper to the after-thought gives a slovenly air to its sentence.

Great attention has been paid to the

17 ALTERNATIVE

+ history of legislation, also [& also] to that of religion. / We are giving these exp ions gently as friends, also Lartg mien as becomes neighbours. /‘ Special’ is a much overworked word, tt being used to mean — in degree, also [but also] pecu-

iar in kind. / Mr. Sonnenschein’s volume will show... abaghd agi obligations to the ancients, also (as well as] the obligations of modern writers to Shakespeare.

alternative. 1. Aliernative(ly) had formerly, besides their present senses, those now belonging only to alternate(ly); now that the differentiation is complete, confusion between the two (Frenchmen have become accustomed to these changes of front in German policy, singular methods which consist in blowing alternatively hot & cold) is still less excusable, because Icss common, than between DEFINITE & DEFINITIVE.

2 There are also difficulties about the correct use of the noun alternative, for dealing with which it is necessary to realize clearly its different senses. These are now distinguished, with illustrations that ma’ serve to show what is idiomatic . what is not:—

a. Set, especially pair, of possibilities from which one only can be selected; this is often practically equivalent to choice. The only a. is success or (not &) death. We have no a. in the matter.

b. Either of such pair or any one of such set. Either a. is, any of the aa. is, both aa. are, all the aa. are, intolerable. The aa., the only aa., are success & (not or) death.

c. Second of such pair, the first being in mind. We need not do it; but what is the a.? We must do uw; there is no (not no other) a. The (not the other) a. ts to die.

d. Other of such a set, one at least being in mind. If we decline, what are the aa.? The only a. ts to dic. You may say lighted or lit or alight; there is no other a. The only aa. to it are gas & (not or) candles.
