page: 19

+ ratio is four times as high for amongst as for among; though the total number of quotations is too small to justify the belief that this proportion prevails generally, it probably indicates a tendency. It may be said with some confidence that (1) among is the normal word, (2) amongst is more usual before vowels, but (3) before the, which so commonly follows as easily to outnumber all other initials, the two forms are used quite indifferently.

amoral, non-moral. See A-, AN-.

amour. Being established in English, & not likely ever to be expelled, it is better pronounced with the normal English accent (&’moor). Retention of a foreign accent undoubtedly discourages the popular use of a word, & if the word is worth having at all this is very undesirable. See FRENCH PRONUNCIATION.

amour-propre. See FRENCH WORDS. Vanity usually gives the meaning as well, é, if as well, then better.

amphibol(oljogy. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

ample, used as an attributive adjective in the sense plenty of (he has a. courage; there is a. time; a. opportunities were given) is legitimate only with nouns denoting immaterial or abstract things. t is often wrongly attached to nouns that, like butter, otl, water, coal, denote substances of indefinite quantity; We hace a. water for drinking, There is a. coal to ca us through the winter, are wrong. The misuse is perhaps traceable to four lines of false analogy: (1) a. is common, & correct, with such nouns as stabling, cellarage, cece tee ammunt-

} » money, plant, rollingstock, which, though used concretely as collectives for the real concretes stable, cellar, apartment &c., powder &e., beast, coin &c., machine &c., waggon &c., are strictly abstract words = supply of; (2) tho There is a. coal is wrong, The , or Our coal, is a. is not wrong; the explanation is that the coal, our coal, denotes

+ a quantity, & is an abstract phrase, though coal is a concrete word; this is only possible when a. is predicative & not attributive, but it naturally misleads; (8) there are many words that belong sometimes to the butter class, & sometimes to the stabling class; linen may mean either the material (a. is then wrong; so We have a. linen for half-a-dozen shirts), or supply of linen articles (a. is then right; so They will start housekeeping with a. linen, plate, & crockery); (4) other words with which in their concrete sense a. is wrong may in some figurative or abstract sense take it; a ship may have a. water (i.e. space) to turn in, though the crew cannot have a. water to drink; & a. butter may mean plenty of flattery though not plenty of butter.

amplify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

amputate makes amputable; see -ABLE 1. sees.

amuck, it. 2g Wen bi “Ning, due to popular et: © xeluctance to . back to the sever | papers attribute -

'. of Canada to do established, +

“with the United against the Dr.

—onjecture; | or

' (Whether such

amusedly. Four see -EDLY. >. under the

amusive is best avoic. ‘ty’ is amin fact (though diffetent ‘should be have taken place) no; _— obstacle better served by amusing in honest spite of its actual age ite part of suggests either ignorance or * placed TY-HUNTING. ). /Ques-

‘tn which

an. See A, AN. f Scottish

anachronic, anachronisticriy useful long form is better (1) becaute with)./ to the places of its accents (tof often nik, an&‘kroni’stik; cf. an&’K'ny subits connexion with its noun issed_ to instantly apparent, & (2) bec-ance)./ is therefore commoner. a Ameri-

anacohithon, anacrusis. S/ awekey 7 NICAL TERMS.

was scared

anagoge. See GREEK G. gq 1 give

°

anagram. See TECHNIG, 20) crisis
