page: 20

ANALOGY. 1. As a logical resource. 2. As an influence in wordformation. 3. As a corrupter of idiom.

1. As a logical resource. The meaning of analogy in logic is given under TECHNICAL TERMS; we are here little concerned with it; it is perhape the basis of most human conclusions, its agree to error being compensated for by the frequency with which it is the only form of reasoning available; but its literary, not its logical, value is what we have now to do with. Its literary merits need not be pointed out to anyone who knows the Parables, or who has read the essays of Bacon or Montaigne, full of analogies that flash out for the length of a line or so & are gone: Money is like muck, not good unless tt be spread. What does need pointing out is unfortunately its demerit— the deadly dullness of the elaborate artificial analogy favoured by journalists who think i*°necessary to write daw- " tt iudience & make theinazgedly. Founo the meanest

-EDLY. irnalist has a view

ambidext(e)rowmization of the War

-e-; see DExTfht relations between

ame damnéee Secretary of State,

ameliorate mder-in-Chief, & the

amende als. He says what he

worps,. ly, in favour of his view;

amenit“lest ‘our people’ should

restorat point, he gocs on to trans-

is pedam into a great household or

Ameri& explain what confusion

for the ssult if the owner did not

for (cition a particular plan the re-

much &* majordomo, butler, cook,

Englandn, or of land-agent, tenants,

Britain & gardeners. ‘ Our people’ is

Briton. familiar with majordomos &

tested ents than with Commanders-

& wilf, & so he finds it well to repeat

tests. 1phasized dullness about the

& mervt he has argued dully enough

amid, aantitype. Specimens fully ary wort this generalized descriptions of 190 long to quote; but the

2. As to8ives a fair idea of the

OED statePidity of these fabricated

+ analogies, against which no warnin can be too strong; they are ona leve with talking to a schoolboy about the puff-puff; let it be read & compared with the money that is like muck =: The Government are playing the part of a man entrusted with the work of guarding a door beset by enemies. He refuses to let them in at once, but provides them with a large bag of gold, & at the same time hands them oué a crowbar amply strong enough to break down the door. That is the Government’s idea of preserving the Union & safeguarding the integrity of the United Kingdom.

2. As an influence in word-formation. In the making of words, & in the shape that they take, analogy is the chief agent. anting a word to express about some idea a relation that we know by experience to be expressible about other ideas, we apply to the root or stem associated with it what strikes us as the same treatment that has been applied to those others. That is, we make the new word on the analogy of the old; & in ninety-nine cases we make it right, being all old hands at the job; for each of us, in the course of a day, makes large numbers of words that he has never seen in a dictionary or grammar, & for which his only warrant is merely an unconscious conviction that they are analogical; nearly every inflexion is an instance; we are taught, perhaps, that the past of will is would, or the plural of oz is ozen, but not that the past of inflate is inflated or the plural of book is books; those forms we make when we want them by analegy: & generally make them right. Occasionally, however, we go wrong: The total poll midway in December was 16,244 so that upwards of half the electors were abstentients. The writer wanted a single word for persons guilty of abstention, & one too that would not, like abstainer, make us think of alcohol; dissension came into his head as rhyming with abstention; if that yields, said he, dissentients, why should abstention
