page: 25

+ Jaw-courts, where it is in place, is chiefly met with in letters to the press; that is, it is a favourite with unpractised writers who, on their holiday excursions into print, like to show that they possess gala attire. See ARCHAISM. Anent is often found in the company of dubious syntax & sense, as in:—Sir,— Your remarks today on the result of the Canadian election anent the paragraph in the Philadelphia Record is, I am glad to see, the first sign of real appreciation of ... (ts should be ave; & he is not glad that it is the first sign).

aneurysm, not ancurism. The y is due to Greek eurus wide; the false form suggests the totally different sense nervelessness; cf. MESEMBRIAN- THEMUM.

angel. Talk of ana. is a GENTEEL- ISM.

angina. To say a’njina was long regarded as a saa lapse from Latinity, & Snji’na was expected of all educated persons. Progress in Piautine prosody has revealed that the i was short in Latin, & OED

ives precedence to &’njina. See

ALSE QUANTITY.

angie n., angle v., angler. The noun angle (fish-hook) is now hardly used except in the BATTERED ORNA- MENT brother of the a. The verb is chiefly a stylish synonym (see WorkKING & STYLISH WORDS) for fish. Angler, on the other hand, has a real use, since fisher is archaic, & fisherman is assumed, unless context forbids, to mean one who makes his living by fishing with nets.

angiiee, -cé. See LATINE.

Angio-Indian. For ambiguous meaning, see MULATTO 4.

ankle, ancle. The -k- is usual.

annihilate makes -lable; see -ABLE 1.

announce. See FORMAL WORDS.

pret fay . A bad form; see -EDLY.

spelt, but -lled &c.; see “LL-, -L-.

annunciation. Pronounce -sia-; see -CIATION.

another. For one a. see EACH 2

+ for But that is a. story see HAack- NEYED PHRASES.

ant is usually pronounced Ant, without the north-&-south variation between & & ah (as in can’t, grass,

ath), by way of differentiation

rom aunt.

antagonize. As a synonym for oppose, resist, neutralize, counteract, the word is recognized in dictionaries; but the OED quotations for it are far from impressive, & it may safely be said that the occasions are rare indeed when one of those words would not be preferable to it. It does appear in those senses in modern journalism, but perhaps never without producing an effect of vulgar display; see WoRKING & STYLISH WORDS. One or two quotations may be given in which there can be no doubt of the meaning:— Socrates ends by saying that we should antagonize gambling on the ground of its being bad business & not as being bad morals./Every attempt to substitute coercion for persuasion is a reversion to the very ideals which Labour collectively professes to antagonize./The Democrats have given notice of a determination to antagonize this & all other Bills for... The last is from the OED, which states that this use (person opposing thing) is American English only; the first two examples show that it has since appeared in England; it is to be hoped than it may not last on either side of the Atlantic.

But a. has another sense in which it does good service, & should certainly not be banned. That is to rouse or incur the hostility of, to expose oneself by one’s action to the enmity of. This sense probably comes also from America, where it 1s commoner than in England; but its usefulness is so obvious that we should welcome it. As the OED has only one example, a few quotations may be worth giving to enable readers to judge of its merits; it should be observed that the idea is not oppose, though opposing is implied, but something
