page: 27

+ —_— ee we ee ese often misuse; that the meaning of many of them is vague is a recommendation to one kind of writer as saving him the trouble of choosing between more precise synonyms, & to one kind of reader as a guarantee that clear thought is not going to be fequired of him; a further account of the attraction of such words will be found in Love OF THE LONG WORD. Others are chosen not because they are, like these, in constant use, but because they are not; to say nomenclature instead grees replica for copy, premier for first, major for paki evince for show, malnutrition for underfeeding, prior to for before, is AVOIDANCE OF THE OBVIOUS; & PEDANTIC HUMOUR suggests gulosity, cacophonous, osculatory, sartorial, & cackinnation.

Anti-Saxonism, then, is here used as a name for the frame of mind that turns away not so much from the etymologically English vocabulary as from the homely or the simple or the clear; it may perhaps have been observed that the word given above as preferable to replica was copy, which is no more Saxon than replica; it is more English, for all that, just as ridiculous is more English than risible. Readers who would like to study the effect of yielding to the practice will find quotations under nearly all the words that have been given as specimens, in their separate articles; & for others half a dozen are here collected, most of them containing rather a misuse than a mere use of the word concerned:— But he had the most tremendous optimism in the future triumph of his cause./ Pleasing & original also are the landscapes in which vegetation is gtoen the meticulous significance teminiscent of the douanier Rousseau./In the Small Rodent House, the was sucking up his milk supper through his long bill, oblivious to the eavesdroppers./Neither France ner Great Britain could indulge in such an eventuality at the present juncture./The 6s. increase

AORIST in the price of coal may not materialize after all. 7

antistrophe, antithesis. See TEcH- NICAL TERMS,

antitype. See TYPE.

anxious. The objections made to it in the sense eager (to hear, improve, go, &c.) as a modernism, & in the sense calculated to cause anxiety (It is a very a. business; You will find her an a. charge) as an archaism, are negligible; both are natural developments, the first is almost univer-

y current, & the second is still not infrequent.

any. 1. Compounds. Anybody, anything, anyhow, anywhcre, anywhen, anywhither, are always single words; so also the adverb anywvse (but in any wise); for anyone, any one, see ONE; any way is best written as two words (J cannot manage it any way) except perhaps when it means at all events, however that may be, at any rate (Any way, or Anyway, I can endure uw no longer); at any rate, not at anyrate.

2. He is the most generous man of anyone I know.

This common idiom, which looks illogical (of all I know being the logical form) is no doubt defensible as a development or survival of the archaic Caesar, the greatest traveller,(of a prince, that had ever been. ere means in the way of, & we should now write for instead of it. But that sense of of being preserved in this idiom alone, the idiom itself is not likely long to resist the modern dislike of the illogical. It therefore seems desirable to avoid such things as:— Edward Prince of Wales is the eighteenth who has borne that title, the most illustrious, perhaps, of any heirapparent in the world (more illustrious than that of any)./The Standard Oil Company is credited with having the largest Eastern tirade of any American enterprise (of all American enterprises; or a larger trade than any other).

aorist. See TECHNICAL TERMS.
