page: 28

& outrance. See A L’OUTRANCE, & FRENCH WORDS.

apergu. See FRENCH WORDS.

apex. For plural see -Ex, -1x, 4.

aphaeresis, aphetic. See TEcH- NICAL TERMS.

aplomb. See FRENCH WORDS.

apocope, apodosis. See TECHNICAL * apopht hould be It, &

apophthegm shou so spelt, &

sonouneed a’pofthém. The word igs not a popular one; to drop the ph in spelling conceals the derivation; & there is no more reason for dropping it in sound than for that conversion of it into p in diphthong & diphtheria which is a_ notorious vulgarism.

aposiopesis, a posteriori. See TrecH- NICAL TERMS.

apostle. See PRONUNCIATION, Silent t.

APOSTROPHE. See POSSESSIVE PUZZLES, & -ED & ’D, for some points concerning its use; &, for the sense in rhetoric, TECHNICAL TERMS,

appal(l). The double | is better; see -LL-, -L-, 8. In any case -lled &c., see -LL-, -L-, 1.

a(p)panage. Either form will do; appa- is perhaps commoner in general, & apa- in learned, use.

apparent(ly). 1. Either pronunciation (-afent, -drent) is legitimate; see FALSE QUANTITY. 2. For commas before & after apparently, see THEREFORE.

appeared is liable to the same misuse as seemed with the PERFECT INFINITIVE.

appendix. PI. -dices (-séz) or -dizxes (-1z); see -Ex, -Ix, 4.

applicable. See RECESSIVE ACCENT.

apply. For inflexions see VERBS IN -1IE &c., 6.

apposition. See TECHNICAL TERMS,

appraisal, See -aL NOUNS.

appreciate makes -ciable; see -ABLE 1.

appreciation. See -cIATION.

apprehend -ension, comprehend -ension. So far as the words are liable to confusion, i.e. as synonyms

+ of understand(ing), the ap- forms denote the getting hold or grasping, & the com- forms the having hold or full ession, of what is understood. What is beyond my apprehension I have no cognizance of; what is beyond my comprehension I am merely incapable of fully understanding. To apprehend a thing imperfectly is to have not reached a clear notion of it; to comprehend it imperfectly is almost a contradiction in terms. J apprehend that A is B advances an admittedly fallible view; I comprehend that A is B states a presumably indisputable fact.

apprise, not -ize; see -ISE)(-IZE.

appropriate, v., makes -priable; see -ABLE 1.

a priori. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

apropos is so sg! marked by its pronunciation as French, & the French construction is, owing to a propos de boites, so familiar, that it is better always to use of rather than {fo after it; probably wt is partly accounted for by some confusion with appropriate (IIis interpolation of stories that were not always strictly apropos to the country through which we were passing). See I’RENCH WORDS.

apt, liable. Followed by to with the infinitive in the senses having an unfortunate tendency (apt), exposed to a risk (liable), the words are so near in meaning that one of them (liable) is often wrongly used for the other, It may perhaps be laid down that apt is the right word except when the infinitive expresses not merely an evil, but an cvil that is one to the subject. This is so, & therefore liable is right, in:—We are l. to be overheard (being overheard is an evil to us); Matinée-hat wearers are l. to be insulted; The goods are l. to suffer. It is not so, & therefore apt is the only word, in:—Curses are a. to come home to roost (the evil is not to the curses, but to the curser); Damage is a. to be done; Matinée hats are a. to cause ill-
