page: 29

+ temper; Difficulties are a. to occur; Lovers’ vows are a. to be broken. It is usually not so, & therefore apt is usually the right word, in:—He is a. lo promise more than he can perform (but liable, if the evil suggested is the shame he feels); Cast iron is a. to break (but liable, if we are sorry for the iron & not for its owner). |

Since Liable is apt to encroach, & apt is liable to suffer neglect, the best advice is never to use l. till a. has been considered & rejected.

aquarium. PI. -ums, -a; see -uM.

Arab, Arabian, Arabic. With exceptions for a phrase or two, such as gum arabic, the three adjectives are now differentiated, Arab meaning of the Arabs, Arabian of Arabia, & Arabic of the language or writing or literature of the Arabs. So we have an Arab horse, child, girl, chief, sheikh; Arab courage, fanatics, fatalism, traditions, philosophy; the Arabian gulf, desert, fauna & flora; Arabian gales; the Arabic numerals; an Arabic word; Arabic writing, literature. Arab & Arabian can sometimes be used indifferently; thus an Arab tillage is one inhabited by Arabs; if it happens to be in Arabia it is also an Arabian village, & may be called by cither name; the Arab war is one with Arabs; the Arabian war is one in Arabia; & the two may be one. Also Arabian maystill be used instead of Arab of what belongs to or goes back to the past, as Arabian records, monuments, philosophy, conquests.

arbitrate makes -trable; see -ABLE 1.

arbo(u)r. Keep the -u-; but see -OUR & -OR.

arch, adj. For meaning see JOCOSE.

arch-, arche-, archi-. Though the prefix arch- (chief &c.) is pronounced arch in all words except archangel & its derivatives, the longer forms are relied ny ee arkI: so arch-

-ch-), but archiepiscopal {(-k-); archdeacon (-ch-), but archidiaconal (-k-).. The ch is hard in archetype, archimandrite, Archimedes, archilectonic, architrave, a 8

29 ARE, IS a

—_

ARCHAISM. A certain number of

words through the book are referred

to this article, & such reference,

where nothing more is said, is in-

tended to give warning that the

word is dangerous except in the

hands of an experienced writer who

can trust his sense of congruity;

archaic words thrust into a common-

place context to redeem its ordinari-

ness are an abomination. More

detailed remarks will be found in

the general articles INconcRUOUS

VOCABULARY, REVIVALS, SUBJUNC-

TIVES, & WAaRDOUR STREET, Parti-

cular words under which the ques-

tion of archaism is discussed are _anent, arride, aught, bounden, breakfast, burthen, chide, choler(ic), confident (n.), derringdo, except (conj.), fall (autumn), forebears, forenoon, gotten, howbeit, parlous, perchance,

sandblind, save (prep.), subtle, sur-

cease; & a few specimens of those

for which the mere reference de-

scribed above has been thought sufficient are albeit, bashaw, beltke, betwixt, broider(y), certes, damsel, Hildeted (vb), peradventure, quoth(a),

whit.

archipelago. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 7.

ardo(u)r. Keep the -u-; but see -ouUR & ia

area. For synonyms see FIELD.

are, is. When one of these is required between a subject & a complement that differ in number (these things . . . a@ scandal), the verb must follow the number of the subject (are, not ts, a scandal). The wages of sin is death is an archaism; we do not now say his wages is, but are, a pound a week; & we do not say a pound are, but is, his wages; when, as here, subject & complement can change places without alteration of sense, so that it may be doubted which is which, the verb must agree with what precedes, & not with what follows; when, however, the undoubted subject happens, as in a question, to follow, the verb agrees with it, as But what proof are, not ts, these facts of your theory?. In
