page: 30

+ accordance with these rules, are & is should replace the roman-type is & are in:—Apparently what that school desires to see are pipe-clayed & brassbuttoned companies of boys./But the moral inconsistencies of our contemporartes is no proof thereof./The pages which describe how .. . is a typical piece of description./The only difficulty in Finnish are the changes undergone by the stem./What is really practical about soldiering in the field are long marches, continuous operations . . ./What we want are 300,000 or more Territorials.

argot. See FRENCH worps, &, for meaning & use, JARGON.

arguing in a circle. See TECUNICAL ‘TERMS,

argumentum ad

. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

arise, in the literal senses of getting up & mounting, has piven piace except in poetic or archaic use to rise. In ordinary speech & writing it means merely to come into existence or notice or to originate from, & that usually (but cf. new prophets a. from time to time) of such abstract subjects as question, difficulties, doubt, occasion, thoughts, result, effects.

Aristotele’‘an, Aristotelian. ‘ The latter more common ’—OED. (Cf. MEPHISTOPHELIAN, HERCULEAN.

arithmetical. See PROGRESSION.

armadillo. Pl.-os; see -o(E)s 7.

arme blanche. See FRENCH WORDS.

armistice. Pronounce ar’mistis, not armi’stis; see RECESSIVE ACCENT.

armo(u)r. Keep the u; but see -OUR & -OR.

arms (weapons). The ig oP is late, rare, & best avoided. Instead of describing a particular pattern of rifle or sword as ‘a_ beautifully balanced arm ’, it is worth while to take the trouble of remembering weapon. We do well to sacrifice the exhaustive brevity of The report of a fire-arm was heard & risk ambiguity with gun, inaccuracy with pistol, or extravagance with pistol, rifle, or gun,—unless, of course, we have the luck to hit upon shot. The

+ only sense in which the singular is idiomatic (either arm =cavairy or infantry; each arm=cavalry, infantry, & artillery) is made tolerable, perhaps, by suggesting the other arm & being interpreted as branch of the service (cf. the secular arm).

army & navy. This, the familiar order, is rightly corrected in toasts, public speeches, & the like, into Navy & Army; but where precedence is not in question it is both needless & impossible to get the correction accepted.

around is, in British use, a disap ing variant of round. It is still the normal form in certain combinations, as a. & about, (the air) a. & above (us), all a. (are signs of decay); & it can be used without being noticeable in a few of the senses of round, as seated a. the table, diffuses cheerfulness a. her, spread destruction a. But it is hardl possible to say winter comes @., a the year a., win one a., send the hat a., a room hung a. with pictures, travel a. the world, show one a. American usage is quite different; among the examples in an American dictionary are the following impossibilities for an Englishman:—He went through, but Irana.; Heturneda.; The earth turns a. on its axis; Go a. to chat ake office; The church a. the corner; if a. the city.

arouse. The relation of this to rouse is much like that of arise to rise; that is, rouse is almost always preferred to it in the literal sense & with a person or animal as object. A. is chiefly used with the senses call into existence, occasion, & with such abstracts as suspicion, fears, cupidity, passions, as object of the active or subject of the passive:— This at once aroused my ied dam: Cupidity is easily aroused. Not 1 shook his arm, but failed to a. him.

arpeggio. Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 4.

arrant makes -esi; see -ER & -EST, 4,

arride. See AncHAIsM. Its modern vogue is no doubt attributable to Charles Lamb.
