page: 34

+ habited by .. . (as = which fact, & it is therefore impossible unless as is omitted)./I do not think, as apparently does Mr Thorne, that ... (as = which thinking, & the inversion is impossible; read as Mr Thorne apparently does).

6. Omission of as. As is commonly but wrongly omitted after the verb REGARD, especially when complications arise with another as similar to that in But tt ts not so much as a picture of the time as a study of humanity that Starvecrow Farm claims attention (as as a study has been too much for even a literary critic’s virtue); cf. the omissions of to in the as to quotations (3 above).

7. As=in the capacity of. When this is used, care must be taken to avoid the mistake corresponding to what is called the unattached participle; we can say He gave this advice as leader of the sttion, Or This advice was gt him as leader, he & him supplying the point of attachment; but we cannot say The advice which he tendered to the Peers was given as leader of the opposition.

8. Case after as. It is a matter of no great practical importance, case being distinguishable only in a few pronouns, & these pronouns occurring so seldom after as that most of the examples given in illustration will have an artificial air; but some points may be noticed:—a. Sometimes a verb is to be supplied; the right case must then be used, or the sense may be spoilt; You hate her as much as I implies as I hate her; You hate her as much as me implies as you hate me. 0b. As is never to be regarded as a preposition; the objective case after it, when right, is due either to the filling up of an elliptic sentence as in @ or to causes explained inc & d; When such as her die, She ts not so tall as me, are wrong. c. The phrases such—as he &c., so—as he &c., may be treated as declinable compound adjectives (cf. German was fir ein), which gives Such men as he are intolerable

/

?

t

1

+ but I cannot tolerate such men as him, Never was so active a man as he but I never knew so active a man as him; to ban this construction & insist on writing he always, according to the a method, seems pedantic, though he is always admissible. d. In many sentences the supplying of a verb supposed to have been omitted instead of repeated, as in a, is impossible or difficult, & the case after as simply follows that of the corresponding noun before as; as is then equivalent to as being (cf.

ares ae Greek ads ay, ws dvra, &C.)3; so I recognized this man as kim who had stared at me; You dressed up as she, You dressed yourself up as her, I dressed you up as her, You were dressed up as she; The entity known to me as I, The entity that I know as me.

9. Asa fact; see FACT.

10. As well as; see WELL.

11. For as concern(s), regard(s), follow(s), see CONCERN, FOLLOW. ascendancy, aseendant. 1. Spelling. | Though -ancy is not much commoner than -ency, it is better as corresponding to ascendant, which is much commoner than ascendent. 2. Usage & meaning. The ascendancy of, Have an or the ascendancy over, be =n the ascendant, are the normal phrases; in the first two ascendant is archaic for ascendancy, & is better avoided; in the third, which is less detached than the others from its astrological origin, ascendancy is wrong, & when used (Jt is not recorded what stars were in the as when Winston Churchill was born./Jimmie’s better angel was in the ascendency) is attributable to ignorance. Both words mean domination or oe influence, & not upward tendency or rising prosperity or progress.

ascension used of climbing, instead of ascent (she had begun her ascension of the hill), is a GALLICISM.

ascertainedly. Five syllables; see -EDLY.

asexual. See A-, AN-.

ashamedly. Four syllables if used; see -EDLY.
