page: 36

+ often as a confessed hypothesis. It may be owing to this distinction that the that of the object-clause is usually expressed after assume (the omission is at once felt to be wrong in I assume Turkey would require such a cash payment of at least £500,000), & usually omitted after presume (I presume you know; I assume that you know).

assure, assurance. 1. These words have never found general acceptance in the sense of paying premiums to secure contingent payments, though they are used by insurance offices & agents, & so occasionally by their customers, especially when death is the event insured inst (life assurance; assure one’s life); apart from such technical use, insure & insurance hold the field.

2. Assure for ensure (make certain the occurrence &c. of) is now rare (That will ensure, rarely assure, your success).

Four syllables; sec

assuredly. -EDLY.

asylum. Pl. -ms; see -UM.

asyndeton. See TECHNICAL TERMS. Pl. -ta, -ns 3 see -on 1.

-ATABLE. In spite of the general rule given under -aBLE for the formation of adjectives in -able from verbs in -ate, the short form with -at- omitted would be disagreeably pedantic in many cases where either the verb itself is little used in literature, or the dropping of -atamounts to disguising the word (as in disyllables, create, vacate, &c.), or the -able adjective is likely to be very seldom used, or confusion with another word might result. Thus tncubate, at least in the sense in which its -able adjective is likely to be wanted, is a technical rather than a literary word; inculcable is not instantly recognized as from tinculcate; inculpable is both likely to be understood as not culpable, & unlikely to be often wanted; & accordingly incubatable, tnculcatable, inculpatable, are less impossible than incubable, inculcable, & inculpable.

+ The practice should be to use -atable where the shorter form is felt to be out of the question. Simple reference to this article under any word means that -atable is better.

atelier. See FreNcH worRDs.

attempt. For was attempted to be done &c. see DOUBLE PASSIVES,.

attic. See GARRET.

attorney. Pl. -eys.

attraction. For the sense in grammar see TECHNICAL TERMS.

au. See A LA.

au fait. See FRENcH worDs.

au fond. See A FOND, & FRENCH WORDS.

aught. See Arcnaism; for a. I know is the only phrase in which the word is still current in ordinary specch, & even there all is displacing it.

au grand sérieux. See FRENcH WORDS.

aunt. Pronounce ahnt; see ANT. For aunty, -te, see -EY, -IE, -Y.

au pied de la lettre, au revoir. See FRENCH WORDS.

authentic, genuine. The distinction commonly drawn between the words is by no means universally observed, especially when either is used without special reference to the other; but, when it is present to the mind, authentic implies that the contents of a book, picture, account, or the like, correspond to facts & are not fictitious, & genuine implics that its reputed is its real author:—a genuine Hobbema; An authentic description; The Holbein Henry VIII is both authentic & genuine (represents Henry as he was, or is really a portrait of him, & is by Holbein). The artificial character of the distinction, however, is illustrated by the fact that authenticate serves for to establish either as authentic or as genuine.

authenticate makes -cable;

see -ABLE I.

authoress is a word regarded with dislike in literary circles, on the grounds, perhaps, that sex is irrelevant to art, & that the common unliterary public has no concern
