page: 38

+ averse meant originally turned away, & ais Latin for away, this did not

revent even the writers of classical

tin from using the dative after aversus; nor, if it had, need it prevent us, to whom the original & physical sense is not usually present, from using after averse & aversion the preposition that best fits their true sense of (harbouring) dislike.

avocation, originally a calling away, an interruption, a distraction, was for some time commonly used as . & synonym for vocation or calling, with which it is properly in antithesis. This misuse is now less common, & the word is generally used in the plural, a person’s avocations being the things he devotes time to, his pursuits or ey Sara in general, the affairs he to see to; his vocation as such is neither excluded from, nor necessarily included in, his avocations.

AVOIDANCE OF THE OBVIOUS is very well, provided that it is not itself obvious; but, if it is, all is spoilt. Expel eager or greedy from your sentence in favour of avid, & your reader wants to know why you have done it; if he can find no better answer than that you are attitudinizing as an epicure of words for whom nothing but the rare is good cna ey or, yet worse, that you are painfully endeavouring to impart some much rieeded unfamiliarity to a platitude, his feeling towards you will be something that is not admiration. The obvious is better than obvious avoidance of it. Nobody could have written * Clown’ who had not been (as Mr. Disher is known to be) an avid collector of pantomime traditions & relics./ Everything is just tn a state of suspended animation, & the House, instead of being in ts usual bustle on account day, is devoid./Lord Lansdowne has done the Liberal Party a good turn by putting Tariff Reform to the front; about this there can be no dubiety./ If John never ‘ finishes’ anything else, he can at least claim by sheer 88

+ labour to have completed over fivescore etchings. There are some who would rather see eager & empty & doubt & a hundred in those sentences than avid, devoid, dubiety, & fivescore; & there are some who would not; the examples are typical enough to sort tastes. Avid & dubtety are not yet hackneyed in the function of escapes from the obvious; they will be so one day if their qualifications in this kind are appreciated, & then their virtue wit be gone.

Several words can be thought of that have been through this course. Starting as variants for the business word, they have been so seized upon by those who scorn to talk like other people as to become a badge by which we may know them; after which they pass into general use by the side of the words to which they were preferred, giving the language

airs of useless synonyms that have

ost whatever distinction there ma once have been between them. Suc words are tic, dual, facile, forceful, foreword, & Gallic, as used without the justification of special meanings instead of obscure, le, easy, forcible, preface, & French; on all of these except cryptic (a word whose sole function seems to be that which is our subject) comment will be found in their separate articles; a few examples of the uses deprecated are:—*A sensible young man, of rough but mild manners, & very seditious”; this description, excepting the first clause, is somewhat cryplic./The combination of cricket & rowing ‘ blues” is very rare; the late J. W. Dale was the last Cambridge man to earn the dual distinction. The ‘dual event’ is perhaps already, & will surely soon be, upon us. /The reunion of a Labour & Soctalist World Conference has not proved to be so facile to arrange as tt a red./*I blame the working of r had pee said Mr. Newey,

orcefully, * for keeping wages at an artt cial figure ’./ The theme is a big

AVOIDANCE OF THE OBVIOUS one, covering, we are told in a fore-
