page: 41

+ BALLADE

a ballade. Pronounce balah’d; for

tion. meaning, see TECHNICAL TERMS. -balion d’essai. See FRENCH WORDS.

’

’ . The etymology

as a symbol of illegitimacy, is is unknown; the second form i8

strictly incorrect, bend or baton probably due to @ sup con-

sinister being the true term; it is, nexion, descri by the OED as

however, so familiar that to correct ‘unlikely’, with bully; the first

it, except where there is real need

for technical accuracy, erable.

see DIDACTICISM. baim. For b. in Gilead see Bat- TERED OBNAMENTS & HACKNEYED

difference in usage among the three _ PHRASES. baluster, ban(n)ister- Banisters

adjectives is roughly, & setting — —- — _ France by (better with single n) is now, though originally a corruption only of balusters, the established form for

in which the

the uprights

handrail with

bambino. Pi. -os; see -0(E)s 6.

bamboo. Pl. -00s; see -OQ(E)S 4.

banal, banality. These are LITER- ARY CRITICS’ WORDS, imported from

a class of writers whose jaded taste relishes novel or imeee jargon. In French they have

a continuous history & a natural development from their original to their present sense; in English they have not, & we accordingly remain conscious that they are exotics.

With common, commonplace, trite,

trivial, mean, vulgar, truism, platt-

tude, & other English words, to

choose among, we certainly do not

need them.

bandit. Of the two plurals, bandits

tends to prevail over bandiiti,

especially when the reference is to

more or less clearly realized in-

dividuals:—The mountains are in-

fested with banditti; The cost. of

suppressing the banditti; Two of the

bandits conducted me to the a

place; You are all bandits.

banister. See BALUSTER.

. Pl. -oes; see -0(£)s 1.

bank. A river’s right bank is that

on the right of the river regarded as 41

+ person going down to his destinapape . The -tery form is best. par. - sinister, used by novelists

i is pedantic; barbarian, barbaric, barbarous. The aside special senses of the first, as follows. Barbarian, as an adjective, is now regarded as an attributive use of the noun barbarian; i.e., it is used only in such contexts as would be admissible for nouns like soldier or German (a soldier king or people; German ancestry OF thoroughness), & means consisting of barbarians, being a barbarian, belonging to or usual with barbarians. So we have barbarian tribes, hosts, rankness, courage; @ barbarian king, home, empire; barbarian man (the human race as barbarians); the barbarian world.

The other two words are ordinary

adjectives, but differ in their, im-

lications. Barbaric is used ith

indulgence, indifference, ors!.even

admiration, & means of the simple,

unsophisticated, uncultured, un-

chastened, tasteless, or excessive

kind that prevails among barbarians.

We speak of barbaric taste, finery,

splendour, costume, gold, hospitahty,

simplicity, strength, health.

Barbarous, on the other hand,

always implies at least contempt,

& often moral condemnation;_ it

means that is unfit for or unworthy

of or revolts or disgraces or would

disgrace the civilized: barbarous

ignorance, speech, customs, style,

words, cruelty, treatment, tyranny.

It should be observed that the same

noun may be qualified by all three

words according to the sense wanted:

barbarian gold is money supplied by

barbarians; barbaric gold is the c3
