page: 43

baritone. See BARYTONE.

a - The two forms are

how y differentiated, bark

being a poetic synonym for ship or

boat, & barque the technical term for

a ship of special rig.

baronage, barony, baronetage, baronetey. The forms in -age are collectives, meaning all the barons (or peers), all the baronets, list or book of barons &c. Those in’-y are abstracts, meaning rank or position or title of a baron or baronet.

baroque. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

barricado. Pl. -os; see -0(£)s 6.

barytone, -ritone. The first is the best spelling. The -y- is the normal English transliteration of the original Greek v, which has _ been changed to -i- in the derivative Italian baritono. The prevailing though not invariable English practice in adopting words at second hand is to undo such intermediate changes & transliterate the originals consistently. It would be justifiable to take the Italian baritono whole; bat if we anglicize the ending we should follow the ordinary English method of transliteration. It is probably true that writers on music usually prefer bari-; but they are not yet irrevocably committed; of two OED quotations from Grove one has bary- & one bari-. French spells baryton; & in the grammatical sense concerned with accentuation barytone is the only form.

basal, basic. These unEnglishpene adjectives, ncither of which exi before the nineteenth century, were manufactured merely as adjuncts to certain technical uses of the noun base in botany, chemistry, & architecture, where fundamental would have been misleading. But a tendency has lately arisen to allow these upstarts to supplant fundamental, with its 600-years tradition, in those _ tian & figurative contexts in which they are unnecessary & incon . native element of hacar we beni is seen in:—The

+ elytra have a basal gibbosity; The basal portion of the main petiole; ils capita resting on tts basic plinth; Basic salts, phosphates, oxides. On the other hand fundamental should be substituted in:— Classification should rest on the most basal charaeteristics. / This ts our basic principle. / The hoppy thought which is the basic idea of Truth’s Christmas number. The great basic industry is agriculture. Many of those who use the words are no doubt sensible of the incongruity, but ho that what they have to say will be more convincing if seasoned with a pinch of the up-to-date & scientific.

bas bleu. See FRENCH WORDS.

bashaw is now only an ornamental ARCHAISM, the correct pasha having taken its place.

basin, bason. The first spelling is both commoner & better; the second is probably due to the established pronunciation (b&’sn); but cf. cousin.

basis. Pl. basés;

see LATIN in imitation of pathetic, chaotic; but PLURBALS.

bas-relief, bass-relief, basso-relievo, basso-rilievo. The first form is French, the last Italian, & the other two are corruptions; the plural of the third is basso-relievos, & of the fourth bassi-ritievi. It is recommended to use the first & pronounce it ba’srilef.

bassinet. This, & not bassinette or berceaunette, is the right spelling; the wrong forms are pacudo French,

Oo. Pl. -os; see -0(£)s 3.

Batavian. For B. = Dutch, in B. grace &c., see POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

bath. Pl. pron. bahdhz; see -TH & -DH.

bathetic, bathotic. These are made

hetic is not analogous, & chaotic is itself irregular. An adjective for bathos is, however, almost @ necessity to the literary critic, & the OED states that bathetic is ‘ A favourite word with reviewers’; it is the better of the two.
