page: 46

+ something, is there any occasion to use it, unless as a shoddy ornament. The English sense is based on the error of supposing idéal to be the noun (instead of the adjective) in the French phrase; & the English noun ideal, without beau, is accordingly the right word to use, unless flower, perfection, very type, pattern, pink, or some other word, is more suitable.

See FRENCH WORDS.

beau monde.

See Poericisms, &

beauteous. PLENTEOUS.

beautiful. But the home b. needs other growing greenery when the

estive season arrives./THE BED BEAUTIFUL. To see the English bed of supreme beauty you must take train to... Such vulgarizing adaptations of Bunyan, now common, have upon readers the effect described in IRRELEVANT ALLUSION-

beautify. For inflexions sec VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

beaux yeux. See FRENCH WORDS.

because. Aftcr such openings as The reason is, The reason why ... ts, the clause containing the rcacon must not begin with because, but with that. Correct accordingly:—

The reason was because they had foined societies which became bank-

rupt./The chief reason why he wel-

comed this bill was b. he regarded tt

as .../ The reason why he had atways

avoided the honour of the Garter was

because he knew that it cost £1000.

Their joining, his belief, his owe

ledge, are the reasons; & these can

be paraphrased into the noun-

clauses that they had joined &c., but

not into the adverbial clauses be-

cause they had joined &c. For similar

mistakes, see HLAZINEsSS.

beccafico. Pl. -0s; see -0(E)s 6.

bedizen. The OED allows both i

& 1, but prefers the 1, & states that

* all English orthoepists ’ do so.

bedouin (bé’do0é’n) serves as noun

singular or plural (bedouins being

now comparatively rare), or as ad-

jective. The forms bedawy or be-

dawee (sing.), & bedawin or bedaween

+ (pl.)» are also now used as nearer to

e Arabic; see DIDACTICISM. beef. For plural see -vE(D). befal(l), befel(i). The second 1 should be kept; see -LI-, -L-, 4. begging the question. See TECH- NICAL TERMS. begin. 1. Past tense began, formerly also (& still rarely) begun. 2. For

t was begun to be built &c., see DouBLE PASSIVES.

behalf & behoof are often confused both in construction & in sense. Modern usage is settling down to a clear differentiation; & those who are not fully conversant with the history of the words would do well to confine themselves to the really current types here a On his &ec. behalf, or on behalf of all &c., means as representing him, all, &c. (I can speak only on my own fs Application was made on behalf of the prosecutor); on is the normal preposition; the phrase does not mean, except additionally & by chance, for the advantage of; it is still in common use. For or to his &c. behoof, or for or to the behoof of all &c., means for or to the advantage of him, all, &c. (For the behoof of the unlearned; To the use & behoof of him & his heirs; Taking towns

or his own behoof); for & to are the

prepositions; the is normally used;

the meaning of behoof is simply

advantage; the phrases are more or

less archaic.

behemoth. Brfhé’méth is the cor-

rect pronunciation, though bé‘Imoth

is perhaps commoner.

beholden, beholding. As p.p. of

behold, beholden is now obsolete ex-

cept in poetry. In the sense bound

by ae (which it got when

behold could still mean hold fast)

it is still in use, though archaic by

the side of obliged; beholding in that

sense is an ancient error due to

ignorance of how beholden got its

meaning, & should be allowed to

perish.

behoof. See BEHALF.
