page: 47

behove, behoove. The first spelling

"\ is the better. As to pronunciation,

the OED says ‘ Historically it rimes

with move, prove, but being now

mainly a literary word, it is generally

made to rime with rove, grove, by ' those who know it only in books’.

belay, belie. For inflexions see

ERBS IN -IE &c., 1, 3.

belike. See ARCHAISM. ‘ belittle has one meaning that may

pass uncensured, viz, to dwarf b i contrast ( A tower not so tall as to b.

the main building). The OED says , ot ) ‘The word appears to have originsy ated in U.S.; whence in recent é English use in sense 3’, which is p ‘depreciate, decry the importance

of’, It cannot be denied that since ' 1881, the date of the earliest British ie quotation, it bas gained considcrable

| currency in this sense; but it is still -1 felt by many to be an undesirable { alien that should not be allowed to; supplant the old-established words, ;° Of which we have a large supply - baler ig for oe contexts | shades of meanin isparage, decry, y depreciate, make light of, sight, run

down, ery down, poohpooh, deride,

ridicule, slight, minimize, lower.

belles-lettres survives chiefly in

blishers’ circulars, library cata-

gues, & book reviews, its place

having been taken elsewhere by

Kiferature (sometimes mere or pure

tilerature) used in a special sense;

that sense is, as defined by the OED,

* Writing which has claim to con-

sideration on the ground of beauty

of form or emotional effect’. Like

other words that require a speaker

to attempt alien sounds (such as the

ending -étr is), belles-lettres can never

really current; & its right

to live at all, by the side of literature,

depends on the value of a differ-

entiation thus expressed by the

OED:-—* But it is now generally | applied -(#when used at all) to the

bi r branches of literature or the

aesthetics of literary study’; i.e.,

Paradise Lost is rather literature

than beliles-lettres, though The

+ Essays of Elia is both. This restricted application, however, itself needs defence, 6. properly including the epic as much as the toy essay, just as literature does. We could in fact do very well without b., & still better without its offshoots belletrist & belletristic.

belly is a good word now almost done to death by GENTEELISM. It lingers in proverbs & phrases, but even they are being amended into up-to-date delicacy, & the road to the heart lies less often through the b. than through the stomach or the tummy. The slaying of the slayer now in course of performance by tummy illustrates the vanity of genteel efforts; a perpetual succession of names, often ending in nursery ineptitudes (smock, shift, chemise, shimmy), must be contrived. Stomach for belly is a specially bad case, because the meaning of stomach has to be changed before it can take the place of b. in many contexts. The tendency, however, is perhaps irresistible.

beloved is, when used as a p.p.

b. by all; was much b.), disyllabic

-irvd); as a mere adjective (dearly

. brethren; the 6. wife of), or as @ noun (my 6.), it is trisyllabic (-tivid); the first of these rules is sometimes broken in ignorance of usage, & the second with a view to the an ear attaching to what is unusual. Cf. blessed, cursed.

below, under. There is a fairly clear distinction between the prepositions, worth preserving at the cost of some trouble; but the present tendency is to obscure it by allowing to encroach; & if this continues 5. will seem more & more stilted, till it is finally abandoned to the archaists. he distinction is that B., like its contrar above (cf. also the Latin infra supra), is concerned with difference of level & su ts comparison of independent things, whereas under, like its contrary over (cf. also the
