page: 48

+ Latin sub & super) is concerned with superposition & subjection, & sug-

ests some interrelation. The classes

. us are merely those not up to our level; those u. us are those that we rule. B. the bridge means with it higher up the stream; u. the bridge, with it overhead. Contexts in which 0. is both right & usual are b. par, b. the salt. Contexts in which u. is encroaching are men b. 45, b. one’s breath, no-one b. a bishop, tncomes b. £160. Contexts in which u. is both right & usual are u. the sun, the sod, the table, the circumstances, the Stuarts, tyranny, protection, one’s wing, one’s thumb, a cloud. Cf. also BENEATH.

beneath has still one gencrally current sense—too mean(ly) or low for (Ile married b. him; It is b. contempt; It would be 6. me to notice it). Apart from this it is now & poetic, rhetorical, or emotional substitute for under or below.

Benedick, not Benedict, is the spelling in Much Ado, & should

ways be the spelling when the name is used generically for a confirmed or captured bachelor; but Benedict is often used (Penalize the recalcitrant Benedicts by putling a heavy tax upon them) cither (& probably) in ignorance, or on the irrelevant ground that Shakspere might have done well to usc the more etymological form in -ct.

Bengalee, -ali. Pronounce bénggaw’'ll. The form in -ee is perhaps still the commoner.

benign, benignant, malign, malignant. The distinction between the long & short forms is not very clear, nor is it consistently observed. But it may be said generally that benign & malign refer rather to effect, & benignant & malignant to intention or disposition:—Ezercises a benign or malign influence; A benignant or malignant deity. An unconscious possessor of the evil eyc has a malign but not a malignant look; discipline is benign rather than benignant, indulgence benignant

+ rather than benign. The difference is the same in kind, though less in degree, as that between beneficent, maleficent, & benevolent, malevolent. It is to be noticed, however, (1) that the impulse of personification often substitutes the -ant forms for the others, e.g. as epithets of destiny, chance, &c.; (2) that the distinction is less generally maintained between benign & benignant than between the other two (e.g., of benign appearance is common, where benignant would be better); (3) that nevertheless in medical use as epithets of diseases, morbid growths, &c., the forms arc benign (as would be expected) & malignant (contrary to the rule); this use of malignant is perhaps a stereotyped example of the personifying tendency, which benign escaped because benignant, a recent formation, did not exist when the words were acquiring their medical sense. See also MALIGNANCY.

bereaved, bereft. The essential principle is perhaps that bercaved is resorted to in the more emotional contexts, bercft being regarded as the everyday form (cf. BELOVED). The result in practice is that (1) bereft is used when the loss is specificd by an of-phrase, & bercaved when it is not, the latter naturally suggesting that it is the greatest possible (Are you bereft of your senses? ; The blow bereft him of consciousness; A bereaved mother; Weeping because she is bereaved); but (2) bereaved is sometimes used even before of when the loss is that of a beloved person (A mother bereft, or bereaved, of her children; Death bereft, or bereaved, her of him). See -T & -ED.

beseech. Besought is the established past & p.p., though beseeched, on which the OED comment is merely ‘ now regarded as incorrect ’, still occurs, probably by inadvertence, & Milton has beseecht.

beside(s). The forms have been fully differentiated in ordinary modern use, though they are often confused again in poetry, & by those
