page: 49

+ who prefer the abnormal or are unobeervant of the normal. (1) Beside is now only a preposition, besides having all the adverbial uses; besides would have been normal in And what is more, she may keep her lover beside./We talked of thee & none beside. (2) Beside alone has the an el beside you), out of contact

‘th (best: it would have been normal in Other men beside ourselves./I have no adviser beside you.

besom. Pronounce bé’zm. It has two uses only, (1) as the name for a gardener’s twig broom, (2) as a poetic expression for some purifying or destroying agency.

- The p.p. form bespoke perhaps lingers only, beside the now usual bespoken, as an attributive adjective meaning made to order ( goods, boots, &c.) in contrast with ready-made.

bestir is now always used reflexively (must b. myself), & never, idiomatically, as an ordinary transitive verb; stirred should have becn used in The example of the French in Morocco bestirred Italy into activity in Africa.

béte noire. See FRENCH WORDS.

bethink has constructions & meanings of its own, & can never scrve as @ mere ornamental substitute for think, as in They will bethink themselves the only unhappy on the earth.

bétise. See FRENCH WORDS.

bet. Both bet & belted are in idiomatic use as past tense & p.p. Tic bet me £5 I could not; They betted

+ a good deal in those days; I have bet £500 against it; How much has been bet on him?; The money was all betted away. These examples, in which it will probably be admitted that the form used is better than the other, suggest that bet is preferred in the more usual connexion, i.e. with reference to a definite transaction or specified sum, & betted when the sense is morc general.

better. The idiomatic phrase had better requires care; the following, for instance, contains a violation of usage:—The fact that many moderate men on both sides were disquieted by the incident of the Prince’s presence in the House was enough to satisfy him that he had better been away. Correct forms are He had better away, He had better have been away. He had better been away, which is not English, is perhaps due, when it occurs, to confusion with the totally different construction, correct though tending to the archaic, He had been better away. In this last, better belongs to he, & the full form is He would have been better (if he had been) away, so that better necessarily follows, & does not precede been. But in He had better have been away, the full form is He would have (i.e. find) Nes better (to) have been abe 6 & better belongs to tf, i.e. to to have been away (not, of course, fo been).

better, bettor. See -OR. :

betterment. For the use of the word in general contexts, & apart from its technical application to property, see SAXONISM. The late

'y Victoria devoted her entire life to the b. of the crofters & fishermen; if the writer had n satisfied with the English for betterment, which is improvement, he would not have been blinded by the unusual word to the fact that he was writing nonsense; the lady’s effort was not to better or improve the crofters, but their lot. IIe would reform our methods all round, beginning with increased attention to the milk supply & the consequent b. of infant feeding.
