page: 52

+ uses of great as the central word, with incidental comments on the other two.

1. With abstracts expressing things that vary in degree, great means a high degree of (g. care, ignorance, happiness, tolerance, charity, joy, sorrow, learning, facility, generosity, comfort); big is not idiomatic with any of these; & though large is used with tolerance, charity, & generosity, it is in a special sense—broad-minded or prodigal. With words of this kind that happen themselves to mean size or quantity (size, quantity, bulk, magnitude, amount, tonnage) large & big are sometimes used, though neither is as idiomatic as great, & big is slangy.

2. With words denoting persons or things such that one specimen of the class deserves the name more fully than another (e.g., one fool is more a fool, but one boot is not more a boot, than another), great docs not imply size, but indicates that the specimen has the essential quality in a high degree; so a g. opportunsty, occasion, friend, landowner, majority, schoolmaster, shot (shooter), nuisance, stranger, brute, fool, haul, race (contest), undertaking, success, linguist, age. Here large could be substituted with landowner, majority, haul, & undertaking, but mcrel because a large quantity of land, votes, fish, or money, is involved; big could stand with the same four on the same ground; it is slangily used also with most of the others; this is bad; a great fool should mean a very foolish fool, & a big fool one whose stature belies his wits.

3. A great has the meaning eminent, of distinction, & the g. the meaning chief, principal, especial (a g. man; &. houses; a g. family; the g. advantage, or thing, is); & from these comes the use of great as a distinctive epithet (the g. auk; G. Britain; Alexander the G.; the g, toe; go out by the g. gate), with the idea of size either absent or quite subordinate. In these senses Jar, cannot be used, though it would

+ stand with many of the same words in a different sense (a g. family has distinguished, but a t. family numerous, members); big is here again slangily & ambiguously substituted for great; a big man should refer to the man’s size, or be extended onl

as in the big men of the trade; cf.

rge with landowner &c. in 2) to express the quantity of his stock or transactions. TZ'he 6b. toe, however, & such examples as the b. gate, show that big may serve as a distinctive epithet instead of great without slangy effect when difference of size is the salient point of distinction; & in such contexts it is now idiomatic.

4. Finally, great does sometimes mean of remarkable size—the scnse that it has for the most part resigned to large & big—; but it is so used only where size is to be represented as causing emotion; large & big give the cold fact; great gives the fact coloured with feeling; e.g., He hit me with a great stick is better than with a large or big stick, if I am angry about its size; but in Perhaps a big or large stick might do it would be impossible to substitute great; similarly Big dogs are better out of doors, but I am not going to have that great dog in here; His feet are large or big, but Take your great fect off the sofa; What a great head he! suggests admiration of the vast brain or fear of the formidable tceth it prey contains, whereas What a large head he has! suggests dispassionate observation.

bi-hourly. See BlI-

bike. See CURTAILED WORDS.

bilbo. Pl. -oes; see -0(E)s 1.

billet doux. Pronounce bI’‘lid60’. The plural is billets doux, but should be pronounced bi’lid00’z. See FRENCH WORDS.

billion, trillion, quadrillion, &c. It should be remembered that these words do not mean in American (which follows the French) use what they mean in British English. For us they mean the 2nd, 8rd, 4th, &c.,
