page: 53

+ power of a million; i.e., a billion is a million millions, a trillion a million million millions, &c. For Americans they mean a thousand multiplied by iteckf twice, three times, four times, &c.; i.e., a billion is a thousand thousand thousands or a thousand millions, a trillion is a thousand thousand thousand thousands or a million millions, &c.

bi-monthly, bi-quarterly. See BlI-.

bird’s nest, bird(’s)-nest(ing). The noun should always have the ’s, & is better without the hyphen as two words (pl. birds’ nests) than with it (pl. bird’s-nests), In the verb & gerund the ’s is also usual, but is often omitted.

bise. See WIND, n.

bishopric. See sEE.

bistre, oter. See RE & -ER.

bivalve. For succulent 0b. see PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

bivouac. Participles -cked, -cking;

bi-weekly age See BI-.

‘ The short form is used

on of

othera reputation, oak blackens with age, & the ceiling is blackened with smoke; an exception is that we black, rather than blacken, a person’s eye for him. See -EN VERBS.

e See FRENCH WORDS.

blam(e)able. Spell without the -e- ; see MUTE E.

blank sverse. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

blarney, vb. For inflexions see

See FRENCH WORDS.

“ble. See -aBLeE.

blended, blent. Blended is now the everyday form oie Aa blended teas; he successfully blended amusemeng with instruction); but blent pia a in poetic, rhetorical, &

igni contexts ity & anger bleni). ee me

blessed, biest. The accent used

+ below (blesséd) is for the purpose of the article only. The attributive adjective is regularly disyllabic (blesséd innocence; what a blesséd thing is sleep!; the blesséd dead;

blesséd night; not a blesséd one), & the plural noun with the, which is an absolute use of the adjective, is so also; but the monosyllabic pronunciation is sometimes used in verse, or to secure emphasis by the unusual, or in archaic phrases; the spelling is then blest:—our blest Redeemer;_ that blest abode; the Isles, the mansions, of the Blest. The past tense, p.p., & predicative adjective, are regularly monosyllabic; the spelling is usually blessed in the past tense, blest in clearly adjectival contexts, & variable in the p.p. (He blessed himself; God has blessed me with riches; He is blessed, or blest, with good health, in his lot, &c.; Blessed, or blest, if I know; Those who win heaven, blest are they; It is twice blest); in the beatitudes & similar contexts, however, blesséd is usual. Blesséd makes sometimes -est; see -ER & -EST 4,

blessedness. For single b.,

see WORN-OUT HUMOUR.

blithesome is a NEEDLESS VARIANT of blithe; see -SOME.

blizzard. For synonymy see WIND, n.

blond(e). The -e should be drop-

; the practice now usual is to retain it when the word is used either as noun or as adjective of a woman & drop it otherwise ee blonde girl; she is a blonde; she has ab complexion; the blond races); but this is by no means universal, & the doubt between blond women & blonde women (with blondes women in the background) at once shows its absurdity.

bloody, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

bloom, blossom. Strictly, bloom n. & v. refers to the flower as itself the ultimate achievement of the plant, & blossom n. & v. to the flower
