page: 54

as promising fruit: the distinction,

as regards literal flowers, is perhaps rather horticultural than literary or

general; at any rate it is often

neglected; but The roses are in

bloom, The apple-trees are in blossom,

& other uses, confirm it; and in

figurative contexts, the blooming-

time or bloom of a period of art is its

moment of fullest development, when

its blossoming-time or blossom is

already long past.

blouse. pea i blowz. a

blowzed, -sed, b . ‘< e

OED spells with z. eiccataes

bi In the south this is the

wild hyacinth, Scilla nutans: in the

north, & esp. in Scotland, it is the

flower called in the south harebell,

Gampanula rotundifolia, with fewer,

larger, & thinner-textured flowers than the other.

blu(e)ish. Spell without e. See

{UTE E.

bluey. See -ry & -y.

boatswain. The nautical pronunciation (bd’sn) has become so general that to avoid it is more affected than

more used than in the sense to use it. See Pronunciation,

proper to the latter. The confusion

is not likely to be corrected, & is of

bodeful is a modern stylish sub-

no importancc. stitute for ominous; see WoRKING & sTyiise worps, & Saxonism,

body, vb. For inflexions see VERBS “Doge coger The OED pref

The plural is bons mots,

e)y, e@. e OED prefers bogy for the bugbear, & bogie in coachbuilding; the golf word is

phrase in French is not that which usually spelt Bogey.

we have given it; but variation of bohea. Pronounce bdhe’.

meaning or form is no valid objection bolt, boult. The word of which the

to a varies is that meaning to sift. Of this the OED says:— “The

established; see A w’OouTRANCE, historical spelling of the word is

bonnes fortunes, bon ton, bon

: unfortunately the diction-

Vivant. See Frencn WORDS. aries have confounded it with ’ [the

bookcase. Pronounce bo0‘k-k&s, other verb bolt] ‘& authorized the

not bood’kas, Spelling bolt’. “It is perhaps, how-

bookie, -y. See -EY, -IE, -¥.

bookman. See NOVELTY-HUNTING, ever, not too late to restore the better spelling boult in literary use

SAXONISM. at Icast.

booze, "LyY9 bouse, SY, Wwsoe, e

The boos doris are now established, bombasine. The OED puts first

& the pronunciation boémbazé’n.

born(e). The p.p. of bear in all bona fide(s). Bona Jide is a Latin

Senses except that of birth is borne

BORN(E)

ablative meaning in 00d faith: its —

original use is accordingly adverbial

Was the contract made bona fide 7);

ut it is also & more commonly used

attributively like an adjective (Was

tt a bona fide, or bona-fide, con-

fract?); in this attributive use the

hyphen is correct, but not usual;

in the adverbial use it igs wrong.

Bona fides is the noun (His bona

fides was questioned); the mistake

is sometimes made by those who know no Latin of using fide instead of fides: The fact that Branting accepted the chairmanship of the Committee should be sufficient evidence of tts bona-fide,

bonbon. See Frencn WORDS.

bond(s)man. The two forms are properly distinct, meaning a surety & being connected with the ordinary bond & bind, & bondman meaning a villein, serf, or man in bondage, & having (like bondage) nothing to do with bond & bind; but bondsman is now rare in its true sense, & on the other hand is much Bon(e)y. See -rv, -1x, -y,

omie. See Frencn worps. bon mot. See Frence WORDS,

mne. See FRENCH worps. bonne bouche. The meaning of the

the use of a phrase once d nitely the others should be abandoned.
