page: 56

+ north its original form burn) means a stream, but is now applied as a current word only to the torrents of the chalk downs, full in winter & dry in summer; it serves in poetry as an ornamental synonym for brook. The second means properly a boundary (from French borne) as in The undiscovered country from whose borne No traveller returns, but is used almost solely, with a distorted memory of that passage, in the sense of destination or goal. The OED prefers bourn stream, & bourne goal, & the differentiation would be useful.

bowdlerize. Pronounce bow-.

bowsprit. Pronounce bé-.

brace, n. (=two). See CoLuiec- TIVES 8.

brachycephalic, -lous. See -cEPHA- LIC.

brachylogy. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

iy hoe - Pl. -os; see -0(E)s 4,

brain(s), in the sense of wits, may often be either singular or plural, the latter being perhaps, as the OED suggests, the familiar, & the former the dignified use. In suck or pick @ person’s brain(s), the number is indifferent; Has no bb. is commoner than Has no b., but either is English. Some phrases, however, admit only one number or the other, e.g. cudgel one’s bb., have a thing on the b., have one’s 0, turncd.

brainy, meaning acute, ingenious, &c., is, & may as well remain, an Americanism.

brake, break, nn. ‘The words meaning (1) bracken, (2) thicket, (3) lever, (4) crushing or kneading or peeling or harrowing instrument, (5) steadying-frame, though perhaps all of different origins, are spelt brake always. The word that means checking-appliance is usually brake, but break sometimes occurs owing to a probably false derivation from to break (the OED refers it to Ne 3 above, which it derives from OF brac = F bras arm). The word meaning horsebreaker’s carriage-frame, & applied also to a large wagonette, is

& probably should be, usually, break; but brake is not uncommon. The word meaning fracture &c, is always break.

Bramah (B. lock &c.) is pronounced br&-, not brah-.

branch. For synonymy see FIELD.

bran(d)-new. The spelling with -d is the right (fresh as from the furnace); but the d is seldom heard, & often not written.

bravado. Pl. -os; see -0(E)s 3.

brave in the sense of fine or showy is an ArcHAISM, & in the sense of worny. a GaLLicism; make a 6b. show, however, is fully current.

bravo, brava, bravi. In applauding operatic performers &c., the first form is used to a man, the second to & woman, & the third to the company.

bravo. PI. -ocs in sense bullics, -os in sense cries of applause; see -O(E)s 1, 8.

brazen. See

“KN ADJECTIVES, & -ER & -EST 2.

breadthways, -wise. See -ways, -WISE.

break. 1. For p.p. see BROKE(N). 2. For spelling of nouns see BRAKE, BREAK.

breakfast, break one’s fast. The divided form is now a mere Arcna- 1sM. Pronounce brét’kfast.

breeches &c. The singular noun & its derivatives (brcechloader, brecching, &c.) have usually -éch- in pronunciation; brecches the garment has always -Ich-, & the verb breech (put child into bb.) usually follows this.

breese, breeze, brize, arc all existent spellings of the word meaning gadfly. A difference from the other breeze being useful, the first is recommended.

brevet, n. & v. Pronounce bré‘vii, not brivé’t; the bets & p.p. are accordingly breveted, see -T-, -TT-.

breviary. Pronounce bré-; see _ FALSE QUANTITY.

bricken. See -EN ADJECTIVES.

drier, briar. 1. For the word mean-
