page: 58

+ not impossible, are:—({preferring broad) expanse, brow, forehead, lands, estates, acres, brim, mind, gauge; (preferring wide) opening, gap, gulf, culture.

(8) Some illustrations of the difference in meaning between broad & wide with the same word; the first two may be thought fanciful, but hardly the others: A w. door is one that gives entrance to several abreast, a 6. door one of imposing dimensions; @ w. river takes long to cross, a b. rwer shows a fine expanse of water; a@ @. generalization covers - many particulars, a b. generalization disregards unimportant exceptions; a page has a b. margin, i.e. a fine expanse of white, but we allow a w. margin for extras, i.e. a great interval between the certain & the possible costs; @ w. distinction or difference implies that the things are very far from identical, but a 6. distinction or difference is merely one that requires no subtlety for its appreciation.

broadness is now used instead of the usual breadth only when the meaning is coarseness or indelicacy of expression.

Brobdingnag (not -ignag) is the spelling.

broccoli (not -oco-, nor -lo) is the best spelling. The word is an Italian plural, & is generally used collectively like spinach &c.; but if a or the plural is wanted, a broccoli, two broccolis, are the forms.

brochure, pamphlet. See FRENCH worps. 8B. has no right to exist in English, since it is not needed by the side of p. Its introduction in the 19th c. was probably due to misconception of the French uses. In French 6b. is used where the French p. (chiefly applied to scurrilous or libellous or violently controversial pamphlets) is inappropriate. The sense *a few leaves of printed matter stitched together ’ has always belonged in English to p., though it has by the side of this general sense the special one (different from the French) ‘ p. bearing on some question

+ of current interest (esp. in politics or theology)’. ‘° Dans sa brochure appelde en anglais pamphlet’, quoted in French dictionaries from Voltaire, gives us the useful hint that the English for 6. is p.

broider(y). See ARcCHAISM, PoETIC- ISMS,

broke(n). The form broke, now obsolete or a blunder in most senses, is still idiomatic (1) as p.p. of break = dismiss the service (he was broke for cowardice) except in the attributive use (a broken officer), and (2) in the slang phrase stony-broke.

bromine.

For pronunciation see IODINE.

bronco. Pl. -os; see -0(E)s 6.

brow. In the sweat of thy brow is a MISQUOTATION.

Bruin. See SospriquETs.

brusque, though formerly so far naturalized as to be spelt brusk & pronounced briisk, is now usually pronounced broosk.

brutal, brute, brutish. Brutal differs from brute in its adjectival or attributive use, & from ish, in having lost its simplest sense of the brutes as opposed to man & bein never used without implying mo condemnation. Thus, while brute force is contrasted with skill, brutal force is contrasted with humanity.

n torturing:a mouse, a cat is brutish, & a person brutal. For comparison of brutal, see -ER & -EST, 4.

nic. See GAELIC.

bubo, buffalo. Pl.-oes; see -o(r)s 1.

buek. See HarT.

buffet. The OED pronounces this bii’fit in the sense sideboard or cupboard, & as French in the sense refreshment bar. See also Frencna WORDS.

buffo. Pl. -os; see -0(E)s 6.

hie ear Pl. -o0s; see -0(&)s 4.

bul. Pronounce boo’lbool.

bulletin. See Frencn worps.

bully, vb. For inflexions see Verss IN -IE &c., 6.

bullyrag. See BALLYRAG,

bumble-bee, humble-bee. See
