page: 61

+ contrast with Pole’s averseness is Cranmer’s having to die; this may be given BY ee Cranmer was Surnt, or with additional details— at was decided &c., or even Mary decided &c.—, as long as the opposition between the sentences remains; but 2 was Mary who decided at once makes the second sentence _harmonious instead of contrasted with the first; And it was Mary who decided, or But Mary decided)./So far as Mr. Haldane’s scheme tends towards the encouragement af local patriotism, it can do nothing but good; but the only point about the scheme which seems to me to be doubtful concerns the question of the divided responsibility (There being only one doubtful point is in harmony, not contrast, with the goodness admitted in the first sentence. Omit buf, or else write But there is a doubtful point &c.)./Our correspondent is singularly well informed, but the one thing he apparently does not know ts the arguments of his fellow

Tariff-reformers (Omit either or the one thing ... is)./It is in no spirit of hostility to the Committee of

Union & Progress that these lines are written; but it is a sincere appeal to the men of courage & goodwill at Salonica to strive to set their house in order (Either omit but, or convert the two sentences into one by writing but in sincere appeal; we then have the correct form Jt is not black, but white instead of the incorrect It is not black, but it is white)./

To the revealed objects of that Club he lakes no exception, 6. what alarms him is the fact that the new Club has been apparently formed behind the back of Mr. four (Either omit but, or write b. he is rmed by).

Since less excusable blunders than

these, due to gross carelessness,

occasionally occur (e.g. Jt is not an

evergreen, as is often represented;

b. us leaves fall in the autumn, & are

renewed in the spring), it may be

well to put down the right & wron

t in the simplest form:—{right

tis not black, but white: It is not

61

+ black; tt is white: It is not black; but it ts nearly black: (wrong) It is not black, but it ts while: It is not black, b. it is nearly white.

4. Wheels within wheels. A few examples will show the disagreeable effect produced when inside one of the contrasted sentences connected by bué an internal contrast, also indicated by but, is added:—{a) B. he did not follow up his threats by any

ompt action against the young king,

. went off to Germany to conclude the campaign against his brother Lewis of Bavaria. B. on arriving in Bavaria he did not strike down his enemy, b. made a six months’ truce with hin. (b) You have come not to a scattered organization, b. to an organization which is in its infancy, 6. which is yet real. (c) I gazed upon him for some time, expecting that he might awake; 0b. he did not, b. kept on snoring. (d) The reformers affirm the inward life, b. they do not trust it, b. use outward & vulgar means. (e) There was a time when golf was a Scottish speciality, b. tt seh i owed Scottish precedents in spreading over the whole country south of the Tweed. B. we are glad that it is a Scot who has ventured to blame golf.

5. But . . . however is perhaps always due to mere carelessness:— (a) If any real remedy is to be found, we must first diagnose the true nalure of the disease; 6. that, however, is not hard. (b) B. one thing, however, had not changed, & that was... (c) The enemy’s cavalry withdrew with losses, b. they returned, however, reinforced by...

6. For but which see WHICH.

buxom. See -ER & -EsT, 2.

buzz). See -z-, -zz-.

by, prep., owing to the variety of

ts senses, is apt to be unintentionally used several times in the same sentence; when the uses are parallel & the repetition intentional (We can now travel by land, by sea, or by air), monotony is better than the ELE- GANT VARIATION (by land, on the sea, or through the air) often affected; but
