page: 62

BY such accidental recurrences of by as are hereshown areslovenly (cf. or):— The oe eee to round off ed play by causi aggie to conquer by makt Taek by her poor joke about Eve was not worthy o him./Pal- derived by England by the great war by his brag.

ng John

merston wasted the streng by, bye, by-. The spelling, & usage the two parts, hyphening them, or writing them as one word, are variable. As the noun & adjective are merely developments of the adverb or pre- position, it would have been reason- but bye is now too firmly established in some uses to be abolished; & the question of hyphening, separating, or com- The following consistency Without violating any usage that

in regard to separating

able to spell always by;

bining, is difficult.

scheme might secure

deserves ‘respect. 1. The noun is bye (leg-bye; Jones

a bye; the bye).

2 the “adjecttog (collateral, sub-

ordinate, incidental, additional, &c.)

should be written by- (by-road,

by-election, &c.); the spelling bye

is due to the desire to distinguish

from the preposition, but is only

needed for this purpose if the hyphen junebjectionsb e even in words made

or the nonce; the by-effects is no worse than the bye effects) is omitted.

3. The adverb should be spelt by & joined on without hyphen (bygone, bystander, &c.).

4. Some special words:—by & by has the adverb or preposition twice, & should follow their spelling; bye-bye sleep, & bye-bye good-bye, are unconnected with by, & have usually the ¢; by-law is perhaps also unconnected, & is often g It bye-, but may well be assimilated to words under rule 2.

A list is added for convenience; by & by, by-blow, bye (n.), bye-bye,

ygone, by-lane, by-path,

FRENCH WORDS. by-road, bystander, by-street, by the bye, by-way, by-word, by-work.

CAFFRE

C

cabbalist(ic), cabbala, &c. These

are the right spellings, not caba-.

cable(gram). The verb cable (trans-

mit, inform, &c., by cable) is both

convenient & unobjectionable; cable-

gram is not only a BarBarism, but

a needless one, since cable (cf. wire vb

& n.) serves perfectly as a noun also

in the sense submarine telegram.

cacao. Pronounce kaka’5, & see

cocoa. Pl. -0s; see -o(E)s 3.

cache. See FRENCH worDs.

cachet is mainly a Literary

CRITICS’ WORD (bears the c. 0 Benius

&c.), & should be expelled as an

alien; eee seal, sign manual, are

ood enough for English readers. See FRENCH WORDS; &, for syn-

onymy, SIGN.

cachinnate, -ation, eatory. See POLYsyLLaBIc HUMOUR,

cacoethes scribendi. See Batrerep ORNAMENTs,

cacophonous, cacophony.

See | ANTI-SAXONIBSM,

cactus. Pl. usually -uses; see -us.

caddie, caddy. The golf-attendan has -ie, see -EY, -1E, -y; the tea-box has -y.

caddis is preferable to caddice.

cadet. or this pronounced ag French & appended to a name see FRENCH worDs,

cadi. Pronounce kah‘di; pl. cadis. cadre, being an established mili technicality, should be anglicized in sound & pronounced kah‘der, in pl. kah’derz; the French pronunciation is especially inconvenient in words much used in the plural. caesura. See TECHNICAL TERMS. café is naturalized in the sense coffee-house or restaurant; in the sense coffee it is a FRENCH worpD. café chantant, café noir. See caffeine. Pronounce k&’ftin, Caffre. See KaFIR.
