page: 63

ealman. See CAYMAN.

eaigue. Pronounce kaé’k.

eaisson. Pronounce ka’sn.

caky, not cakey. See -Ey & -y.

ealeareous, -rious. The first form is definitely wrong, the ending being from Latin -arius, which gives -arious or -ary in English; but it is so firmly established that perhaps a@ return to the correct but now obsolete second form is out of the question.

calculate. 1. C. makes calculable; sec -ABLE 1. 2. The Americanism is an example of SLIPSHOD EXTENSION; the sense I consider-as-the-result-ofa-calculation passes into the simple sense I consider. We shall win, I c., by a@ narrow majority shows the normal use, the assumption at least being that the numbers have been reckoned & compared. We shall be in time, I c. is (according to British usage) correct if the time wanted & the time at disposal have been worked out in detail, but wrong if it is a mere general yy alee of san-

ineness, You don’t know everything,

c. is the full-fledged Americanism.

ealeulus. The medical word has pl. -#; the mathematical, -luses. See -US.

- See CAULDRON.

Caledonian. Putting aside its special sense (inhabitant) of ancient Scotland, & its ornamental use in names of clubs, companies, &c., the word serves chiefly as material for POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

calembour. See FRENCH WORDS.

calendar, Calends, not k-, is usual.

ealf. For plural &c. see -vE(D).

calibre. he OED prefers this spelling (not -ber) & the pronunciation k&liber. See -rE & -ER.

calico. PI. -03s; see -0(E)s 8.

ealiph is the spelling, & ka’lif the pronunciation, put first by the OED, which states, however, that ‘ orientalists now favour Khalif’; see DIDACTICISM.

calligraphy &c. should not be altered to calig-. Greek compounds

+ are made either with saAxu- from xadAos beauty, or with x«xado- from xadés beautiful. Choice is therefore between calligraphy & calography; & as the actual Greek compounds were xadduypagia &c., calligraphy is obviously right.

callus. Pl. -uses; see -us. The word is often wrongly spelt callous, from confusion with the adjective.

calmative, being queer both in pronunciation (k&’lmativ, not kah’mativ) & in formation (there is no Latin word for -ative to be attached to), should be left to the doctors, if even they have a use for it beside sedative, as a technical term.

caloric, a word now no longer in scientific use, is preserved as a synonym for heat only by PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

calumniate makes -niable; see -ABLE 1.

camaraderie. See FRENCH WORDS.

cambric. Pronounce k&-.

camellia. The spelling with -ll- is quite fixed, & the mispronunciation -mé-, now so prevalent as to be almost justified by usage, will no doubt give way to -mé- as the spelling becomes familiar.

camelopard does not contain the word leopard, & should be neither spelt nor pronounced as if it did. Pronounce kamé‘lopard. But giraffe is now the usual word.

eamembert. See FRENCH WORDS.

cameo. Pronounce k&’mié. PI. cameos, see -O(E)S 4. For c., intaglio, & relief, see INTAGLIO.

camomile, cha-. Ca- is the literary & popular form; cha-, which represents the Latin & Greek spelling but has no chance of general acceptance, would be better abandoned in pharmacy also.

cam - Pronounce kampaneé’ll. PI. ad e

Canaan(ite). The prevalent pronunciation is undoubtedly ka’nyan- (it), & this is a quite justifiable escape from the difficult & unEng-
