page: 65

+ AL

in the sense title or heading French (chiefly used in U.S.—OED), is ferred ie g. rare in British use, & might well be

nunciation right. iv bine has displaced carabine, the -a- _ ee &e., 6.

carte blanche, carte-de-visite. See rarer.

FRENCH WOBDS. carabineer, carbine. Though car-

cartel, in the old senses, is pro-

nounced kar’tl; in the new sense of remains in The Carabineers as the

manufacturers’ combination it rename of a regiment; cf. WELCH.

presents German Kartell, & is often

so carafe is, apart from its use in

cted to accent the last syllable for Scotland, chiefly a GENTEELISM for water-botile.

° The caravanserai, -sera, -Sary

independent establishments regulatfirst spelling (pronounce -ri) is the

ing best.

& carbolic, carbonic. The first is the spelling for the disinfectant, the

(Enc. Brit.); cf. TRUST.

carven is a REVIVAL, not having second for the poisonous gas. carcass, -ase. ‘The -ss form stands

been used between the 16th & 18th first in the OED.

careful. See -ER & -EST 4.

cc.

CARELESS REPETITION. See RE-

word so freely resorted to as & PETITION OF WORDS & SOUNDS.

trouble-saver, & consequently re-

caret. Pronounce ki’rét.

sponsible for 80 much flabby writing.

. Pi. -oes; see -O(E)s 1.

The following extract from 2 legal

. See BURLESQUE.

treatise, in which the individual acai is a Latin oer meaning

uses are comparatively justifiable,

cer 5 pronounce ar’léz.

shows how the word now slips off

Pronounce ké’rilyon, oF

the pen even of an educated as in FRENCH WORDS.

writer:—In the majority of cc. where

cark(ing). The verb is practically

obsolete, & the adjective, survivilg

only as a meaningless epithet of

care, should be let die too.

carnelian. See CORNELIAN.

-earol makes -ller, -lling, &c.; see

carotid. Pronounce kard’tid; see

FaLSE QUANTITY.

carousaL See -AL; carouse is itself

carpet. For on the c. (under dis-

cussion) see GALLICISMS; & disad-

vantage peculiar to the phrase is

that the sense required for ¢., viz

tablecloth, is obsolete.

ple. For such formations

carry. For inflexions see VERBS IN

see -ABLE 4.

Carry, -le. See -£Y, -IE, -Y.

carte, qu e), in fencing. The

first spelling, still the commonest

excep, in technical books following

1351

D

authorities, should be pre-

if only as keeping the prospelt; it may therefore be ex-

the amount of output for each, in certain cases also the prices

d. Pronounce karia’'tid. case. There is perhaps no single reprisals have been the object, the blockade has been instituted by a single State, while in cc. of intervention several powers have taken

art; this is not, however, necessarily the c.

To obviate the suspicion of an intolerant desire to banish it from the language, let it be admitted that case has plenty of legitimate uses, as in:—If I were in your c.; A 0a c. of blackmailing; I am only putting a ¢.5 Circumstances_ alter

cc.; inc. of fire, give the alarm;

Never overstate your C25

reform is in bad c.; Inno c. are you

to leave your post; t wo

excusable for a staring man, but th

was not your ic. ; There are seven Cc.

of cholera.
