page: 68

policy is not to welcome neglect of

its rules, but to demand that in the

novels & the newspapers, from which

most of us imbibe our standards of

language, they should be observed.

3. Specimens of case mistakes.

A. Three years of dining are a pre-

liminary for he who would defend his

Sellows./Should not a Christian com-

munity receive with open arms he who

comes out into the world with clean

hands & a clean heart?/They came

to fight in order to pick up the chal-

lenge of he who had said * Our future

lies on the water ’./But it is the

whimsical perplexity of Americans

contemplating the appearance of Lon-

don that provides he who Suides with

most amusement. ; pres

B. I saw a you Lirl gazi ut,

somewhat Gpeniuthed & crafused

whom I guessed (correctly) to be she

whom I had come to meet. /It is not

likely that other & inferior works were

done at the same time by an impostor

C. One comes round again to the

D. Eye hath not Seen, nor ear heard, nether have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him./Yet the coal is there in abundant ies, & there is nothing the world wants so much or cane he dispensed with such handsome profit to those who produce it.

E. By that time Mr Macdonald will

the apposition (& he was a seniry). be in possession Of the decision of the Conservative Party, & it will then be

tempts us to try sometimes whether for he & his advisers lo take a de-

they may not be made to serve two ctsion. F. Let Gilbert's Suture wife be whom

thians that stands first in D, things she might, 4. Temptations. The groups in the last section exemplify th that put one off one's guard & sug-

R.V. shows, with its which in italics, gest @ wrong case, First in frequency & iness comes the

et as passable. The second Personal pronoun in a place requiring

+ | the objective case followed by a | relative that must be subjective,

when there is a temptation to regard

i

verse attraction (the right term here)

is @ name to Conjure with in modern

English grammar, though the text-

books can muster a Shaksperian &

Miltonic example or two; in modern

rammar they are only polite names

or elementary blunders, All the

a a Should have him instead of he.

The next temptation is to assume, perhaps from often hearing It is me corrected to Jt is J, that a subjective Case cannot be wrong after the verb to be. But in the B examples it ig not to be that decides the case of he & she; itis whom & impostor, & her

him must be substituted.

It is hard not to Sympathize with amples. ‘ Him, too, a Cosmopolitan ’, ‘“& hima sentry ’, do sound as if one Was airing one’s knowledge of the Concords. Well, perhaps it is better or also a cosmopolitan) or sacrificing The invisibility of case In nouns

rs. In the verse from Corin-

the Revisers did not regard its example has the peculiarity that
