page: 69

+ the word whose case is in question, viz that, not only has no distinguishable cases, but is not on show at all; but the sentence is ungrammatical unless it is inserted twice— nothing that the world wants so much, or that can be dispensed.

Another trap is the compound subject or object; when instead of a single pronoun there are a pronoun & a noun to be handled, the case often goes wrong where if the pronoun been alone there would have been no danger. Even the divider of the rolypoly, who can easily be believed to have said Me d& my mate likes, would never have said Me likes; still less could we have had in the E example It will be for he to take.

The F example is a little more complicated, but of a kind that not infrequently presents itself. The temptation is to look before & after, & doubt in which direction the governing factor is to be found. We first, perhaps, put aside the error of supposing that be requires a subjective, ice. who, & remember that

t puts wife in the objective, which raises a presumption that the same case will follow, i.e. whom; but then it perhaps occurs to us that the part to be played by who(m) is that of complement to may (be), which ought to be in the same case as she. In this difficulty the last resource is to write the sentence in full, Let Gilbert's wife be her who she may be; & the insertion of the omitted her having provided the first be with the objective complement that it requires, we find ourselves able to write who as the subjective complement required by the sccond Be; tho is in fact the grammatical English; cf. WHOEVER.

casino. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 6.

cast, vb. See FORMAL WORDS.

cast(e). Caste is sometimes wrongly written for cast in certain senses less obviously connected with the verb cast—mould, type, tendency, huc, &c. The confusion is the more

+ natural since cast was ey the prevalent spelling for the hereditary class also; but the words are now differentiated, & cast is the right form in such contexts as peer: tions of a moral c., heroines of such ac., a man of the c. of Hooker & Butler, my mind has a melancholy c., his countenance was of the true Scottish c., a strongly individual c. of character, their teeth have a yellowish c.

caster, -or. The word meaning pepperbox &c., & swivelled chairwheel, should be caster, meaning literally thrower, & veerer, from the ordinary & an obsolete sense of cast; but -or, probably due to confusion with other castors, is now usual.

cast fron used as a noun (c. i. is more brittle) should be written as two separate words; cast-tron is the attributive or adjectival form (a c.-t. bracket); see HYPHENS.

CAST-IRON IDIOM. Between Idiom & ANALOGY a secular conflict is waged. Idiom is_ conservative, standing in the ancient ways, insisting that its property is sacrosanct, permitting no jot or tittle of alteration in the shape of its phrases. Analogy is progressive, bent on extending liberty, demanding better reasonsthan use & wont forrespecting the established, maintaining that the matter is what matters & the form can go hang. Analogy perpetually wins, is for ever successful in recasting some piece of the cast iron; Idiom as perpetually renews the fight, & turns to defend some other object of assault. ° We aim to prove it’, *This is claimed to be the best’, ° They are oblivious to hardship’, ‘I doubt that it ever happened ’, ‘ In order that the work can procecd’, ‘* He is regarded an honest man’, ‘A hardly won victory’, ‘ With a view of establishing himself ’—all these, says Idiom, are outrages on English; correct them, please,to: We aim at proving it, They claim that this is the best, They are insensible to hardship, I doubt whether it ever happened, In order that the work may (be able to) proceed, He is
