page: 70

+ regarded as an honest man, A hard won victory, With a view to establishing himself. But why? retorts Analogy; is not to aim the same as to design? is not to claim to represent? does not oblivious mean insensible 2? is not to doubt to be unconvinced? would not so that convey the same as in order that? is not regarding considering? is not -ly the adverbial ending, & is not won to be modified by an adverb? &, if in view of is English, why should with a view of be unEnglish? Away with such hair-splittings & pedantries!| when one word is near enough to another to allow me to use either, I propose to neglect your small regulations for the appurtenances proper to each.

—_

Not that Analogy, & those whom it influences, are offenders so deliberate & conscious as that account might seem to imply; they treat regard like consider not because they choose to flout the difference that Idiom observes, but because it comes natural to them to disregard distinctions that they have not noticed. In ANALOGY 2 it has been pointed out that it has very important functions to perform ae from waging its war upon Idiom; & therefore the admission that this book is wholly partisan in that war need not be interpreted as a condemnation of analogy always & everywhere; the Analogy that wars against Idiom is unsound or hasty or incomplete analogy.

The cast-iron nature of idiom may now be illustrated by a few phrases, shortened down to the utmost, in which some sags that to the eye of reason seems of slight importance has converted English into something else:—He did it on his own accord; Contented himself by saying § Spain was materially enhanced; We entertained him to dinner; Tried to father it on to me; Follow events at close hand; Lest the last state becomes worse than the first; Is to @& great measure true; Had eve motive in doing it; A fact of whi

70

+ he took every opportunity; Am not

iwileged with his friendship; Has

en promoted to captain; The resentiment I feel to this Bill; We must rise equal to the occasion; Fell sheerly down; I cannot state he was present; Stood me in splendid stead; Guests came by the hundreds; It was not long until he called. Discussion or actual quotations for these lapses will be found under the words italicized; & a few articles that have special bearing on the present subject are: AIM; CLAIM; DOUBT(FUL); FACT; FRIDAY; IN ORDER THAT; OBLIVIOUS; PLEA- SURE; PREFER 3; REGARD 2; RE- SORT; SUCH 1; THAT CONJ, 2; UNIDIOMATIC -LY; & VIEW.

castle. See PRONUNCIATION, Silent t. C. in the air is English; c. in Spain is a GALLICISM.

castrate. See -ATABLE.

casuistic(al). The OED has four

uotations for each form; of the -ic four, three are later than the 18th c., of the -ical four only one; from which it would seem that -ic ig the modern choice;_ see -1c(41).

catachresis. See TECHNICAL TERMS,

catacomb. Pronounce -dm.

catalectic. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

catamaran. OED puts first katamari’n.

catarrh should not be used for cold without good reason; see WORKING & STYLISH WORDS,

catchpole, -oll. The OED puts -ole first.

catchup. See KETCHUP.

category should be used by no-one who is not prepared to state (1) that he does not mean class, & (2) that he knows the difference between the two; see WorKING & SsTYLISH WORDS, & POPULARIZED TECHNI- CALITIES,

cater, quatre, in dice &c. Spell cater & pronounce k&a’ter; for the other names see CINQUE.

It is open to Roman- Catholics to use C. by itself in a sense that excludes all but themselves; but it is not open to a Protestant to
