page: 71

+ use it instead of Roman-Catholic without implying that his own Church has no right to the name of C. Neither the desire of brevity (as im the C. countries) nor the instinct of courtesy (as in I am not forgetting that you are a C.) should induce anyone who is not Roman-C. to omit the Roman-.

catholic(al)ly. Both forms are rare, & consequently no differentiation has been established; a catholicly & a catholically minded person may mean cither one of wide sympathics &c. or one inclined to Catholicism.

catsup. See KETCHUP.

cattle. See CoLLeEcrIvEs 5.

——— ne

ea(u)idron. Spell with the u.

cause. The main cause of the higher price of meatin France is due to the

erclusion of foreign cattle. The main

cause is the exclusion; the price is

due to the exclusion; out of two

rights is made a wrong. See Hazi-

NESS for this type of blunder; with

reason it is still commoner than with

cause.

cause célébre, causerie, causeuse.

See FRENCH WORDS.

causerie. See ee TERMS.

causeway, causey. ither form is correct, Me first being not a false spelling of the sccond, but a shorten-

ing of causcy-way. Causeway, how-

ever, has so far ousted causey (except

in some local names) that those who

use the latter are naturally taken for

pedants protesting against an error

that is, after all, not an error; see

D1DACTICISM.

caveat. Pronounce ka’viit, & see

FALSE QUANTITY.

caviar(e). Spelling & sound have

varied greatly; the pronunciation

kaviar’, & the corresponding spelling

caviar, are recommended.

cavil makes -iler, -iling, &c.; see

eLL-, -Le.

cayman, cal-. Spell with y.

-C-, <CK-. When a word ending in

c has a suffix beginning with a vowel

71

+ added to it, the hard c is preserved before the native suffixes -ed, -er, -ing, & -y, by the addition of k (mimicked, bivouacker, trafficking, panicky), but not before the classical suffixes -ian, -ism, -ist, -ity, -ize (musician, criticism, publicist, electricity, catholicize).

cease is rapidly giving way to stop, as cast has given way to throw; it is no longer the word that presents itself first; we substitute it for stop when we want our language to be dignified; it is now poetic, rhetorical, formal, or old-fashioned, though not sufliciently so to have such labels attached to it in dictionaries. No effort should be madc to keep words of this kind at work; they should be allowed to go into honourable retirement, from which the poets & the rhetoricians can summon them at need; the man who says he is going to c. work is, unless the statement has a rhetorical importance, merely pompous. See FormMAL WORDS.

-ce, -cy. Among the hundreds of words corresponding to actual or possible adjectives or nouns in -ant or -ent, large numbers now present no choice of form: no-one hesitates between avoidance, forbearance, admiltance, magnificence, coincidence, or intelligence, & a form in -cy; nor between buoyancy, constancy, vacancy, agency, decency, or cog » & a form in -ce. ut about large numbers also it may easily happen that one has doubts which is the right form, or whether one is as good as the other, or whether both exist but in different scnses: persistence or persistency? frequency or frequence? emergency or emergence?

When there is doubt about a word not given in its place in this book, & again when one is given without further comment than See -crE, -cy, it is to be presumed that either -ce or -cy may be used; but three generalities may be added. First, that short words favour -cy, & longer ones -ce; it was not by de-
