page: 72

sign, but by a significant accident,

that all the -cy words given above

metrical matches for buoyancy.

Secondly, that many words tend to

use the -ce form in the singular, but

-ctes rather than -ces in the plural,

€.g. irrelevance, but try ncies,

And thirdly, that euphony often

decides, in a particular context, for

one or the other ending. Of the

first point a good illustration is

ded by frequency & tnnocence:

for each, but now from the shorter

adjective frequent -ce ig almost obso-

lete, & from the longer innocent -cy

is an archaism preserved by Bible

texts. On the second it may be

added that words used concretely in

the plural meanin specimens of the

quality &e. (truculenties = truculent

phrases, _trrelevancies — irrelevant

points, inadvertencies = acts of in-

advertence) Partly account for the

peculiarity, since when there is

differentiation it is -cy, not -ce, that

tends to the concrete, as in emer-

gency = event that emerges com-

pared with emergence =the emerging. And on the third point convincing examples will be found undcr ftransparence.

Articles in which differentiation between the two forms is recorded consistence, dependence, effervescence, emergence, independence, tndifference, special senses while the -ce forms do the general work; & under com-

ringé‘nary, quingé’nary, sescé’nary, mended for differentiation not from

septingé’nary, Octingé’nary, nongeé’complacence, but from complaisance.

nary, millé’nary, cedarn. See -rn ADJECTIVES, cee-spring, C-spring. Thc second

tem centi. denotes division, & hectoform is Perhaps better; ef. D-trap,

multiplication, by a hundred; ef, -joint, Collar of SS, T-square, uy.

DECA-, DECI-, & KILO-, MILLI-, tube, V-joint, Y-cartilage,

Centime. See Frency WORDS, Celestial — Chinese. Except in the

Cento. PI. -0s, see -O(E)S 6. The C. Empire, which translates a native name for China & may be used seriously, the word is facctioug only,

. ese

& ranks with POLYsyLuaBre HU-

MOUR,

apostrophe. Pr. chél6, see Iranian.

Celt(ic), K-. The spelling C-, & the

Pronunciation s-, are the established

ones, & no useful urpose seems to be

served by the su itution of k-.

rary,

centenary, centennial, nn. meaning

hundredth annive Ys

the usual British form, has the distenary.

The shots made at these higher names often resulting in monstrosities, a list of not intolerable forms is here offered. Bicentenary, which might have been ducenary, & tercentenary (trecenary), must be taken

en Bae ac Od ee won a8 established; but quatercentenary

quince need not. The procenti-, hecto- In the metric sys-
