page: 73

+ centre, center. See -RE & -ER; &, for cent(e)ring, SPELLING POINTS 4. century. Each c. as ordinally named (the 5th, 16th, c.) contains only one year (500, 1600) beginning with the number that names it, & minety-nine (401-499, 1501-1599) beginning with a number lower by one. Accordingly 763, 1111, 1800, 1912, belong to the 8th, 12th, 13th, & 20th, cc. For the curiously different Italian reckoning, see TRECENTO.

-cephalic, -cephalous. Compounds (brachy-, dolicho-, hydro-, &c.) accent the -ceph- of -cephalous, but the -alof -cephalic. As there is no difference of meaning, however, & -ic is the commoner, -cephalous should be abandoned as 8 NEEDLESS VARIANT.

cerement is disyllabic (sérm-).

ceremonial, ceremonious, aa. Ceremonial means connected with or constituting or consisting of or fit for a ceremony (i.e. a piece of ritual or formality) or ceremonies (the -al

; a-al occasion; for -al reasons; -al costume). Ceremonious means full of or etirtar from ceremony Oo i.e. attention to forms (why be so -ous? ; -ous people; -ous politeness). In these examples the termination not used could hardly be substituted, even with change of meaning. But with some words -al & -ous are both possible, though not indifferent: @ -ous court is a sovereign’s court in which ceremony is much observed; a -al court would be a judicial couft set up to regulate ceremonies; A visitor may make a -ous entry into a room, but an army a -al entry into a town that has capitulated.

ceriph. See SERIF.

certes. Pronounce ser’téz. See ARCHAISM,

certify. For inflexions sec VERBS IN -1E &c., 6.

certitude is now restricted to the single sense of absolute conviction or feeling quite sure; certainty can,

but often does not, mean this also,

& the use of c. may therefore obviate

ambiguity.

cerulean. See 2, &.

cervical is pronounced servi’kl by purists, but ser’vikl is commoner; see on doctrinal in FALSE QUANTITY; the Latin for neck is cerviz, -icis.

Cesarevitch or -witch, Cesarevna, are the right forms for the Czar’s eldest son & that son’s wife. Pronounce siza’riwich. Czarevitch is an obsolete title superseded by Grand Duke.

cess. For synonymy see TAx.

ceterach. Pronounce sé’terak.

ceteris paribus. Pronounce sé’terls paribus.

chagrin. Pronounce shagré’n. The pronunciation shagri’n, used _ to avoid improbable confusion with shagreen, would commit us to chagrinned instead of chagrined; see -N-, -NN-.

chagrinedly.

Four syllables; see -EDLY.

chairwoman.

See FEMININE DE- D3 SIGNATIONS.

chaldron. Pronounce chawl-. |

chalet. See FRENCH WORDS.

chalybeate. Pronounce kall’biat.

cham. Pronounce kim.

chamade. See FRENCH WORDS.

chamois, in or used for c.-leather, is best pronounced shaé’mi.

chamomile. See CAMOMILE.

champaign. The OED pronounces cha’mpén, & rejects shampa’n & shé’mpan.

chance, n., makes chancy; see -EY & -y.

chance, vb, as a synonym for happen (it chanced that .. .; chanced to meet him) stands in the same relation to it as CEASE to stop.

chancelliery, -ory, -erle. The first form (accented on the first syllable) is that preferred by the OED.

Change, in on Change, is not an abbreviation of Exchange, & should have no apostrophe.

tage. See FRENCH WORDS; blackmail is generally preferable.

Chanticleer. See SOBRIQUETS.

chanty, sh-, sailors’ hauling-song. Spell c-, but pronounce shi-; thc
