page: 75

+ voice, appearance, manner, &c. —— Resignation may be cheerful without being cheery; & a person may have a cheerful, but ha a cheery, spirit without his neighbours’ discovering it. The cheerful feels & perhaps shows contentment, the cheery shows & probably feels it. For cheerful see -ER & -EST, 4.

chef, chef-d’couvre. See FRENCH WORDS.

chemist &c., chy-. Che- is now established, though chymist is still sometimes seen over drug-shop windows.

cheque, though merely a variant of check, is in British usage clearly & usefully differentiated from it with the sense bank-draft, check being chiefly American in this sense.

chequer, checker. The first spelling is very much commoner for both the noun & the verb.

cherub, cherubic. Cherub has pl. cherubim chiefly when the Cherubim are spoken of as a celcstial order; cherubims is wrong; in figurative use cherubs is usual. Cherubie (see -B-, -BB-) is pronounced -d0b-.

ehes(t)nut. Spell with & pronounce without the ¢.

chevalier d’industrie. See FRENcn

WORDS.

chevaux de frise. See FRENCH

worps. Cheval de frise is now rare; chevauz de frise is treated either as sing. or as pl. (a wall with ac.d.f., or

a wall with c.d.f.).

chevelure. See FRENCH WORDS.

chevy. See cuivy.

ehiaroscuro. Pronounce § kyar’-

chiasmus. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

chibouk, -ouque. Pronounce ch- ;

spell -k.

chic. See FRENCH WORDS.

chicane. Pronounce sh-.

chick(en). Chicken is the original

& still the ordinary form, chick

serving as a diminutive & being used

chiefly of an unhatched or unfledged

bird, the young of small birds, or

(endearingly, in pl.) children. For

pl. of chicken see COLLECTIVES 4.

chide stands to scold as CEASE to we Past chid, p.p. chid(den).

fest, formerly common, is now felt to be an unnatural form, & used only as an ornament.

chiffon. See FRENCH woRDs.

chilblain. So spelt; see -L1L-, -1-, 4.

childish, e. The distinction drawn is so familiar that childish is in some dan of being restricted to the depreciatory use that is only one of its functions, while childlike is applied outside its sphere; the face, for instance, that we like a child to have should be called not a childlike, but a childish face; the rule that childish has a bad sense is too sweeping, & misleads. Childish used of adults or their qualities, & childlike (which should always be so used), have the opposite implications of blame & approval; childish means ‘that ought to have outgrown something or to have been outgrown’, & childlike ‘that has fortunately not outgrown something or been outgrown’; childish simpreity in an adult is a fault; child-

tke simplicity is a merit; but childish simplicity may mean also simplicity in (& not as of) a child, & convey no blame; childish enthusiasm may be either a child’s enthusiasm or a man’s silly enthusiasm; childlike enthusiasm is only that of a man who has not let his heart grow hard.

« See REvivats.

chilli is the right spelling for the capsicum pod (unconnected with Chili); pl. chillies.

ehill(y). The form chill (as adj.) is only a LITERARY WORD, chilly being that in gencral use.

chimera, -aera, -era. See £, &. Pronounce kimcr’a.

an &c. The normal uses are:—A Chinaman (rarely Chinese); three Chinamen (sometimes Chinese); 50,000 Chinese (sometimes Chinamen); the Chinese (rarely Chinamen). Chinee for Chinaman is a BACK-FOBMATION from Chinese pl., &, being still felt to be irregular, is
