page: 76

+ rare except as conscious slang, but common in such use.

chiropodist is a Barsarism & a GENTEELISM.,

chirrup(p)ing &c. See -p-, -PP-.

chisel makes -lled &c. ; see -LL-, -L-.

chivalry &c. The pronunciation sh-, instead of ch-, though based on a mistake, is now established, & the OED places it first. Of the adjecctives chivalrous & chivalric the second should be either Ict die as a NEEDLESS VARIANT or restricted to the merely grammatical function of representing the phrase of chivalry, as in the chivalric ages.

c(h)ive. Spell with the h.

chivy, che-. The -i- certainly gives the prevailing sound, &, being now written also more often than it was, will doubtless become the accepted spelling before long.

chlorine.

For pronunciation see IODINE,

chloroform. The OED pronounces klor’o-, not kI16’ro-. The latter, however, which is also common, is (see FALSE QUANTITY) not illegitimate.

chock-full is

the spelling, not choke-full.

choir, quire. Though the first spelling, which goes back little further than the 18th c., neither bears its pronunciation on its face ‘nor represents the French or the Latin forms well, & is therefore inferior, attempts to restore quire arc not likely to succeed, & are best avoided.

choler(ic). Choler, except when used historically with reference to the four humours, is now a mere ARCBAISM;_ Choleric, however, has survived it, & is haters in some contexts to trascible, quick-tempered, &c.; pron. k6‘lerik.

choliambic. See TECHNICAL TERMS,

chop, cutlet. A chop is cut from the loin & includes a rib; a cutlet is cut from the neck, or may be a small piece of meat from any part & include no bone.

chorale. Pronounce korah’]. As to spelling, the -e is strictly incorrect, but both usual & convenient, obviating confusion with the adj. choral; cf. LOCALE & MORALE, & see A L’OUTRANCE,

c(hjord. There nre two words chord, one of which, that used in Harmony, has no connexion with cord; the other (touch the right chord; the chord of an arc; the vocal chords; the spinal chord) is the same as cord, but has had its spelling corrected after the Greek original. It is well to remember that in the four phrases mentioned chord means simply string; but the spelling cord, which would have been legitimate & avoided confusion in any of them, is ruled out by custom exccpt in the last & possibly the last but one.

chose jugée. See FRENCH worps.,

chouse, having been current for 300 years (Ben Jonson 1610), need not be avoided as slang by those who have occasion to usc it.

christen. See PRONUNCIATION, Silent t.

Christmas. Pronounce kri’smas; see PRONUNCIATION, Silent t.

chromo. See CURTAILED WORDS, Pl. -os, sec -0(E)s 5.

chronic in the illiterate use for bad, intense, scvere, (the weather has been c.3 that wasae. fight last night), is a SLIPSHOD EXTENSION. See PoPu- LARIZED TECHNICALITIES,

chronique scandaleuse. See FrENCH WORDS.

ehrysalis has pl. chrysalises, chrysalids, or chrysalides (krisa’lidéz) 3 the first should be made the only form.

chute. See suoor.

chutney, -nee. Spell -ney.

chymist &c. See CHEMIST.

-ciation. Nouns in -alion from verbs in -ciate have, if they follow their verbs, the very unpleasant combination of two neighbouring syllables with the -sh- sound (ima&shia’shn from emaciate). The alternative pronunciation -slashn, some-
