page: 77

+ times recognized by the OED (e.g. in association), avoids the bad sound, & is legitimate on the analogy of denunciation, pronunciation, annunciation, of which all might have had, & the last has in annunciate, a verb in -ciate as well as that in -ounce. Words in -liation (as initialion) can perhaps hardly be treated in the same way, except those that, like negotiation, have alternative forms with -c- for -i-; nigdsia’shn seems possible, but not propisia‘shn.

cicada, cicala, The first is the original Latin word taken into I-nglish (pronounce -ka-); the second is Italian (-kah-); the third is the French cigale with termination assimilated in English to the others (-gah-). The first is recommended.

cicatrice, cicatrix. The first, pronounced si’katris & in pl. si’katrisiz, is the English word. The second, pronounced sika’triks & in pl. sikatri‘séz, is the Latin in surgical & other scientific use.

cileerone. Pronounce chicherd’n! ; pl. ciceront, pron. -né.

ci-devant. See FRENCH WORDS.

Cineinnatus. So spelt.

cinema, cinematograph, kin-. The cin- forms are obviously more handy for words destined to constant popular use, & should be accepted heartily. There is indeed very little in any of the objections made to them. The points are: (1) cor k?;

(2) the syllable accented; & (3) the

curtailed form of cinema. 1. English

ce for Greek k, far from being wrong,

is normal; cf. catholic, cenotaph,

Circe, colon, cubic, cycle. It may be

regrettable that, since kinetic &

kinematic are abnormally spelt, the

connexion of cinematograph with

them is obscured; but that is their

fault, not its. 2. The vowel sounds

& the syllable accents will be found

justified in the article FALSE QUAN-

tiry. The chief objection—to mis-

placing in sI’nIma the stress of the

Greek kiné’ma—falls to the ground

when it is remembered that cinema

isnot the Greek word kinema at all,

77 CIRCUMSTANCE

+ but a curtailed form of cinematograph, whose second syllable is

und to be -ni- in popular speech. 8. Curtailing is an established habit, no worse in cinema than in the schoolboy’s rep, our ancestors’ mob, or our own dynamo & bike & phone; see CURTAILED WORDS.

Cingalese. See SINHALESE.

cinq(ue). The five on dice &c. is pronounced singk, & best spelt cinque. Ace, deuce, trey (-&), cater (ka-), & sice (sis), are the others of the series.

cinquecento.

Pronounce chingk-

for meaning see TREwiché’nt6 ; CENTO.

cing(ue)foll. Pronounce sI’ngkfoil. The OED i eb the longer form first.

° spelt; see y & 1.

- Pronounce ser’si.

circuit(ous). Pronounce ser’kit, but serki’Itus (not ser’kitus).

circulate makes -lable; see -ABLE I.

circumbendibus. See Facerious FORMATIONS.

cise, not -ize; see -ISE)(-IZE.

circumlocutional, -nary, -utory. Though an adjective is often wanted for circumlocution, none of these three has won any favour; it is better to make shift with periphrastic.

circumstance. The objection to under ihe cc., & insistence that in the cc. is the only right form, because what is round us is not over us, is puerile. To point out that round applies as much to vertical as to horizontal relations, & that a threatening sky is a c. no less than a threatening bulldog (Under the circumstances I decided not to venture), might lay one open to the suspicion of answering fools according to their folly. A more polite reply is that ‘the cc.’ means the state of affairs, & may naturally be conceived as exercising the pressure under which one acts. U. t. cc. is neither illogical nor of recent invention (1665 in OED), & is far more often heard than ¢. t. cc. The OED, far from hinting that either form is
