page: 80

+ never, like climate, the weather conditions themselves; we say strangers from every c., but never the country has a delightful c.

cling has past clung, not clang.

cliqu(e)y. Spell -quy; see -ry & -y.

close C. the door, the window, your mouth, used in the literal sense & in everyday speech instead of shut, expose the speaker to grave suspicion of GENTEELISM, though 7'he door is closed for ever upon that possibility, & similar figurative uses, are innocent. See also FoRMAL worpDs.

close(ly). See UNIDIOMATIC -Ly.

closure, gag, guillotine, kangaroo. The first is the name given to a provision by which debate in the House of Commons can be cut short in spite of the wish of a minority to continue it; the closure is brought into operation by a motion That the Question be now put.

Gag is the word used chiefly by the closured party to describe the ordinary closure or its developments, the guillotine & the kangaroo.

The guillotine, or closure by compartments, is thus defined in the Ency. Brit, :—‘ The guillotine means that the House decides how much time shall be devoted to certain stages of a measure, definite datcs being laid down at which the closure shall be enforced & division taken ’.

The kangaroo, or kangaroo closure, is @ further development. The guillotine having the disadvantage that the limited time may be wastcd on minor matters & none be left for important ones, the Chairman of Committees is empowered to select the amendments that shall be debated, the unselected ones bcing voted on without debate.

cloth may be pronounced eithcr -awth or -dth; the plural of the tirst is -awdhz, but of the sccond -Oths. See also -TH & -DH.

clothe has clad beside clothed both as past & p.p. While clothed, however, is suitable to all contexts (except where dressed is preferable as less formal), clad is (1) always

80 Cco-

+ slightly, & often intolerably, archaic in effect, & (2) never used absolutely, but always with some specification of the kind of clothing. Accordingly, clad cannot be substituted in You were fed & clothed at my expense, He clothed himself hurriedly, When he was clothed he admitted us. But

a) clothed can be substituted in any of the following phrases, which are selected as favourable for the use of clad:—Lightly, well, insufficiently, clad; He clad himself in shining armour; Clad with righteousness; Hills clad with olives; Clad in blue.

clothes. The usual pronunciation is kl6z, though this is often deliberately abstained from in the mistaken belief (confirmed by the OED) that it is ‘vulgar or careless’. See PRONUNCIATION,

cloud-burst. See winp, n.

clubbable. See -aBLeE 4.

clue. See cLEW.

co-. There are three ways of writing cooperate (coop-, co-op-, coép-), & two of writing copartner (cop-, co-p-). The diacresis should at once be rejected as possible only in some words (those in which cois followed by a vowcl), whereas the hyphen is possible in all. Next it should be recognized that hyphens in the middle of words are no ornament, & admittance should be refused to all that cannot prove their usefulness. In the alphabctical list

iven below of the commoncr words

as nr) fe be

ginning with co- together or cocomplementary, the spelling printed is to be taken as recommended, & the number affixed to each word refers the readcr to the following classification:—

1. In some words the hyphen is never used.

2. Many are either so common or so analysable at a glance that the hyphen, though sometimes used, is entircly superfluous.

’ gy r

8. Some are used & seen only by the learned, who may be expected to know them at a glance without hyphens.
