page: 81

+ 4. Some always have the hyphen apparently by way of a (sic), oF announcement that the spelling is intentional. 5, Some, if no hyphen is used, tend to fall at the first glance into wrong e--|seES OS, syllables & so perplex. 6. When a writer believes himself to be making a new word, he naturally uses the hyphen—my co-secretary, their co-authorship, &c. :

EsTABLISHED WORDS IN CO-. coacervation 8. coadjutor 1. coadunate 3. coagulate 1. coalesce 1. coalition 1. coaxial 3. co-declination 5. coeducation 2. coefficient 2. coequal 2. coerce 1. coessential 2. co-etaneous 5. coeternal 2. coeval

2. coexecutor 2. coexist 2. coextensive 2. cognate 1. cohabit 1. coheir

2. cohere 1. coincide 1. coinstantaneous 2. coition 1. co-latitude 5. cooperate 2. coopt 2. coordinate

2. coparcenary 2. copartner 2. co-relation 4. co-religionist 4. co-respondent 4. cosecant 3. coseismal cosignatory 2- cosine 2. cotangent 2. cotemporary 2. co-tenant 5. co-tidal 5.

1. Haul, & call, over the

cc. are both in use, though the former perhaps commoner. 2. Coal-vase for -scuttle is chiefly a shop term,

but

coastal is a BaRBARISM, the

-0ashowing at once that -al has

been added to an English & not a

Latin word. If an adjective had

been really needed, it should have

been costal; but the attributive function can be performed by coast (the

coast trade, towns, &c.; a coast voyage),

the predicative by coastwise or

along, &C-+» the coast. Coastal

should

be abandoncd.

coa » court-. Coat- is

original form, but it has been

ousted

by the corruption court-, & is

marked

as obsolete in the OED.

cobalt. Pronounce kd’bawit.

(oie Eo a cobra de capello. Spell de, & pronounce dl. cocaine. The pronunciation koka’n, stigmatized by the OED (in 1893) as vulgar, is now 80 general that attempts to maintain k6’kain arc useless.

coccyx. Pronounce k3‘ksiks.

e is properly the name of a luxurious Utopia; the use of it for London as the home of Cockneys is a mistake or & pun.

cockle. The cc. of the heart is of some age (quoted from 1671) but of disputed origin; such phrases arc best not experimented with, but kept to their customary form & context (rejotce, warm, the cc. of the

heart).

cockneyfied. So spelt; see -FIED.

cock’s-comb, cockscomb, coxcomb.

The first for the comb of a cock, the

second for the fool’s cap & the

plants, & the third for the fop.

cocky, cocksy, COXy- The first is 38.

the form in general colloquial usc,

the last a schoolboy variant estab-

lished in particular schools, & the

second the fuller but less used

spelling for the third. is

coco(a), coker. Cacao & coco, inde-

ndent words, have corrupted each

other till the resulting cocoa is used

always for the drink & often for the

coco(a)-nut palm; coker(nut &c.) is

a shop spelling devised to obviate

the confusion. Coco-nut, coco fibre,

&c., are still used, though the -a

more often appears; they should be

kept in existence if possible, & cocoa

be restricted to the drink & the

powder from which it is made; the

uncrushed seeds & the plant are

still usually spelt cacao. &

. Pronounce ko-, not ko-.

The tendency to refer &, &, I, 0, to On,

i, é, 1, 5, in suc forms is secn in

gralify, pacify, ratify, edify, specify,

verify, vilify, vivify, modify; whether the

a similar list on the other side could

be made is vcry doubtful.

codex has pl. codices; see -EX; “1X.
