page: 83

+ reindeer, salmon, sheep, trout, (Many counsel were briefed; The grouse were shy; We saw no deer).

2. Words having a plural, but whose singular used in a collective sense, & treated as either singular or plural, is generally B beers to it, e.g. shot, cannon, (The shot scatters too much; Three shot were extracted from his head).

3. Words of number or amount that when used after definite or indefinite numerals have often or usually the singular instead of the plural form, e.g. brace, dozen, hundred, futhom, pound, hundredweight, (We shot 20 brace; Siz fathom deep; A few hundredweight of coal; Si pound of lard).

4. Names of an animal or vegetable that can have a@ & mean an individual, or be used in the singular without a & mean the things as food or as objects of sport, e.g. salmon, lamb, pig, grouse, potato, cabbage, (ient out sticking pig; Have some potato; Cabbage is a blood-purifier). 5. Words having no plural, but able, being nouns of multitude, to take either a singular or a plural verb, e.g. cattle (The c. is sold; The c. are in the hay). For the man blunders occasioned by these wo (The German Government acknowledge him as its official courier) scc PEBSONIFICATION.

The indiscriminate assumption of the name by schools that are no more colleges than others contented with the ordinary title is a sad d tion & obscuring of the word’s meaning. Mothers (not yet, perhaps, fathers) are now heard to speak of sending their boys to college when they mean merely to school; this at least should be resisted; it is too late to ask the self-styled ‘colleges’ to consider whether it is for their real dignity to use c. in the same way as our grandfathers are laughed at for using academy. See WORKING & STYLISH WORDS.

collocutor, colloquist, interlocutor, are rival candidates for a post that undoubtedly ought to be filled; we all need occasionally a single word to stand for the other speaker, the person who was talking to & being talked to by me, you, him, or her. None of the three is very satisfactory, but if two could be rejected the third would have a tter chance, & collocutor (k6‘lokiter seems the best.

collusion &c. 1. Pronounce -160- ; _ see LU. 2. The notion of fraud or underhandedness is essential to collusion, & the following is a mis- °° use:—The two authors, both professors at Innsbruck, appear to be — working inc. ; the supposed arrangement is merely that their periods shall not overlap; tn collaboration will therefore not do; if in conce7zt will not, the thing must be given at length.

COLON. See Srops.

colossal in the sense not of enormous (as in c. folly &c.), but of indescribably entertaining or dclightful or ridiculous, is a Germanism not deserving adoption; the similar use. of immense, though we do not name it honoris causd, is at least of native development.

colo(u)r. Keep the -u-; but see -our & -oR. For synonymy see TINT.

colour makes colourable, colourist, but coloration, decolorize; see -or & -OUR, -OR- & -OUR-, HYBRID DE- RIVATIVES.

come. For pronunciation in commandment &c., see COL-.

combat. Pronounce kii-. Part. & p.p. -ating, -ated; see -T-, -TT-.

combe. See cooms.

combinedly. Four syllabics if used; see -EDLY.

come. For c. tnto one’s life, see HACKNEYED PHRASES,

come-at-able, get-at-able. Write with the hyphens. C. was made as long ago as the 17th c., but, except
