page: 84

+ in g., the experiment has not been successfully repeated, & probably will not be.

comedian, tragedian, have, in the sense actor, the feminines comedienne, tragedienne, perhaps best pronounced komé’dié’‘n, trajée’dié‘n, & written without accents; see FRENCH PRO- NUNCIATION. It is unfortunate that c. & t. also mean writer, which leads to ambiguity; but the introduction of comedist & tragedist for the writers is a remedy worse than the disease; we cannot begin now to talk of the Greck comedists & tragedisis, for instance.

comedy, farce, burlesque. As species of drama, the three are distinguished in that comedy aims at entertaining by the fidelity with which it presents life as we all know it, farce at raising laughter by the outrageous absurdity of the situations or characters exhibited, & burlesque at tickling the vanicy of the audience by caricaturing plays or actors with whose style it is familiar.

comestibles. See WorRKING & STYLISH WORDS, & FORMAL WORDS.

comic(al). The broad distinction, sometimes obscured by being neglected, is that that is comic of whic the aim or ore is comedy, & that is comical of which the effect, whether intended or not, is comedy. A comic actor is merely one who acts comedy; a comical actor, one who makes the audience laugh. Comic hesitation is that in which the hesitator is playing the comedian; comical hesitation, that in which observers find comedy, whether the hesitator meant them to or was unconscious of them. Accordingly, coméc is the normal epithet (though comical may be used, in a different sense) with actor, opera, scene, relief, song, singer, history, paper; comical is normal (subject to the converse reserve) with face, effect, expression, deformity, earnestness, attempt, terror, hesitation, fiasco. There is some tendency (the attempt was comic in the extreme; The disaster had its

+ comic side) to use comic where comical is the right word. This may possibly be a sign that comical is on the way to become archaic & obsolete; but, the difference of meaning being fairly definite & of real use, this would be regrettable.

comity, from Latin cdmis courteous, means courtesy, & the c. of nations is the obligation recognized by civilized nations to respect each other’s laws & usages as far as their separate interests allow. It has nothing to do with Latin cdémes companion, & phrases based on this false derivation (obtain admittance to the c. of states; entered into the c. of nations; a useful member of the civilized c.), & implying the sense company, association, league, federation, &c., are wrong.

COMMA. See STops.

commando. Pl. -0s; see -0(E)s 6.

comme ilfaut. See FRENCH WORDs.

commemorate makes -rable; see -ABLE 1.

commence(ment). The writers who prefer ere & save to before & except may be expected to prefer c. to begin(ning) in all contexts. Begin is the word always thought & usually said, but it is translated sometimes before it is said, & often before it is written, into c., which is described by the OED as‘ precisely equivalent to the native begin’. It is a good rule never to do this translation except when begin or beginning is felt to be definitely incongruous; see WORKING & STYLISH WORDS. In Official announcements c. is appropriate; the play-bill tells us when the performance will c., though we ask each other when it begins. The grave historical style also justifies c., & historians’ phrases, such as c. hostilities, keep their form when transferred to other uses, though we begin, & do not c., a quarrel; similarly we c. operations, but merely begin dinner. As against the precise equivalence mentioned above, it should be observed that begin has, owing to its greater commonness,
