page: 86

haste greater than it is well to act

added. But What is right pays, or

in other words Honesty is the best

policy, is not a truism either in the

strict sense (since it makes a real

Statement & not a sham one) or in

the loose sense (since its truth is

truism in the loose sense is a

thing that, whether in point or not,

is so indisputably true that the

speaker is under no obligation to

prove it, & need not fear contra-

diction. This sense is a SLIPsHop

EXTENSION; the writer who de-

scribes his principle as a t. in order

to justify his drawing conclusions

from it would do better to call it an

axiom; & the critic who depreciateg

some one else’s Statcments ag #.,

not in the strict Sense, but meaning

merely that they are too familiar to

be of value, Should call them plati-

tudes or commonplaces.

common sense should be written

as two separate words except when it is use attributively, & should then be hyphened:—The philosophy of common sense; The common-sense philosophy; cf. bona Side.

communal. The OED gives komii’nal preference over k6’minal, but Recessive ACCENT is likely to prevail, & the latter is recommended, See Farse quantiry (on doctrinal),

commune. Both nouns (corporation &c. & converse &c.) are pronounced k6&’min. In the verb, komia‘n will probably prevail in the cnd (see Noun & VERB ACCENT), but k6‘miin is perhaps oftener heard at

with alone is possible. present. Communicate makes -cable; see

-UM. -ABLE |. communism. See socrauism for distinction,

communiqué. See Frency PRO-

NUNCIATION. Certain newspapers,

or writers, have taken lately to

printing the word with no accent,

Pe ely to be called kémine’ ;

is seems ill-advised, the literal

sense * communicated thing ’, & the

difference from words like critique &

hysique, being at present exhibited

y the accent & surely worth pre-

scrving.

companionable. For such forma-

tions see -aBLE 4,

comparative(ly). For q compara-

tively few, the comparative few, &c.,

see FEW.

COMPARATIVEs. For misuses, see

"ER & -EST, MONE, & THAN.

compare, in the sense 5 est or

state a similarity, is regularly follow

ed by t, not with; in the sense

examine or set forth the details of

@ supposed similarity or estimate its

degree, it is srgularly followed by

with, not to, € comparcd me to

Sthenes means that he sugcomparison or pointed out where & how far I] resembled or failed to

turer compared the British jield-gun with the Erench 3 The effect

tlion; Compared with, or to, him lama bungler (this is a common type in which either sense is applicable), After the intransitive verb (a boiled mullet cannot c. with a baked one), compass. For synonymy see FIELD, compendium. PI. “UMS, -A; see cOmpensate. 1. Formerly kom- ‘nsat, but now k6’mpensiat; see ECESSIVE ACCENT; compensatory
