page: 87

+ &c. will probably conform & accent the first before long, but usually accent the second still. 2. C. makes -sable; see -ABLE 1.

competence, -cy. Neither has any sense in which the other cannot be used; the first form is gaining on the second; & it would be well if competency could be abandoned as a NEEDLESS VARIANT; s€€ -CE, -CY.

complacence, -cy. There is no distinction that can be called established; the second form is the commoner, & is less liable to confusion with complaisance (see foll.); complacence might be dropped as a NEEDLESS VARIANT; se@ -CE, -CY.

com t, -ency, complaisant, -ance. 1. The two sets have clearly differentiated meanings, but are often confused (see below); _ it would help to obviate this confusion if the more easily distinguished & better established pronunciation of the second set (kémplizaé’nt, -d’ns, not kompla’znt, -i’zns) were made invariable, & if complacency were always preferred to -acence (see prec.).

2. He is complacent who is pleased with himself or his state, or with other rsons or things as they affect him; the word is loosely synonymous with contented. He is complaisant who is anxious to please by compliance, service, indulgence, or flattery; the word is loosely synonymous with obliging. The

wrong choice has been made in each

of these sentences:—He owed such fends as he Ege ssa to French com-

placency./He has nothing more to

expect from the complacency of the

authorities./The disp of the dia-

monds usually sto the tears, &

she would remain in a complaisant

state until...

Note, 1924. I wrote the above in

1913, fortified by the OED descrip-

tions (dated 1898) of complacent,

-acency, & -acent, in the senses

proper to complaisance, -aisant, as

respectively ‘ Obs.’, ‘ 2?0bs.’, & ‘ 20bs.”

It is a curious illustration of the

87 COMPOUND PREPOSITIONS

+ changing fashions in words that I have since collected a dozen newspaper examples of complac- words wrongly used for complais-, & none of the contrary mistake. It looks as if some journalists had forgotten the existence of complais- & the proper meaning of complac-.

complement. For the sense in

ammar, see TECHNICAL TERMs.

n the verb -ent is clearly sounded (-ént) if not given the N accent; in the noun it is neither accented nor clearly sounded (-ent); see Noun & VERB ACCENT.

complete, vb. See FORMAL worps.

complicacy, by the side of the established complexity, has no claim to. favour, & is perhaps due to mcre NOVELTY-HUNTING.

compliment. The pronunciation varies as with COMPLEMENT.

complin(e). ‘ The final ¢ is modern & unhistorical °—OED.

compo has pl. -os; see -0(E)s 5.

composedly. Four syllables; see -EDLY.

compost.

Pronounce -ést.

compound, n. & v.

See Noun & VERB ACCENT.

COMPOUND PREPOSITIONS, CON- JUNCTIONS, &c, <A_ selection of these is:—as to (as 3); for the purpose of; INASMUCH AS; in CON- NEXION 2 with; in favour of; in order that, to; in reference to; in relation to; IN SO FAR as, that; in so much that; IN THAT; in- the absence of; in the CASE of; in the INSTANCE of; in the matter of; in the NEIGHBOURHOOD of; in the region of; of the character of; of the nature of; with a VIEW to; with reference to; with REGARD to; with relati

on to; with respect to. And one or two specimens of their work are:—.4t least 500,000 houses are requircd, & the aggregate cost is in the region of £400,000,000./Sir Robert Peel used to tell an amusing story of one of these banquets, in the case of which he d: Canning were seated on df edead sides of Alderman Flower./If I have a complaint to proffer against Mr Bedford,
