page: 91

+ connotation or connotative meaning of father applies. Ugly denotes Socrates, Wilkes, the black country, cowardice, & all other things to which the connotation of ugly applies. The whole of taken jog MESS The monde dee notation or den Vv ing.

A word connotes all ars attotbutes common to the objects that it denotes (or is predicable of). Father connotes fatherhood or having be-

en, male sex, prior existence, & all other attributes common to the objects included in the denotation of father. Ugly connotes ugliness or violation of standards of beauty, igre effect on an observer, &c.

sum of the common attributes is the word’s connotation or connotative meaning.

2. A word denotes the contents of its barest adequate definition. Father denotes one that has begotten. Ugly denotes violating standards of beauty. The word’s denotation is this barest definition alone.

A word connotes all or any of the attributes that, without being denoted by it, are associated with it either as deducible from its denotation or as observed to be common to all normal specimens answering to its denotation. Father connotes male sex, prior existence, greater © experience, affection, guidance, &c. Ugly connotes repellent effect, immunity from dangers peculiar to beauty, disadvantage in the _marriage rket, &c. The (whole) of these &re‘the ‘scnaciation ane of i a part of the connotation, of

word.

conquer(or), conquest. Pronounce ko'ngker(er), ko ngkwést.

- Write for conscience’ sake; see SAKE.

us. Pronounce konslor kénshi- ; see -CIATION.

consecutive. For the sense in syntax see TECHNICAL TERMS.

consensus means unanimity, or unanimous body, of opinion or testi-

mony. The following, in which it is

+ confused with census, is nonsense: Who doubts that if a consensus were taken, in which the interrogated had the honesty to give a genuine reply, we should have an _ overwhelming majority?

consequential is a word sevcrely restricted in its application by modern idiom; it is unidiomatic in several of the senses that it might have or has formerly borne.

1. Where doubt can arise between it & consequent, the latter should always be used when the sense is the simple & common one of resulting, & -tal be reserved for that of required for consistency with something else. Thus In the consequent confusion he vanished, but The consequential amendments were passed. Consequential confusion is not English; the consequent amendments is, but means not (as with -ial) those necessitated by one previously accepted, but those that resulted from (e. g.) the opposition’s hostility or the discovery of a flaw. The right use is seen in A good many of these undiscussed changes were only conse-

uential alterations: but the follow- Ing sentence (in which consequent would be better, but either is possible) shows that the line is sometimes hard to draw:— Yet whilst he washes his hands of the methods of the Albert Hall, with its consequential campaign of resistance & its cry of ‘no servant tax’, he declares that the Bill must not be passed.

2. C. does not mean of consequence; ac. person may or may not be important; all we know is that he is self-important; Mr C. bustled about, feeling himself the most c. man in the town would not now be English.

8. C. does not now mean having great consequences. For so desperate & so c. a war as this there should be substituted a war so desperate & 30 pregnant with nces.

4. Ac. crime &c. is an act that was not criminal &c. in its own nature, but amounts to a crime &c. in virtue
