page: 92

of its consequences:—There tg

difference between direct contradiction

& merely c, tnconsistency,

moderate, safe, or low, with estimates,

figure, &c. :—8,000 killed is con.

43d. per ft, & with reasonable care

this should be a ¢. Jigure./The dis-

tributing side of the market takes a

more c. & certainly more hopeful view,

conservatoire, conservatory. The

French, German, & Italian musical

institutions are best called by their

native names—conservatoire, conser-

vatorium, conservatorio. Academ or

School of Music ig better than Con-

Servatory for corresponding English

institutions,

considerable, in the sense a good

of, is applied in British use onl

to immaterial things (I have &iven it c. altention). The use with material things is an Americanism; the following are from definitions in two American dictionaries:— Silk fabric

é Se: : ., | With -ateness, means thought for others, while -aieness means the characteristic of taking (or implying) such thought s BSCE -ION & -NESS. It is therefore sometimes indifferent

K8’nsort, the verb konsor’t; sec -ateness or “ation; Thanks for your

Noun & vERB ACCENT, -aleness or alton). But more often one is preferable:—His -ateness 4s beyond all Praise; I was treated with

+ a

~ation; He was struck by the -ateness

of the offer.

consist. C. of introduces a ma-

terial, & c.ina definition ora State-

ment of identity; we must not say,

the moon consisis in Sreen cheese (no-

One would), nor virtue consists of

being good (many do). ELEGANT

VARIATION betwecn the two is ab-

surd:—The external world consisted,

according to fe a in ideas; ac.

, ll at consists of

Sensations & permanent Possibilities

of sensation, Of is wrong in The most

exceptional feature of Dr Ward's

book undoubtedly consists of the re-

production of photographs.

consistence, -cy. See -CE, -cy. The

“cy form is now invariable in the

noun that means being consistent,

i.e. not inconsistent (-cy is an over-

rated virtue). In the noun meaning

degree of thickness in liquids usage

varies; A -ce Something like that of

treacle, & Mud Varying in -cy &

temperature, are both from Huxley;

it would be well if -ce could be made

the only form in this sense, as

in the other. .It is sometimes

doubtful now whether freedom from inconsistency is meant or meta- Phorical solidity; among the OED Would be one of the advantages of the limitation proposed above for

consistory. Accent the first syllable; see RECESSIVE ACCENT, consociation. Pronounce “SOsI- ; 8C€ -CIATION, consolatory Pronounce -s0l-, console, bracket, table, &c. Accent the first (kd‘ns6l), consols. Accent the last (kons6’Iz), consommé. See Frencg WORDs, consort. Pronounce the noun Conspectus. Pl. -uscs > See -US, Conspiculty, -ousness. See -ry &
