page: 93

conspicuous. For c. by absence see HACKNEYED PHRASES (Even in the ezamtnathion for the M.D., literary quality & finish is often c. by its absence).

constable. Pronounce kiin-.

eonstitution(al)ist. See -18T.

econstrainedly. Four syllables; see -EDLY.

construct, construe, translate, with reference to language. To translate is to reproduce the meaning of (a passage &c.) in another language, or sometimes in another & usually a more intelligible style. To construe is to exhibit the grammatical structure of (a passage &c.), either by translating closely (& so it is often tantamount to translate) or by analysis. A sense of construe formerly common, but now disappearing & better abandoned, is that in which construct is taking its place (Aim should not be constructed, or construed, with an infinitive). The right pronunciation of construe (for which conster was long the prevalent form) is kd’nstr6d; the konstroo’ now often heard by the side of the noun (k0O’nstroo) is no doubt due to the NoUN-&-VERB-ACCENT tendency.

constructive, in legal & quasi-legal use, is applied to an act that, while it does not answer to the statutory or formal definition of the offence &c. under which (qualified by c.) it is classed (c. treason, rebellion, blasphemy, obligation, &c.), is seen, when the true construction is put upon its motive or tendency, to amount to such an offence &c. (It was at most c. blasphemy). Cf. the analogous use of CONSEQUENTIAL.

consubstantiation. For pronunciation see -CIATION.

consuetude. Pronounce -swl-.

consumediy. Four syllables; see -EDLY. But the word is a BaTrERED ORNAMENT.

consummate. 1. Pronounce the adj. konsii’mit, the verb kd’/nsumat; sec PARTICIPLES 5A. 2. See -ATABLE.

consummation. For ac. devoutly to be wished see HAaCKNEYED PHRASES,

98

consumption, consumptive, should be kept alive, if possible, as better words for ordinary non-scientific use than tuberculosis & tuberculous.

contaminate makes

-nable; see -ABLE l.

contango. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 3.

contemn. Pronounce part. -éming, but agent-noun -émner.

contemplate &c. 1. Accents as in COMPENSATE &c. 2. See -aTABLE.

co(n)temporary, -oraneous, &c. The OED shows conclusively that con- is the only right spelling.

contemptible) (contemptuous. Mr Sherman, speaking in the Senate, called the President a demagogue whe contemptibly disregarded the Government, because President Wilson, speaking at Columbia yesterday, said an International Labour Conference would be held at Washington, whether the Treaty was ratified or not. Mr Sherman probably meant, & not improbably said, contemptuously. See Pairs & SNARES.

content, v. C. oneself with (not by) is the right form of the phrase that means not go beyond some course; the following are wrong:—We must c. ourselves for the moment by observing that from the juridical stand-point the question is a doubtful one./The petition contents itself by begging that the tsolation laws may be carried out.

content(ment). The two forms now mean practically the same, contentment having almost lost its verbal use (Lhe contentment of his wishes left him unhappy) & meaning, like content, contented state. Contentment is the usual word, content surviving chiefly in to heart’s content & as a poetic or rhetorical variant.

content(s), what is contained. The OED says ‘The stress conte’nt is historical, & still common among the educated’. The stress co’ntent is due partly to Noun & ADJECTIVE ACCENT & partly to the wish to differentiate from content = content- Ment. But contents is still almost always accented on the last, & thut
