page: 95

+ differentiation, preferable. If 0.f.c. is to stand first, it must be in such forms as Food was not abundant; o. ft. c., if was running short.

contrary, converse, opposite. These are sometimes confused, & occasionally precision is important. If we take the statement All men are mortal, its contrary is Not all men are mortal, its converse is All mortal beings are men, & its opposite is No men are mortal. The contrary, however, does not exclude the opposite, but includes it as its most extreme form. Thus This is white has only one opposite, This is black, but many contraries, as This is not white, This is coloured, This is dirty, This is black; & whether the last form is called the contrary, or more emphatically the opposite, is usually indifferent. But to apply the opposite to a mere contrary (c.g. to I did not hit him in relation to I hit him, which has no oppoete): or to the converse (c.g. to He hit me in relation to I hit him, to which it is neither contrary nor opposite), is a looseness that may easily result in misunderstanding; the temptation to go wrong is intelligible when it is

remembered that with certain types

of sentence (A exceeds B) the con-

verse & the opposite are identical

(B exceeds A).

contrast. 1. Pronounce the noun

ké’ntrast, the verb kontri’st; see

Noun & VERB ACCENT. 2. The

transitive use of the verb with one

of the contrasted things as subject,

in the sense be a c. to or set off by c.,

was formerly common, but in

modern writing is either an archaism

or a blunder; with should always

be inserted. The use meant is seen

in:—The sun-tinged hermit & the

pale elder c. each other. /Monks whose

dark garments contrasted the snow./

The smooth slopes are contrasted by

the aspect of the country on the

opposite bank.

control makes -iled, -llable, &c.;

see -LL-, -L-.

05

contumac(it)y. See LONG VARIANTS,

contumacy. Accent the first syllable; see RECESSIVE ACCENT.

contumely. The possible pronunciations, given here in order of merit, are no less than five:— k6’ntimll, ké’ntimé’lI, k6’ntimill, konta’mili, konta’mli. The wellknown line The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s c. does much to kill the last two, which are irreconcilable with it, & to encourage the first, which seems to those whose knowledge of mctre is limited to fit blank verse better than the second & third. The second is kept in being by contumelious. The OED gives only the third; but that has less chance than any other of surviving; a stressed syllable followed by three unstressed ones is ve unpopular except with professors & the like if there is an alternative handy, which is the reason wh despi'cable, hospi’table, &c., still maintain their ground even against the RECESSIVE ACCENT.

convenance, convenience. For mariage de c., & the convenances, see FRENCH worpbs. For marriage of convenience see GALLICISMS.

conversable. For such formations see -ABLE 4.

conversance, -cy. See -CE, -Cy.

conversation(al)ist. See -1sT.

conversazione. Pronounce -itsl6’n!I. Pl. -nes (-niz), -nit (-né); the first is better.

converse, talk &c. Pronounce the noun kd’nvers, the verb konver’s; see NOUN & VERB ACCENT.

converse(ly). 1. Pronounce the adj. k6’nvers, but the adv. konver’sll. 2. For the sense of the converse, see CONTRARY, CONVERSE,

convert. Pronounce. the

noun kO’nvert, the verb konver’t;

see Noun & VERB ACCENT.

convertible, -able. The first usually better; see -ABLE 2.

convey. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 2.

See FORMAL WORDS.

conveyance.

Pronounce the noun

convict.
