page: 97

coryphaeus. Spell -ae-; see £, a. Pl. -aei; see -uUS.

cosaque. See FRENCH WORDS.

cose, coze, cosy, Cozy. The established spelling for the adjective (a Scotch word of doubtful origin) is cosy. The verb (& noun) meaning sit (sitting) by the fire &c. is a BACK- FORMATION from this, & therefore best spelt cose. The verb (& noun) meaning gosstp or chat is referred to French causer talk, & the spelling coze, which is the usual one, is also desirable, since the senses of the two verbs are very liable to confusion, by way of distinction. The noun cosy Or cozy meaning a kind of seat is probably from the adjective, though helped to become a noun by the French causeuse. The spellings recommended, then, are:—cosy, comfortable, seat, teapot-warmer; cose, sit at ease, spell of sitting so; coze, chat (n. & v.).

cosset makes -eling, -eted; see T-, -TT-.

coster(monger). See CuRTAILED WORDS.

costume. The verb is késtii’m. This pronunciation is probably commoner, & is preferred by the OED, for the noun also; but k6’stim (see NOUN & VERB ACCENT) is often heard.

cosy, -zy. See COsE.

eot(e). The word for bed is or was Anglo-Indian, is unconnected with the other words, & is always col. The poetic word for cottage, & the word for shelter (usually seen in comaa as sheep-c.), represent allied

ut separate old-English words; col is now invariable in the sense

ce, & cote usual in the sense sheller; the latter, however, whether spelt cofe or cot, is usually pronounced két, especially in the commonest word dovecotc.

cotem - See CONTEMPORARY.

co-tenant. See co-.

cothurnus. Pl. -ni; sec -us. As a word for tragedy, c. is a BATTERED ORK AMENT.

co-tidal. See co-.

A351

cotill(ijon. Spell with the -i-.

cottar, cotter, cottier. The words are clearly distinguished from cottager by being applicable not to any one who lives in a cottage, but to peasants doing so under certain conditions of tenure. As compared with each other, however, there is no differentiation between them that is of value; it is merely that the -far, -ter, forms are more used of the Scotch variety, & -Her of the Irish. It would be well if cottar were madc the sole form, cotter left to the pin or bolt, & cottier abandoned.

cotyicdon. PI. -ns; see -on 3.

couch, bed, sofa, &c. As a general word for anything that is lain on, bed, lair, &c., the word is poetic only. As a mere synonym for ‘the ordinary word sofa in conversation, it is a GENTEELISM. As the name for a particular shape of sofa, it is a trade word.

couch, the weed. The OED prefers the pronunciation kowch, & describes kddch as that of the southern counties only.

couchant. Pronounce kow’chant.

could. For such forms as Could he see you now, see SUBJUNCTIVES.

couleur de rose, coulisses, couloir. See FRENCH WORDS.

coulomb. Pronounce k6616’m.

co(u)iter. Spell with -u-.

council, -sel, -cillor, -sellor. A board or assembly, & the mecting of such a body, has always -cil, & a member of it is -cillor. The abstract senses consultation, advice, secret (keep one’s c.), belong to -sel, & one who gives advice is, as such, a -sellor, though he may be a -cillor also; my -cillors are the members of my (e.g., the king’s) council; my counsellors, those who advise me officially or otherwise. Counsel, however, has also the semi-concretc sense of the person or persons (never counsels) pleading for a party to a law-suit (The second of our three counsel was the best); the use is originally abstract, as when All the wealth & fashion stands for all the
