page: 98

COUNTENANCE rich &c. Peoples or as though advice

were said for adviser(s).

countenance, face,

features.

without special significance.

counterpart means thing exactly

similar to, not o posite to or con-

trasted with, another; the following

is nonsense: All this is utterly false,

the truth is its very counterpart.

country dance. The form contre-

dance or -se (i.e. counter-dance) is

wrong; the words mean native

dance or dance of our country.

countryfied, -ified. The first is

recommended; see -FIED,

coup. Pronounce k6d; pl. coups,

pron. k06z. For c. d'état, de Zrdce,

de main, de theatre, @ ail, see FRENCH

WORDS,

couple. See CoLLectives 8.

couplet. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

coupon. Pronounce k60’pin; see FRENCH WORDS.

course. Of c., as the herald of an out-of-the-way fact that one has just unearthed from a book of pect is a sad eee to journalists:—From this marriage came Charles James Foz; his Sather was, 0. C., created Baron Holland in 1768./Milton o. c. had the idea of his line from slay la 48, 0. C., a son of the famous E. A. Sothern, of ‘ Lord

undreary’ fame./The House being zn Committee, the Speaker would not, 0.c., under ordinary circumstances, have been present./Much speculation - + - a8 lo the precise degree of pageant which will altend Sir edward: Grey’s admission; the full pageant, o. Cc., is that which is associated with a Chapter of the Order. court-card is now the established form; see COAT-CARD. court martial. Write as two words for the noun, & hyphen only for the physiognomy, visage. Face is the proper name for the part; countenance is the face with reference to its expression; physiognomy, to the cast or type of isage is now a LITERARY worpD, used: ornamentally for face

COXSWAIN

verb; see HYPHENS, group *Court

Martial. Pl. courts martial.

courteous, courtesy, are variously

ronounced ker-, kor-, & koor-; the

Brst is recommended.

courtesan, -Zan.

Spell -san, &

pronounce kortiza’n.

courtier. Pronounce kor-.

colte que cofite. See FRENCH

WORDS,

peoveney: The OED prefers ké- to

ti-.

coverlet, -lid. Both forms are old;

the first is better, the ending almost

certainly representi French lit

bed, & not English lide

covert, n. The -t is now so seldom

sounded, & is so often omitted even

in writing, that what distinction

remains between covert & cover may

be said to be valueless. The only

sense in which covert, otherwise a

NEEDLESS VARIANT, is worth preserving is the ornithological one (wing-coverts &c.), in which the -t ig invariable.

covetous is often, even when read in church, mispronounced -chus on the supposed analogy of righteous, & sometimes mis-spelt -teous. ,

coward(ly). The identification of coward & bully has gone so far in the popular consciousness that persons & acts in which no trace of fear ig to be found are often called coward(ly) merely because advantage has been taken of superior strength or position; such action may be unchivalrous, unsportsmanlike, mean, tyrannical, & many other bad things, but not cowardly; cf. the similar misuse of DASTARDLY, cowl-like. For the hyphen see “LIKE. cowrile, -y. Spell -ie, cowslip. The true division is cow & slip, not cow's & lip; & the usual pronunciation with s, not Zz, is accordingly right. coOxcomb, cocks-. See COCKSCOMB, coxswain. Pronounce kd’ksn.
