page: 99

coxy. See cocky.

coyote. Pronounce koyd’tl.

COZe, COZY. COSE.

crabbed. See -ER & -EsT, 4.

cramp, as an adjective meaning crabbed or hard to understand (c. words, terms, style), narrow (a c. corner), niggling (writes a c. hand), has now had its senses divided between crabbed & cramped, & the use of it is an affectation.

eran(e)age. Spell without -e- ; see MUTE E.

eranesbill, crane’s-bill. The apostrophe & hyphen are better dispensed with in established words of this type; cf. COCKSCOMB.

cranium. PI. -ia, -ms; nies lish word, Phe second shop French

crasis. See TECHNICAL TERMS, PI. erases (kra’séz).

crayfish, craw-. The first is the British form, the second *‘ now used chiefly in U.S.’ (OED).

crayon. Pronounce kra’on, & not as French.

create. See -aTABLE.

eréche. See FRENCH WORDS.

credence, credit. Apart from the isolated phrase letter of credence & the concrete ecclesiastical sense table or shelf, credence has only one meaning—belief or trustful acceptance; the use seen in Two results stand out clearly from this investigation ...; neither of these gives any credence to the assertions of Lord Ri that Protectionist countries had fared better than Great Britain is a mere blunder; gwe credence to means believe, simply; support or credibility is the word wanted. Credit, on the other hand, is rich in meanings, & it is a pity that it should be allowed to deprive credence of its ewe-lamb; credence would be better in Charges like these seem to deserve some degree of credit, & in To give entire credit to whatever he shall state. Even give credit (to) has senses of its own (J give him credit for knowing better than that; No credit given on small orders), which are all the better

+ for not being confused with the only sense of give credence to (One can give no credence to his word).

credo. Pl. -08; see -0(E)s 6.

creese, crease, kris, Malay dagger. The first spelling is recommended as neither too outlandish (& see Dipac- TICISM) nor liable to confusion.

cremate. See -ATABLE.

cremona. See CROMORNE.

crenel(le), crenellated. Spell crenel & pronounce kré’nl. Crenellated has -ll- ; see -LL-, -L-.

creole. See MULATTO 8.

crépe, crépon. See FRENCH worDs.

crescendo. Pronounce krésh-. PI. -08, see -O(E)s 8.

cretic. See TECHNICAL TERMS,

cretin. Pronounce kré’tin.

crétonne. Pronounce kré‘tén.

crick, rick, wrick, whether identical in origin or not, are so in sense; the third spelling is recommended; cf. wrinkle & crinkle, wrack & rack.

cringe makes -ging; see MUTE E.

crisis. Pl. crises (kri’séz).

criterion. Pl. -ia; see-onN 1. For synonymy see SIGN.

critique is in less common use than it was, &, with review, criticism, & notice, ready at need, there is some hope of its dying out.

crochet, croquet, make -eling, -eted, prone kr6d‘shiing, krd’kiing,

‘shid, krd’kid.

Croesus. Spell so; see #, &.

cromorne, krummhorn, cremona. Either the first or the second should be used, the second being the original (German), the first the French pronunciation of the second, & the third a misleading confusion with Cremona (violin &c.).

crooked. See -Er & -rsT, 2. A stick that is not straight is a kroo’kid stick; one provided with a crook is a krookt stick.

et. For -ed, -ing, see CROCHET.

,»-zier. The OED prefers -s-.

croup(e). The throat trouble is always croup. The rump varies, but.
