page: 100

+ the -e, due to the French original, might well be insisted on.

croupler. Pronounce kr6o’pler.

crow. The past is now usually crowed (They crowed over us; The baby crowed loudly; Three cocks crowed, or crew, at the same moment); crew is used always in the cock crew when there is reference to the N.T. passage, & alternatively with crowed when cock is the subject in other connexions.

crown. The C. is often used as a phrase for the king or queen regarded not as a person, but as a part of the constitution. It does not follow that pronouns appropriate to king can be used after it, as in these absurdities:—The incontestable fact that the C. nowadays acts, & can only act, on the advice of his pealshar aot eas people of this country are little likely to wish to substitute for this {rule by Cabinet] rule by the C., for whom the experiment would be most fraught with peril.

crucify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -lE &¢., 6.

cruel makes -ller, -llest.

crumby,-my. Whcere the reference is to actual crumb(s), as in ac. loaf or tablecloth, use -by; in the secondary senses fat, comfortable, rich, &c., use -my. The right spelling for noun & adjective would be crum(my), b pone cue to false ANALOGY merely; but, failing a general reform of spelling, usage is fixed.

cruse, jar. The OED prefers kroos to krd6z.

cryptic. For this as compared with mysterious, obscure, hidden, & other synonyms, see WORKING & STYLISH WORDS.

crystalline. In ordinary use, pronounce kri’stalin, see RECESSIVE ACCENT; but in poetic & rhetorical use krista‘lin is common, cf. wind.

cubic(al). Cubic is the form in all senses except that of shaped like a cube. So -ic measure, contents, foot, equation; but a -ical box or

Cubic, however, is used of stone. minerals crystallizing in cubes, as -ic alum, saltpetre. See -1c(AL).

cuckold. Pronounce ki’kid.

cudgel makes -iled, -lling; see eLL-, -L-.

cue, queue. Both are pronounced ka. In billiards, & in the theatrical use (with the transferred applications, as in take one’s c. from), cue is invariable. In the sense string of people &c. waiting their turn, quewe is invariable. In the sense pigtail, queue, which is usual, is recome mended.

cul bono? As generally used, i.e. as a pretentious substitute for To what end? or What is the good?, the phrase is at once a BATTERED ORNA- MENT & a blunder. The words mean To whom was it for a good?, i.c. Who profited by it or had something to make out of it?, i.e. If you want to know who brought it about ask yourself whose interest it was that it should happen. Those who do not want it in this sense should leave it alone. The following is an amusing attempt to press the correct translation of the Latin into the service of the ordinary pointless usc:—We have had repeated occasion of late to press the question ‘Cui bono?’ in relation to the proposal to force the Government to a creation of peers. We must ask it again, tin reference to the scandal of yesterday. What is the good of ut? Who stands to gain? See MISAPPREHENSIONS.

cuirass(fer). Pronounce kwira’s, kwiraser’ or kifascr’.

cuisine, cul-de-sac. See FRENCH WORDS.

culinary. Pronounce ki‘linars. The word is a favourite with the PoLy- SYLLABIC-HUMOURist, who often pronounces it kil-.

cullender. See COLANDER.

cult, as now used, dates only from the middle of last century; its proper place is in books on archaeology, comparative religion, & the like; that it should be ousting
