page: 102

+ archaic & affected for curtsy; curtsy n. & v. (curtsied, curtsying) is better than curtsey, which involves curtseyed; see VERBS IN -IE &c., 2, 6.

curule. Pronounce kir’6dl.

curvet. Pronounce kervé’t in noun & verb, & spell the verb parts -ted, -tting, see -T-, -TT-.

at. Pronounce ki’shat.

customs. For synonymy see TAX.

cuticle. See PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

See CHOP.

cycle. For the noun & verb as an abbreviation for ‘bicycle or tricycle ’, see CURTAILED worpDs. For c. as a time-word, see TIME.

cyclone. See wInp, n.

cyclopaedia, -dic. For -pae-, -px-, -pe-, see &, @&. The longer forms encyclo- are in themselves better, & encyclopaedia, being common in titles, is also the prevalent form; but cyclopaedic is becoming the more usual form for the adjective; cf. accumulate & cumulative.

cyclopean, -pian. The first (siklopé’an) is more usual than the second (sikl6’plan); but neither is wrong.

cyclop(s). The forms recommended arc: for the singular cyclops; & for the plural the classical cyclopes (sikl]0’péz) except in jocular or familiar use, for which the English formation cyclopses is suitable. The sing. cyclop with pl. cyclops results in confusion.

cymbalo. Pl. -0s; see -O(E)s 6.

cymbocephalic, -ous. €e -CE- * Cymri P ki

c. Pronounce kI-.

cynic(al). As an adjcctive, cynic is used only in the sense of the ancient: philosophers called Cynics (except in the technical terms cynic year, cynic spasm), & the word that describes temperament &c. is cynical; see -IC(AL).

cypher. See CIPHER.

Czar. See Tsar.

Czarewitch. See CESAREWITCH.

Czech, =k. Spell Czech, & pronounce chék.

102

dactyl. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

dado. PI. -0es; see -Q(E)s 1.

daedal, dse-. x, &.

daemon, dse- Write dae-; sec #, am. This spelling, instead of demon, is used to distinguish the Greekmythology senses of supernatural being, indwelling ol pe &c., from the modern sense of devil.

daguerreotype. The OED pronounces -géro-.

ronounce da’lya.

dais. Pronounce das; ‘always a monosyllable in Fr., & in Eng. where retained as a living word; the disyllabic pronunciation is a ‘‘ shot ” ae word from the spelling ’"—

damnable. See -eEr & -EST, 4

damning, in the sense cursing, is pronounced without the n; in the sense fatally conclusive it usually has the n sounded.

damp(en). See -EN VERBS.

damsel. See ARCHAISM.

danceress. FEMININE DE- SIGNATIONS.

dandiacal, dandyfied. The amuscment provided by incorrect formations like dandiacal (as though there were a dandiac corresponding to maniac &c.) is evanescent, & the words should be allowed to vanish with it, especially when an alternative word exists, as here. For spelling of dandyfied see -FIED. ,

dandruff, -iff. The OED places the -uff form first.

- l. Dare & dares. 2. Durst. 8. Dare say. 1. Dare as 8rd pers. sing. pres. indic. is the idiomatic form instead of dares when the infinitive depending on it either has no to or is understood; this occurs chiefly, but not only, in interrogative & negative sentences. Thus dares, though sometimes used in mistaken striving after correctness, would be contrary to idiom in Dare he do it?; He e not /—\es, he
