page: 103

+ dare; He dare do anything; No-one dare oppose him.

2. Durst, which is a past indicative & past subjunctive beside dared, is obsolescent, & nowhere now required, like dare above, by idiom; the contexts in which it is still sometimes preferred to dared are negative sentences & conditional auses where there is an infinitive either understood or having no to (But none durst, or dared to, or dared, answer him; I would do it if I durst, or dared).

3. Dare say as a specialized phrase with the weakened sense incline to think, not deny, admit as likely (cf. the unweakened sense in I dare sa what I think, Who dare say it?, He dared to say he, or that he, would not do it) has certain peculiarities: (a) even when not parenthetic (You, Id. 8., think otherwise), it is never followed by the conjunction that (I d. s. tt, not that it, is a mere lie); (b) it is never dare to say in direct speech, & the fo is rare & better avoided in indirect s h also (Te dared say the difficulty would disappear; I told him I dared say he would change his mind; He dares say tf does not matter); (c) to avoid ambiguity, it is sometimes written as one word (I dare say she is innocent, I am sure of it; I daresay she is innocent, I can believe it); but this device is useless as long as it is not universally accepted, & it cannot be applied to the indirect dares &

; it is simpler to avoid I dare say in the unspecialized sense wherever it can be ambiguous.

dark(e)y. See -EY, -1E, -y.

darkle. Being a recent formation (19th cent.) based on a mistake (see foll.), & not having, like the analogous » won any real currency, the verb has little to recommend it, & should be let die; its only use is ornamental, & as an ornament it is pinchbeck. See BacCkK-FORMATION.

darkling is an adverb formed with the now forgotten adverbial ter-

103

DATE mination .-ding, & means in the dark (Our lamps go out & leave us d.:

Phe wakeful bird sings d.); by a natural extension it is also used as an attributive adjective (Like d. nightingales they sit; They hurried on their d. journey). But having nothing to do with the participial -ing it does not mean growing dark &c. ; from the mistaken notion that it is a participle spring both the misuses of the word itself & the spurious verb DARKLE.

darling. See -ER & -EsT, 4.

dartle is too new to deserve respect, & too old, being still rare, to have prospects; it should be let die.

DASH. For double dashes as a form of parenthesis, see Srops.

dashing. See -Er & -EsrT, 4.

dastard(ly). The essential & original meaning of the words is the same as that of coward(ly), so far at least that both pairs properly connote want of courage; but so strong is the false belief that every bully must be a coward that acts requiring great courage are constantly described as cowardly or dastardly if they are so carried out as not to give the victim & sporting chance; the throwing of a bomb at a king’s carriage is much less dastardly than shooting a partridge, because the thrower takes a very real risk; but even when he recklessly exposes himself to being torn to pieces, the absurd headline * Dastardly Outrage’ is inevitable. The true meaning is seenin ‘A lag-

rd in love & a dastard in war’.

he words should at least be reserved for those who do avoid all personal risk.

data is plural only (The d. are, not is, insufficient./What are the d.?/We have no d.); the singular, comparatively rare, is datum; one of the data is commoner than a@ datum; but datum-line, line taken as a basis, is common. My Intelligence Department has furnished me with so much valuable illustrates the mistake of taking the plural for a singular. date. For d., epoch, &c., see TIME.
