page: 104

dat(e)able. Spell -ia-; see MUTE E.

datival(ly), dative(ly). See aBLA- TIVE.

daughter. For d. of joy see GAL- LICISMS.

daughter-in-law formerly included step-daughter; now, my d.-in-law has become my daughter by her marriage, & my step-d. has done so by my marriage, & the two are confused only in ignorance.

davits. The OED prefers di- to da-.

-D-,-DD-. Monosyllables ending in d double it before suffixes beginning with vowels if the sound preceding it is a single vowel (a, e, i, 0, u, or y), but not if it is a diphthong or a doubled vowel or a vowel & r: caddish, redden, bidding, trodden, tubby; but deaden, breeder, goodish, plaided, lardy. Words of more than one syllable follow the rule for monosyllables if their last syllable is accented or is itself a word in combination (forbidding, bedridden), but otherwise do not double the d (nomadic, nakedest, rigidity, periodical).

dead letter, apart from its theological & post-office uses, is a phrase for a regulation that has still a nominal existence, but is no longer observed or enforced; the application of it to what was never a regulation but has gone or is going out of use, as quill ns, horse-traction, amateur football, &c., or to a regulation that loses its force only by actual abolition (the one-sex franchise will soon be a d. l.), is a SLipsHOD EXTENSION.

deal, n. 1. The use of a d. instead of a great or good d., though as old as Richardson & Johnson (the Shaksperian what a deal! can hardly be adduced), has still only the status of a colloquialism, & should be avoided in writing even when the phrase stands as a noun (saved him a d. of trouble), & still more when it is adverbial (this was a d. better). 2. A d. in the sense of a piece of bargaining or give-&-take is still slang.

104

dean, doyen. The FRENCH worD doyen, a bad stumbling-block to the mere English-speaker, & the unfamiliar GALLICISM dean, are equally objectionable; as there is nothing complicated about the idea to be expressed, senzor, with the assistance if necessary of whatever noun may be appropriate, should be made to do the work.

dearie, ~y. See -EY, -IE, -y.

dear(ly), advv. With the verb love, dearly is now the a, bers form, & dear merely poetic; but with buy, sell, pay, cost, &c., dear is still idiomatic, & the tendency born of mistaken grammatical zeal to attach an UNIDIOMATIC -Ly should be resisted.

dearth. I think it of interest to point out what a singular d. of information exists on several important points; for this favourite journalistic device see PERIPHRASIS; rcad how litile we know.

débacle. See FRENCH WORDS.

debark(ation) are NEEDLESS VARI- ANTS for the better established disemb-.

debat(e)able. Spell -ia-; see MuTE E

debauchee. Pronounce déboshé’.

debouch(ment). Pronounce dIbddsh-.

debris, dé-. Write without accent, & pronounce dé’bré.

debut, débutante). Début can only be pronounced as French, & should not be used by any one who shrinks from the necessary effort. There is no reason why debutant should not be written without accent, pronounced dé’bitant, & treated like applicant &c. as of common gender. See FRENCH WORDS.

deca-, deci-. In the metric system, deca- means multiplied, & decidivided, by ten; decametre, 10 m., decimetre, 35 m.; so with gramme, litre, &c.

decad(e). The -e is now usual. Pronounce dé’kad.

decapitate makes decapitable; see -ABLE I.
