page: 108

+ dreams that he is married, his marriage is an i.; if he marries in the belief that marriage must bring happiness, he may find that marriage isad. A mirage, or the taking of it for a lake, is a d.; the lake is ani. What a conjuror actually does—his real action—is a d.; what he seems to do is ani.; the belief that he does what he seems to do is ad. The world as I conceive it may for all I know be ani.; &, if so, the world as it exists is a d.

demagogic &c. For pronunciation see GREEK G.

demean. Thcre are two verbs. One, which is always reflexive, means to conduct oneself or behave, & is connected with demeanour & derived from old French demener (He demeans himself like a king). The other, which is usually but not always reflexive (J wo not d, myself to speak to him; A chair which it would not d. his dignity to fill), means to lower or debase. This seems to be the product of a confusion between the first verb & the adjective mean, &, though it is occasionally found as a normal word in good authors, it is commonest on the lips of the uncducated or in imitations of them, & is best avoided except in such contexts.

démenti. See Frencw worps.

demesne. 1. ‘ The prevailing pronunciation in the dictionaries in the modern poets is dimé’n, but dimé‘n is also in good legal & general use, & is historically prefcrable.’-— OED.

2 Demesne, domain. The two words are by origin the same, but in technical use there are several distinctions between them that cannot be set forth here. In the wide general sense of sphere, region, province, the established form is domain, & the usc of demesne is due to NOVELTY-HUNTING,

demi-monde, demf-mondaine. Scc FRENCH WORDS,

demise, not -ize; see -18E)(-1ZE.

108 DEPENDABLE

cf

demonetize. For -mén- or -minsee PRONUNCIATION, |

demoniac(a]). The adjectives are not clearly differentiated; but there is a tendency to regard -acal as the adjective of demon, so that it is the form chosen when wickedness is implied, & -ac as the adjective of the noun demoniac, so that it is chosen to convey the notion of the intensity of action produced by possession (demontacal crueliy, demoniac energy). Pron, -d’niak, -i’akl.

de’‘monstrate, de’monstrator, demo’nstrable, demo’nstrative. 1. The accents are those shown. 2. For demonstrable see -ABLE }.

demur. In_ pronunciation § the nouns are always demurrer, demi’ ;rage, but the participle is either demur’ring or demit'rring; see Pro- NUNCIATION S.f.

dengue. Pronounce dé‘nggi.

denier. Pronounce dinér’,

Denmark. For ‘something rotten in the state of D.’ see IRRELEVANT ALLUSION.

denote. See conNnore.

dénouement. See FreNcH worps, & TECHNICAL TERMS.

de nouveau. See FRENCH WOoRDs.

dental. For the phonetic sense, see TECHNICAL TERMS.

dentifrice is a shop word, occasionally heard also as a GENTEELISM.

denunciation. Pronounce -sia-, & see -CIATION. .

deny. For inflexions see VERzS 1N -IE &c., 6. ers

departed. For the d., the dear d., &c., see STOCK PATHOS.

department. For synonymy see FIELD.

depend. The egg? construction illustrated below, in which té depends is followed by an indirect question without upon, is growing common, but is indefensible:—‘ Critics ought to be artists who have failed’. Ought they? It all depends who ts going to read the criticism, & what he expects to learn from it.

dependable. For such formations
