page: 116

diplomat(ist).

English -matl, the

diptych.

Pronounce -Ik,

direct(ly).

direct, not dtrectl is

MATIC -LY. 2. The conjunctional use of directly (I came d. I knew) is quite defensible,

but is chiefly colloquial. directress, -trix. See FEMININE DESIGNATIONS. As fem. of director, -tress is better, cf. DICTATRESS; but -triz has a use in geometry (pl.

-trices, see -TRIX). direful is a NEEDLESS VARIANT for dire in sense, & in formation is based

on a false analogy (dreadful).

dirigible, -geable.

Bee -ABLE 2, dirty, vb. For inflexions see Verns

IN -IE &c., 6.

disc. See pisx.

discernable, -ible. The first is better; See -ABLE 2,

discip e The pronunciation distpli’nari is recommended in prefe- ‘rence to dl’siplinar!, which is suited only for academie articulation; cf, CONTUMELY.

discobolus. Pl. -li: sec -us.

discolo(u)ration. See Hysrip pE- RIVATIVES,

discomfit. There is a tendency to use this in too weak or indefinite a sense (Bell, conscious of past backslidings, seemed rather discomfited). It is perhaps mistaken sometimes for the verb belonging to the noun discomfort. It has nothing to do with that, & means overwhelm or ‘utterly defeat.

discomposedly. Five syllables; see -EDLY, disconnexion, -ction. Spell -zion; ‘SCC -XION, discontent, For ‘ the winter of our d.’ see IRRELEVANT ALLUSION, The longer English formation is preferable to the un- pronunciation of which, though in fact simple (di’- ‘plom&t), seems doubtful to those who are not familiar with the word. 1. The right adverb in some contexts (e.g. You should go d. ‘to Paris, to the fountain-head) is see UNIDI0- Write -gible;

116 DISK

discord, discount, discourse. Accent

the nouns on the first, the verbs on

the second syllables; see Noun &

VERB ACCENT.

discrete (separate, abstract, &c.)

should be accented di’skrét, not

diskré’t; the first is both natural in

English accentuation (cf. the op-

posed adj. concrete), & useful as

distinguishing the word from the

familiar discreet.

discriminate, v., makes qpole; see

-ABLE 1,

discuss, used with wine, food, &c.,

as object, may be classed with

Worn-ouT HUMOUR.

discussable, -ible. The first is re-

commended; see -aBLe 2,

disenthral(l), -alment. See En-

THRALL, & -LL-, -L-, 3,

disfranchise, not -ize; see -ISE)(-IZE.

disgraceful. See Positive worps.

disgruntle(d). ‘Now chiefly U.S.’

(OED); resort to words of this kind

amounts usually to an admission that one’s matter is dull & needs enlivening.

disguise, not -ize; see -ISE)(-1ZE.

disguisedly. Four syllables 3; see “EDLY.

disgustful was formerly common in the sense disgusting, but has now been so far displaced by that word as to be a NEEDLESS VARIANT in that sense. In the sense inspired by disgust (a d. curiosity) it is unobjectionable.

dishabille. Pronounce di’sabé'l.

disillusion(ize). It is a pity that there should be two forms of the verb. The first is recommended; aisbud, discredit, discrown, disfigure, dismast, give sufficient support for the use of dis- before a noun in the sense deprive or rid of; -ize is the refuge of the destitute & should be resorted to only in real destitution: & the verbal noun is undoubtedly disillusionment. disinterested &c.

For the accent see INTEREST. disjunctive. See TecunicaL TERMS. disk, disc. ‘The earlier & better spelling is disk ’ (OED).
