page: 117

dislocate. See -ATABLE.

dislodg(e)ment. Keep the -e-; see JUDGEMENT.

dismal For ‘the d. science’ see SospriquEts. For comparison, see -ER & -EST, 4.

dismission, the predecessor of dismissail, has been completely dis-

by it, & must now be regarded as a NEEDLESS VARIANT.

dispatch, des-. The OED gives good se Ye for preferring dis-. See also Fo WORDS.

means to drive away in different directions, & must have for object a word to which that sense is applicable (darkness, fear, cloud, suspicions), & not, as in the following sentence, a single indivisible thing:— Lord Carrington effectually dispelled yesterday the suggestion that he resigned the gi decade | because he feared . . . He might dispel the suspicion, or repel the suggestion, suspicion being comparable to a cloud, but suggestion to a missile.

le. For the sense that can be dispensed with, sec -ABLE 4,

- Four syllables; see -EDLY.

dispiteous. See Revivals.

displeasedly. A bad form; see -EDLY.

Stace: For the sense that can be di of, Bee -ABLE 4.

disposal, disposition. In some contexts there is no choice (J/ts -ttion is merciful; The -al of the empty boitles is a di 'y); in some either word may indifferently (The money is at r -al or -ition); & in some the choice depends upon the sense required (The -ilion of the troops is the way they arc stationed for action &c., & is general’s work; The -al of the troops 1s the way bene are lodged &c. when not being used, & is quartcrmaster’s work). When doubt arises, it is worth while to remember that -ition corresponds to dispose, & -al to 7 e of. So The -ition of the books is excellent (they are excellently disposed, i.e. arranged), but Zhe -al of the books 117

+ was soon managed (they were soon disposed of, i.e. either sold or got out of the way); The -ilion of the body is stiff (it is stiffly disposed, i.e. arabe), but The -al of the body proved impossible (it could not be disposed of, i.e. destroyed or concealed), The testamentary -ition of property, i.e. the way it is disposed or arranged by will, & The testamentary -al of property, i.e. the way it is disposed of or transferred by will, describing the same act from different points of view, are naturally used without much discrimination. The same is true of at one’s -al or -ition; but in this formula -al is now much commoner, just as You may dispose of the money as you please is now commoner than You may dispose it.

disproved, -en. The first is recommended; see PROVE.

disputable. Accent di’spitabl, not dispii’tabl; see RECESSIVE ACCENT.

dissatisfiedly. A bad form; see -EDLY.

disseise, -ze, disselsin, -zin. Spell “se, -8in; See SEIZE.

ble, dissimulate. There is no clear line of distinction between the two. Dissemble is the word in ordinary use, & the other might have

rished as a NEEDLESS VARIANT,

ut has perhaps been kept in being because it is, unlike dissemble, provided with a noun (dissimulation), & a contrasted verb (simulate), & is more convenient for use in connexion with these. disseminate makes -nable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

dissimilation. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

dissimulate, dissipate, dissociate, make -lable, -pable, -ciable; see -ABLE I.

dissociation. See -cIATION.

Pro-

dissoluble, dissoivable. 1. nounce dI’solcobl, dizd‘lvabl.

2. Dissoluble is the established word, & may be used in all senses; but dissolvable often represents dissolve when it means make a solution
