page: 118

DISSOLUTE of in liquid (sugar is -vable or -uble

in water), & sometimes in other senses (a Chamber -uble or -vable at the Minister's will); see -aBLE 2.

dissolute, -ution. For pronunciation see LU.

dissolve. Pronounce dizO‘lv.

di(s)syllable. Omit one 8; see DISYLLABLE,

distendable, -dible, -sible. The first is recommended; see -ABLE 2,

distich. Pronounce -ik; for meaning see -STICH.

distil(l). The modern form is -il; BCE -LL-, -L-.

distinction, as a LITERARY CRITICS’ WORD, is, like charm, one of those on which they fall back when they wish to convey that a style is meritorious, but have not time to make up their minds upon the precise nature of its merit. They might perhaps defend it as an elusive name for an elusive thing; but it is rather an ambiguous name for any of several things, & it is often doubtful whether it is the noun ee distinctive (markedly ir laa istinguished (nobly epee istingué (noticeably wellbred), or even distinct (conciscly lucid). A few quotations follow; but the vagueness of the word cannot be brought out without longer extracts than are admissible, & the reader of reviews must be left to observe for himself:—His character cd that of his wife are sketched with a certain d./She avoids any commonplace method of narration, but if she achieves a certain d. of treatment in the process, she detracts enormously from the interest of her story./The book is written with a d. (save in the matter of split infinitives) unusual in such works./Not only is distinctness from others not in itself d., but distinctness from others may often be the very opposite of d., indeed a kind of vulgarity./Despite its length, an inclination to excessive generalization, & an occasional lack of stylistic d. verging upon obscurity, this book is a remarkable piece of literary criticism. distinctive means serving or used fo |

118

DIVERS(E) discriminate, characteristic, so called by way of distinction. But it is often

misused (cf. DEFINITIVE, ALTEBNA- TIVE) for distinct (The refugees at length ceased to exist as a d. people./ Distinctively able & valuable. On the other hand distinctively would have been the appropriate word in The Swiss name of Edelweiss will be given to the village, the houses having the high-pitched roofs & other features of distinctly Swiss architecture); sometimes for distinguished (During a long public life he served the interests of his class well in many d. Aatcaniee §

Ir Klitguard, Mr Richard Blondel, Miss Jean Sterling Mackinlay, ... & anumobcr of other d. people).

distinctly, in the sense really quite, is the badge of the superior person indulgently recognizing unexpected merit in something that we are to understand is not quite worthy of his notice:—The effect as the procession careers through the strects of Berlin ts described as d. interesting./ Quite yk from its instructive endeavours, the volume is d. absorbing in tts dealing with the romance of banking.

distingué. See FRENcI! worps.

distrait, -te. See Frenco worps. Use -ait of males (-d), -aite of females (-at); of things (expression, air, mood, answer, &c.), -ait always.

distributive (in grammar). See TECHNICAL TERMS,

disyliable, diss-. The first is better; the double s is due to French, in which it served the purpose of preserving the hard sound (s, not z); in English the prefix is di-, not dis-.

ditto. Pl. -os; see -o(r)s 3.

diurnal should not now be used in the sense of daily, i.e. recurring every day, though that was formerly one of its possible meanings; in modern use, (1) when opposed to nocturnal it means by day, (2) when opposed to annual &c. it means occupying a day.

divers(e). The two words are the same, but differentiated in spelling, pronunciation, & sense, divers (di’verz) implying number, & diverse
