page: 120

+ the Unionists./The ambassador gave them all the assistance which the Imperial nature of his office made ut obligatory upon him to do./We have gol to make a commission tn the Territorial Force fashionable, the right thing for every gentleman to do./ T'o inflict upon themselves a disability which one day they will ae the mistake & folly of doing. In these examples do is in grammatical relation to a noun (dissolution, assisdance, commission, disability) that is only a subordinate part of the implied whole (the forcing of a dissolution, the giving of assistance, the holding of a commission, the inflicting of a disability) to which alone it is in logical relation; we do not do a dissolution, a commission, &c. These sentences, however, in which do is a transitive verb meaning perform, are not properly examples of the substitute do; but the mistakes in them are due to the influence of that idiom.

do (the musical note). Pl. dos; see -O(E)s 3.

doat. See DOTE.

docile. The OED pronounces d0’sil or do’sil, with preference to the first.

doctor. See PHYSICIAN.

doct(o)ress. It is a serious inconvenience that neither form (-éress would be the better) has been brought into any but facetious use as a prefixed title; the device of inserting a Christian name after Doctor (Dr Mary Jones) is clumsy, & sometimes (Dr Evelyn Jones) ineffectual. See FEMININE DESIGNA- TIONS.

doctrinal. The accentuation d6‘ktrinal is recommended; see FALsE QUANTITY.

document. It is somctimes forgotten that the word includes more than the parchments or separate papers to which it is usually applied; a coin, picture, monument, passage in a book &c,, that serves as evidence, may be a d., & the following

remark on ‘ J)d. illustrative of the Continental Reformation’? is ab-

+ surd:—It is a collection not only (as the title implies) of dd., but also of passages from books & letters. The phrase human d. is more than a mere metaphor.

dodo. Pl. -oes; see -o(E)s 1.

doe. See Hart.

do(e)st. In modern, though not in older, use the auxiliary has dost only, & the independent verb doest only.

dogged. See -ER & -EST, 4.

doggy, -fe. See -EY, -I§E, -Y.

dogma. PI. -mas, formerly -mata; see LATIN PLURALS.

dolly, doiley, doyly. The first is the OED spelling.

dolce far niente.

See BATTERED ORNAMENTS.

dole, gricf. See REVIVALS.

dolichocephalic, -ous. See

-CE- PHALIC.

domain. For synonymy see FIELD. See also DEMESNE.

Domesday,dooms-. D. Book is spelt Domes- but pronounced d6omz- ; elsewhere the spelling is dooms-.

domestic, n., though it survives in legal & other formal use, in PEDAN- TIC HUMOUR, & as a GENTEELISM, has been superseded for ordinary ele by servant taken in a

imited sense. Such losses of differentiation may be regretted, but usage is irresistible.

-cable; see

domesticate makes “ABLE 1.

domesticity. The OED pronounces d6- ; see FALSE QUANTITY.

dominate makes -nable; see -aABLE 1.

domino. Pl. -os; sec -o(E)s l.

don, vb. See FoRMAL WORDS.

donate is ‘ chicfly U.S.—OED. It is a BACK-FORMATION from donation:—He recently donated a site for the proposed Hindu University.

donation. See FORMAL WORDS.

dossier. Pronounce dd’syer. See FRENCH WORDS.

dost. See DO(E)ST.

dot (dowry). See FRENCH WORDS.

dote, doat. Spell doic.

double. The common quotation (Macbeth, 1v. i. 83) is ‘ make assurance double sure’ (not doubly).
