page: 121

DOUBLE CASE. An exz-pupil of

Verrai?’s . . . cannot but recall the

successive states of mind that he

—or, more truly, possessed him—in attending Verrall’s lectures. Here that is first objective & then subjective; see Cases 8 D 4, THaT rel. pr., & WHICH.

DOUBLE CONSTRUCTION. They are also entitled to prevent the smuggling of alcohol into the States, & to reasonable assistance from other countries to that end. ‘Entitled to prevent {infin.}] ... & to assistance {noun]’ is a change of a kind discussed in SWAPPING HORSES.

double entendre is the established English form, & has been in common use from the seventeenth century; the modern attempt to correct it into double entente suggests ignorance of English rather than knowledge of French; cf. A L°OUTRANCE. See FRENCH WORDS.

DOUBLE PASSIVES. The point is sought to be evaded: monstrosities of this kind, which are as repulsive to the grammarian as to the stylist, perhaps spring by false analogy from the superficially similar type seen in The man was ordered to be skhot. But the simple forms from which they are developed are dissimilar:—-They ordered the -man to be shot, but They seek to evade the point; whereas man is one member of the double-barrelled object of ordered, point is the object not of seck at all, but of evade; therefore, whereas man can be made subject of the ive was ordered while its fellow-member is deferred, point canmot be made subject of the passive ts sought, never having been in any sense the object of seck.

To use this clumsy & incorrect construction in print amounts to telling the reader that he is not worth writing readable English for; a@ speaker may find himself com-

to resort to it because he must not stop to recast the sentence he has started on; but writers have po such excuse. Some of the verbs

+ most maltreated in this way are attempt, begin, desire, endeavour, hope, intend, propose, purpose, seck, & threaten; a few examples follow:—Now that the whole is attempted to be systematized./The mystery was assiduously, though vainly, endeavoured to be discovered./The darkness of the house (forgotten to be opened, though it was long since day) yielded to the glare./No greater thrill can be hoped to be enjoyed./Considerable support was managed to be raised for Waldemar./The commissioners proposed to be appointed will give their whole time./Such questions as Prayerbook Revision & the Mass Vcstments, now threatened to be authoritatively revived, have to be decided.

doubt(ful). It is Sontraly to idiom to begin the clause that depends on these with that instead of the usual whether, except when the sentence is negative (I do not doubt ...; There is no doubt ...; It was never doubtful .. .) or interrogative (Do you doubt ...?; Is there any doubt...?; Can it be doubtful. ..?). Even in such sentences whether is sometimes better (I do not doubt whether I have @ head on my shoulders), but rules on that point are needless; the mistake against which warning is required is the use of that in affirmative statements. It is especially common (probably from failure to decide in time between doubt & deny or disbelieve, doubtful & false), but equally wrong, when the clause is placed before doubi( ful) instead of inthe normal order. Whether should have been used in:—It was generally doubied that France would permit the use oj her port./I must be allowed to doubt that there is any class who deliberately omit . . ./That the movement is as purely industrial as the leaders claim may be doubted./So afraid of men’s motives as to doubt that anyone can be honest./That I have been so misled is extremely doubtful./That Mr Bennett would, or even could, write an uncompromisingly sad story we are inclined to doubt./It is very doubtful
