page: 122

+ whether it was ever at Dunstaffnage, & still more doubtful that it came from Ireland./That his army, if it retreats, will carry with it all its guns we are inclined to doubt.

doubtless, no doubt, undoubtedly, &c. Doubtless & no doubt have been weakened in sense till they no longer convey certainty, but either probability (You have doubtless or no doubt - heard the news) or concession (No doubt he meant well enough; It is doubtless very unpleasant). When real conviction or actual knowledge on the speaker’s part is to be expressed, it must be by undoubtedly, without (a) doubt, or ond a doubt (Ife was undoubtedly guilty).

douceur. See FRENCH wonrpbs.

dour. Pronounce door, not dowr.

douse, dowse. The OED gives -«se for the verb concerned with the divining-rod (so dowser, dowsing-rod, &c.), & -use for the other verb or verbs.

dow. See pow.

|

dower, dowry. The two words, originally the same, are differcntiated in ordinary literal use, dower being the widow’s life share of her husband’s property, & dowry the portion brought by a bride to her his: band; but in poetic or other ornamental use dower has often the sense of dowry; & either is applied figuratively to talents &c.

doyen. See DEAN.

dozen. See CoLuEctTIvEs 2.

» drachma, dram. Drachm was the prevalent form in all senses; but now the coin is almost always drachma, the indefinite small quantity is always dram, & dram is not uncommon even where drachm is still usual, in apothecaries’ & avoirdupois weight. Pron. drachm drim, drachma draé’‘kma.

draft, draught, &c. Draft is merely a phonetic spelling of draught, but some differentiation has taken place. Draft has ousted draught in banking, & to a great extent in the military sense dctach(ment); it is also usual

122

+ in the sense (make) rough copy or

lan (a good draftsman is one who drafts Bills well, a good draughisman one who draws well). In all the other common senses (game of dd., air-current, ship’s displacement, on d., beast of d., haul of fish, dose, liquor), draught is still the only recognized British form; in U.S. draft is much more widely used.

dragoman. The pl. is correctly -mans, & usually -men; for choice between them see DIDACTICISM.

tswoman. See FEMININE DESIGNATIONS.

draw. See ForRMAL WORDS.

dreadful. See -eER & -EST, 4.

dream. The ordinary past & Pe is dreamt (-émt); dreamed (-émd) is preferred in poetry & in impressive contexts. See also -T & -ED.

drib(b)let. Driblet is both the usual & (f. obs. vb drib+-let) the more correct form.

drink has past tense drank, P-p-

UnK, drunk; the reverse uses (they dr have drank) were formerly not unusual, but are now blunders or conspicuous archaisms,

droll, For synonymy see JOcosE.

drom - Pronounce drém- ; the abnormal drim-, though put first in the OED, is not likely to resist the influence of the spelling.

drunk(en). The difference, as now established, is complex. Drunk is in predicative use only, or at least is unidiomatic as an attribute; Trodden into the kennels as a drunk mortal (Carlyle; cf. the normal I met a drunken man) is either affectation or an emphasizing, which should have been otherwise effected, of the distinction between mortal now the worse for drink (drunk) & one often the worse for it (drunken). Drunken is the attributive word, whether the meaning is now in drink or given to drink or symptomatic &c. of drunkenness (I saw a -en man; A lazy -en lying ne’er-do-weel; His -en habits); it may be used predicatively also, but only in the sense
