page: 125

+ (& complement) & is followed by singular nouns & the corresponding possessives: we are responsible e. for kis own vote (also sometimes, by confusion, ¢. for our own voies, & sometimes, by double confusion, e. for our own vote). The following forms are incorrect in various degrees:—Brown, Jones, & Robinson e. has a different pony 2 will go e. your own way./They have e. something to say for himself./E. of these verses have five feet./They e. of them contain a complete story./We are master €. in his own house./Guizot & Gneist, e. in their generation, went to school to the history of England to discover . . ./The People’s Idols mount, e. his little tub, &, brazenthrouted, advertises his nostrum, the one infallible panacea. A_correspondent informs me that in the hymn-lines (4. & M. 289) ‘ Soon will you & I be lying E. within our narrow bed’ our has been substituted for the original his; the corrector has been offended by us of the common gender, & failed to observe that he has restricted the Bee to married couples. =

Each other is now treated as a compound word, the verb or pre-

ition that governs other standing

ore ¢. instead of in its normal place, & they hate e. o., they sent presents to e. o., being usually preferred to ¢. hates the other(s), they sent presents e. to the other(s); but the phrase is so far true to its origin that its ive is e. other’s (not others’), & that it cannot be used when the case of other would be subjective:—a lot of old cats ready to tear out e. other's (not others’) eyes; we know e. what the other wants (not what ¢. o. wants). E.o. is by some writers used only when no more than two thi are referred to, one another being similarly mg Sree to larger numbers; the differentiation is neither of present utility nor based on historical usage; the old distributive of two as opposed to several was not ¢., but either; & either other, which formerly existed

+ beside e. o. & one another, would doubtless have survived if its special meaning had been required.

8. Between e. For such expressions as ‘three minutes b. ec. scene’ see BETWEEN.

ear. Pronounce ¢ér (not yer). Public readers of the Litany (we have heard with our ears), please note; the modern loss of the r trill in our makes our ears a difficulty for readers who do not remember to restore it pro hac vice.

earthen, earthly, earthy. Earthen is still in ordinary use (see -EN ADJECTIVES) in the sole sense made of earth (either soil or potting clay).

sarthly has two senscs only:—(1) belonging to this transitory world as opposed to heaven or the future life, & (2, in negative context) practically existent or discoverable by mortal man. Earthy means of the nature, or having an admixture, of earth (soil, dross, gross materialism). An earthen mound, rampart, pot. Earthly joys, grandeur; the earthly paradise; their earthly pilgrimage; ts there any earthly use, reason, &c.? ; for no earthly consideration; cf. the slang he hasn’t an earthly (i.e. chance). An earthy precipitate formed in a few minutes; the ore ts very earthy; an upright man, but incurably earthy in his views & desires.

earwig. <A yearwig (see EAR) Is a pronunciation sometimes heard.

easterly, northerly, southerly, westerly. Chiefly used of wind, & then meaning east &c. or thereabouts, rather from the eastern &c. than from the other half of the horizon; else only of words implying either motion, or position conceived as attained by previous motion:—an easterly wind; took a southerly course; the most easterly outposts of western civilization. Not southerly (but south) aspect; not the easterly (but eastward) position; not the westerly (but west) end of the church; not westerly (but western) ways of thought.

eat. The past is spelt ale (rarcly eat) & pronounced ét (wrongly at).
