page: 127

+ -EDLY edly*, consumedly*, contentedly, cursedly*, decided! edly,

unaffectedly, unconcernedly*, undauntedly, undisguisedly*, undisputedly, undoubledly, unexpectedly, unfeignedly*, unfoundedly, uninterruptedly, unitedly, unreservedly*, unwontedly.

It will probably be admitted by everyone that the list is made up wholly of words known to be in the language already & not having to be manufactured, with doubts about their right to exist, for some special occasion. Most readers will admit also that, while it is physically possible to say any of those starred without allowing a separate syllable to the -ed-, the only oncs actually so pronounccd by educatcd persons are those with two stars; fixedly, for instance, demands its three syllables, & unconcernedly its five. It will further be observed that all but one (hurriedly) of the (two-starred) words that drop the extra syllable are in the part of the list containing what are called parasynthctic i Aaa ie. words of the type good-humouredly.

The upehot is that, among the hun of adverbs in -edly that may suggest themselves as_ convenient novelties, (1) those that must sound the e are unobjectionable, e.g. animatedly, offendedly, unstiniedly; (2) of those in which the e can (physically) be either sounded or silent none (with the exception of the classes in N™ 8 & 4 below) are tolerable unless the writer is prepared to have the e pet age vam the user of com-

» Con y, dispersedly, absorbediy, & declaredly, will not resent

their being given four syllables each,

& they pass the test; but no-one 127

+ will write experiencedly, accomplishedly, boredly, skilledly, or discouragedly, & consent to the ed’s being a distinct syllable; they are therefore ruled out; (38) hurriedly suggests that such forms as palsiedly,

edly, variedly, frenziedly, & studiedly (from verbs in unaccented -§) are legitimate; (4) words in unaccen -ure, -our, or -er, seem to form ble adverbs in -edly without the extra syllable, as measuredly, injuredly, perjuredly, labouroui, pompercny, bewilderedly, chequeredly; most two-starred words in the second part of the standard list answer to this description; (5) none from verbs in -#, or from those in -bdle, -cle, &c., as triedly, satisfiedly, troubledly, puzziedly, are endurable.

These conclusions may be confirmed by comparing many couples of possible words. Take dementedly & derangedly, degradedly & depravedly, dejectedly & Deny: openhandedly & open-armedly, admittedly & ownedly, dispiritedly & dismayedly, delightedly & charmedly, disgustedly & displeasedly. The reason why the first of each couple is possible & the second (except to novelty-hunters) impossible is that we instinctively shrink from the ed syllable (archaic when phonetics allow the e to be silent) except in established words; charmedly as a disyllable is felt to flout analogy, & as a trisyllable is a bizarre mixture of the archaic & the newfangled.

educate makeseducable(see -ABL: 1).

education(al)ist. See -1sT.

educe. Educible is better than educeable; see -ABLE 2.

Edy, -le. See -ry, -Ib, -Y.

cel-like. For the hyphen, sec -LIKE.

effect, vb. See AFFECT.

effective, effectual, efficacious, efficient. The words all mean having effect, but with different applications & certain often disregarded shades of meaning. Efficactous applies only to things (cspecially now to medicines) used for a purpose, & means sure to hac, or
