page: 128

+ usually having, the desired effect. Efficient applics to agents or their action regarded as theirs or (with more or less of personification) to instruments &c., & means capable of producing the desired effect, not wcompetent or unequal to a task. Effectual applies to action apart from the agent, & means not falling short of the complete effect aimed ut. Effective applies to the thing done or to its doer as such, & means having a high degree of effect.

An efficacious remedy, (now rare) cement; a@ drug of known efficacy. -

An efficient general, cook; efficient work, organization; an_ efficient bicycle; efficient cause is a special use preserving the original etymological sense * doing the work ’.

Effectual measures; an effectual stopper on conversation; effectual demand in Political Economy is demand that actually causes the supply to be brought to market.

An effective speech, speaker, contrast, cross-fire; effective assistance, cooperation. An effective blockade, effective capital, effective membership, preserve a now less common sense

not merely nominal but carried into action ’.

effervescence, -cy. The -ce form means the act or process, or the product (bubbles &c.), of effervescing; the -cy form (now rare) means the tendency or capacity to effervesce (has lost tts -cy), though in this sense too -ce is now more frequent. See -ceE, -cy.

e.g. is short for exempli gratia, & means only * for instance’, Nonlatinists are apt to think that it does not matter whether e.g. or 1.E. is used; so Mr took as the theme of his address the existence of what he called a psychic attribute, ¢.g., a kind of memory, in plants. Italics, & a following comma, are unnecessary, but not wrong.

ego(t)ism. The two words are modern formations of about the same date. Etymologically, there is no difference between them to

128

+ affect the sense, but egotism is correctly & egotism incorrectly formed —a fact that is now, since both are established, of no importance. Egotism is, or was till recently, the more popular form, & is (perhaps consequently) restricted to the more popular senses—excessive use of I in speech or writing, & self-importance or sclf-centredness in character, Egoism shows signs of ousting egotism even in these senses, but is also used im metaphysics & ethics as a name for the theory that a person has no proof that anything exists outside his own mind, & for the theory that self-interest is the foundation of morality. However arbitrary the differentiation may be, it serves a uscful purpose if it can yet be maintained.

egregious. The etymological sense is simply eminent or of exceptional degree (e€ grege, out of the flock). The use of the word has been narrowed in English till it is applied only to nouns expressing contempt, & especially to a few of these, as ass, coxcomb, liar, impostor, folly, blunder, waste, The e. Jones &c. is occasionally used in the sense that notorious ass Jones; & with neutral words like example e. is the natural antithesis to shining—a_ shining example of fortitude, an e. example of incapacity. Reversion to the original scnse, as in the following, is mere pedantry: There is indeed little aforethought in most of our daily doings, whether gregarious or egregious.

eighteenmo. See Foro. PI. -os; see -O(E)sS 6.

eighth. Spell thus, but pronounce atth, not ath.

eighties, ele. See TWENTIES.

eirenicon, ir-. Usually spelt cir-, & pronounced 1ré’nikén. As it is chiefly in learned use, it is odd that the spelling should be anomalous. Irenicum would be the Latinized & normally transliterated form; trentcon the normally transliterated Greek form; eirenikon the Greck written in English letters. All these
