page: 134

+ away, getting rid, or ignoring, of elements that for some reason are not wanted; .the verb does not mean to extract or isolate for special consideration or treatment the elements that are wanted, as in He would e. the main fact from all confusing circumstantials, & in hypotheses of the utmost value in the elimination of truth. See POruLARIZED TECHNICALITIES,

2. The verb makes eliminable (see - ABLE 1).

ELLIPSIS. 1. Be & have. 2. Second part of compound verb. 38. With change of voice. 4. That (conj.). 5. After than. 6. With inversion. 7. That (rel. pron.). That the reader may at once realize the scope of the inquiry, a few ellipses of miscellaneous types are first exhibited:—

The ringleader was hanged & his followers \imprisoned./The evil consequences of excess of these beverages ts much greater than/alcohol./Mr Balfour blurted out that his own view was/\ the House of Lords was not strong enough./No State ever has/ or can adopt the non-ethical idea of property. / he House of Lords would

really revised the Bill, as no doubt tt could be with advantage./ Not only such a love have deepened & exalted, & A may still deepen & exalt, the life of any man,

When a passage would, if fully set out, contain two compound members corresponding to each other, how far may the whole be shortened by omitting in one of these members (‘ understanding’, in grammatical phrase) a part that is either expressed in the other or easily inferable from what is there expressed? Possible varieties are so many that it will be better not to hazard a general rule, but to say that the expressed can generally, & the inferable can in specially favourable circumstances, be ‘ understood’, & then proceed to some types in which mistakes are common.

1. Ellipsis of parts of be & have. 184

+ Not only the expressed part can be understood, but also the corresponding part with change of number or person:—The ringleader was hanged & his followers imprisoned; He ts dead, & I alive; The years have

assed & the appointed time come.

hese are permissible; not all that is lawful, however! is expedient, & the licence is not to be recommended outside sentences of this simple pattern; with the intervening clause in the following quotation it is clearly ill-advised: A number o stumbling-blocks have been remove & the road along which the measure will have to travel. straightened out; it should be observed t it is the distance of straightened from have been, & not the change of number in the verbs, that demands the insertion of has been.

2. Ellipsis of second part of compound verb. Only the expressed part can be understood; No State can or will adapt would be regular, but No S. has or can adopt is (however common) an elementary blunder. The understanding of an infinitive with ¢g out of one without to (A standard o f eas tnion which ought & we believe will strengthen the sense of parental responsibility) is equally common & equally wrong; insert after ought either to strengthen or fo.

3. Ellipsis with change of voice. Even if the form required is identical with that elsewhere expressed, it cannot be understood if the voice is different; to omit revised ig out of the question in Though we do not believe that the House of Lords would have really revised the Bill, as no doubt tt could beAwith advantage. Still less can the passive managed be supplied from the active manage in Mr Dennett foresees a bright future for Benin if our es will manage matters con 4 with its * customs’, as to have been. And with these may be classed the leaving us to get to be out of the preceding fo in If the two lines are to cross, the rate of loss \reduced to zero,
