page: 135

+ & a definite increase in the world’s shipping to be brought about...

4. Omission of that (conjunction). Though this is strictly speaking not an ellipsis, but rather an exercise of the ancient right to abstain from subordinating a substantival clause (And I seyde his opinioun was good— Chaucer), it may conveniently be mentioned here. Three examples will suffice to show the unpleasantness of ill-advised omission, & to suggest some cautions:—Sir,—JI am abashed to seein my notice of Mr Bradley Birt’s ‘** Sylhet’ Thackeray” Ad have credited the elder W. M. Thackeray with sizteen children./ Mr Balfour blurted out that his own view was/\the House of Lords was not strong enough./I assert( the feeling in Canada today is such against annexation that... The first illustrates the principle that if there is the least room for doubt where the that would come, it should be expressed & not understood. The second Icads us to the rule that when the contents of a clause are attached by part of be to such words as opinton, decision, view, or declaration (a very common type), that must be inserted; it at the same time illustrates the motive that most frequently causes wrong omissions— the sensible reluctance to make one that-clause depend on another— ; but this is always avoidable by other, though often less simple, means. The third involves a matter of idiom, & reminds us that while some verbs of saying & thinking can take or drop that indifferently, many haveastrong preference for one orthe other use (see THAT CONJ.); assert is gr onan gy bag Acar - §. ipsis after than is extremely common, & so various in detail as to make the laying down of any

rule impossible. The com-

rative claims of brevity on the one Pand, & on the other of the comfort that springs from feeling that all is shipshape, must in each case be weig with judgement. It will be best to put together a few examples,

+ ranging from the more te the less obvious, in which doubts whether all is right with the sentence obtrude themselves. The evil consequences of excess of these beverages is much greater than / alcohol; 1.e., than the evil consequences of excess of alcohol are great; shall we (a) omit are great? yes, everyone does it; (b) omit the evil consequences of excess of? no, no-one could do it but one who could also write, like this author, consequences is; (c) retain all this? no—waste of words; (d) shorten to those of excess of 2? yes, unless the knot is cut by writing than with alcohol./This was due to the feeling that the Bill went further than public opinion warranied or was justified; i.e., than what opinion warranted or what was justified; either what could be omitted if its clause stood alone; but since the two whats are in different cascs, one being subject & the other object, there is felt to be a grammatical blunder lurking under cover of than./That export trade ts advancing with greater rapidity than our trade has ever increased; i.e., than any rapidity with which ours has increased; shorten to than our trade has ever increased with 3 or, better, substitute more rapidly for with greater rapidity. /The proceedings were more humiliating to ourselves than I can recollect in the course of my political experience; i.e., than I can recollect any proceedings rae humiliating; shorten to any that can recollect./The interpretations are more untformly admirable than could, perhaps, have been produced by any other person; i.e., than any would have been admirable that .. .3 shorten to than what could, though the misplacing of perhaps, which belongs to the main sentence, will cry all the louder for correction.

6. Ellipsis complicated by inversion. In questions, & in sentences beginning with nor & certain other words, inversion is normal, the subject standing after the verb or its auxiliary instead of before it (Never heard I or Never did I hear, not
