page: 136

+ Never I heard). When a sentence or clause thus inverted has to be enlarged by a parallel member of the kind in which ellipsis would naturally be resorted to, difficulties arise. Why is a man in civil life perpetually slandering & backbiting his fellow men, & is unable to see good even in his friends? The repetition of its without that of why & the subject is impossible; in this particular scntence the removal of the second is solves the problem as well as the re-insertion of (at the least) why is such a man; but often full repetition is the only course posasible./ Not only may such a love have deepened & exalted, & may still deepen & exalt, the life of any man of any age, but ... The inversion has to be carried on; that is, not only, & the subject placed after may, must be repeated if may is repeated; &, may being here indispensable, eee less will do than not only (with a omitted) may if still deepen.

7. For ellipsis of that (rel. pron.), & of prepositions governing that (rel. pron.), see THAT REL. PRON.

elongate. See -ATABLE.

else. The adverb e. has come so near to being compounded with certain indefinite pronouns & words of similar character (anybody, everyone, ittle, all, &c.) that separation is habitually avoided, & e.g. Nobody is ignorant of it e. is unidiomatic; correspondingly, the usual possessive form is not everyone’s &c. ¢., which is felt to be pedantic though correct, but everyone else’s. With interrogative pronouns the process has not gone so far; though What ce. did he say? is the normal form, What did he say e.? (with which compare the very unusual Nothing was said e.) is unobjectionable; sei aaron who else’s may be used colloquial y: but whose else (cf. anybody’s e.) has maintained its ground; & of the forms Who else’s should tt be?, Whose e. should it be?, Whose should it be e.?, the last is perhaps the best.

186

elucidate makes -dable; see -ABLE 1.

elusive, elusory. That is elusive which we eee spite of Nahas As grasp physi or mentally; sie ae PEI, holf-back, submarine; elusive rhythm, perfume, fame; an elusive image, echo, pleasure. That is elusory which turns out when attained to be unsatisfying, or which is designed to pass as of more solid or permanent value than itis; elusory f ulfilment, success, victory, possession, promises.

The elusive mocks its pursuer, the elusory its essor; elusive is synonymous with evasive, elusory with

elvish, elfish. ‘The older form elvish is still the more usual] ’"—OED. See -vE(D).

Elysium. Pl. -ms; see -uM.

emaciation. Pronounce -as!I-; see -CIATION.

emancipate makes -pable;

see -ABLE 1.

EM- & IM-, EN- & IN-. The words in which hesitation between e- & i- is possible are given in the form recommended; readers who wish for more than an unsupported recommendation will find notes below.

embed, empanel, encage, encase, enclose &c., encrust*, encrustmeni, endorse*, endorsement, endue, enfold, engraft, enmesh, ensure (in general senses), entrench, entrust, entwine, entwist, enwrap; incrustation, indorsation, ingrain, titel inquire, inquiry, insure (in financial sense), insurance, inure, inweave.

*but cf. incrustation, tndorsation.

Tenacious clinging to the right of private judgement is an English trait that a mere grammarian ma not presume to deprecate, & suc statements as the SEDs The halflatinized enquire still subsists beside inquire will no doubt long remain true. Spelling, however, is not one of the domains in which private judgement shows to most advantage, & the general acceptance of the above forms on the authority of the OED (from which the remarks in
