page: 137

+ inverted commas below are taken, & which recognizes as the criterion not any pedantic canon, but the

of most writers) would be a sensible & democratic concession to uniformity.

: *e. is now the more common form ’.

empanel: the OED gives e. precedence.

encage: ‘%., the obs. var. of ¢.’.

*¢., var. of e.’.

enclose: ‘ The Fae ana lego of usage (in England at least), as well as etymological propriety,is infavour of ¢.’.

encrust: ‘* The dictionaries mostly favour %4., but e. appears to be the more frequent in actual use ’.

endorse: ‘* E. is more frequent in commercial & general literary use, but 4. is more usual in law books’ ; conformity on the part of the lawyers would be a ful proceeding.

endue: ‘The form e. is now the more common in all the living senses ”.

enfold: ‘%., obs. var. of é.’.

engraft: ‘%., obs. var. of e.’.

enmesh: immesh & emmesh are less used than enmesh.

ensure: ‘ In general usage i. is now limited to the financial sense, in which the form e. is wholly obs.’.

entrench: ‘The form 7. is that favoured by modern dictionaries, but in recent use e. seems to be more frequent ’.

entrust: * The form ¢., though preferred in many recent dictionarics, is now rare in actual use’.

entwine, entwist, enwrap: ‘1%., var. of e.’.

incrustation, indorsation: The i- of these (cf. endorse, encrust) is due to the preference for completely latinizing words with a” conspicuously Latin ending.

ingrain(ed): ‘In the pares adjective used attributively, though not in the verb, the form with in- is more common than that with en-’ ; the adjective being perhaps a hundred times as common as the verb, & being often so dccented (on the 187

+ first) that there can be no doubt about its beginning with i & not e, the rare verb will surely conform before long.

inquire, inquiry: The OED

ives 4. the precedence, but says * The half-latinized e¢.’ (the unlatinized form being enquere) ‘ still subsists beside i.’.

insure: See ensure above.

inure: ‘ E., an earlier form of i., by which it is now superseded except in the legal sense’ ; see INURE.

inweave: The OED gives precedence to i.

embarkation. The OED gives this as the standard form; &, where all three forms are justifiable—embarcation as the French original. tmbarcation as properly latinized. & embarkation as agreeing with embark— it is well to accept the OED ruling.

embargo. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 6.

embarrassedly. A bad form; see -EDLY.

embed, ime. See -EM & -IM-,

emblem. For synonymy see SIGN.

embody. For inflexions see VERBS IN -1IE &c., 6.

See FRENCH WORDS.

embonpoint.

Pronunciation: OED

embrasure.

Nav. & Mil., also émbra‘zhyer; émbrazhoor’.

embryo. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 4.

emend(ation). The words are now confined strictly to the conjectural correction of errors in MS. or printed matter, or to changes deliberately compared to this by metaphor; they are not used, like amend(ment), of improvement or correction in general.

Emerald Isle. See Sonmigues

emergence, emergency. e two are now mimpletely ‘differentiated, -ce meaning emerging or coming into notice, & -cy meaning a juncture that has arisen, esp. one that calls for prompt measures, & also (more recently) the presence of such a juncture (in case of -cy). See -cez, “CY.

émeute. See FRENCH WORDS. F3
