page: 139

+ with which somewhat is in perfect harmony, see DOUBLE PASSIVES. See also FORMAL WORDS.

endemic, epidemic. An endemic disease is one habitually prevalent in a particular place; an epidemic disease is one that breaks out in a place & lasts for a time only.

endorse, indorsation. See Em- & iu-. The use of endorse in advertisements (Paderewski endorses the pianola) is an example of unsustained metaphor (METAPHOR 2 A) worth mention because advertisements play a considerable part in forming the language of those who read little else. You can endorse, literally, a cheque or other paper, &, metaphorically, a claim or argument; but to talk of endorsing material things other than papers is a solecism.

endue, indue. See EM- & I™M-.

endways, -wise. See -ways, -WISE.

enema. ‘The normal pronunciation is é’nima but the incorrect form [iné’ma] is in very general use ’— OED. FALSE QUANTITY.

enervate. See -ATABLE.

enfold, infold. See Em- & I™-.

enforce. They were prepared to take action with a view to enforcing this country inio @ pone & vanguished peace. his use of e. for force or compel or drive, with a person or agent as object, though common two or three centuries ago, is obsolete; today we force a person into peace, or enforce peace. See NOVEL- TY-HUNTING, OBJECT-SHUFFLING.

enforceable. Sospelt; see MUTE E.

enfranchise, not -2ze; see -ISE)(-1ZE.

Engiand, English(man). The incorrect use of these words as equivalents of Great Britain, United Kingdom, British Empire, British, Briton, is often resented by the Scotch, Irish, & Welsh; their susceptibilities are natural, but are not necessarily always to be deferred to. It must be remembered that no Englishman, & rhaps no Scot even, calis hi a Briton without

189

+ a sneaking sense of the ludicrous. How should an Englishman utter the words Great Britain with the glow of emotion that for him goes with England? he talks the English language; he has been taught English history as one tale from Alfred to George V; he has known in his youth how many Frenchmen are a match for one Englishman; he has heard of the word of an Englishman & of English fair play, scorns certain things as unEnglish, & aspires to be an English gentleman; he knows that Englan gs every man to do his duty, & that to the foreigner his nation is the Anglais & Englander & Inglesi; in the word England, not in Britain, all these things are implicit. The case is not so strong siping British, since we can speak of the British Empire, the British army or navy or constitution, & British trade, without feeling the word inadequate; yet even it is unfit for many contexts; who speaks of a_ British gentleman, British home life, British tailoring, or British writers, or condemns with an ‘ unBritish ’? on the other hand the British matron, the British parent, & the British public, have an unenviable notoriety. The attempt to forbid thirty millions of people the use of the only names that for them are in tune with patriotic emotion, or to compel them to stop & think whether they mean their country in a narrower ora wider sense each time they name it, is doomed to failure. The most that can be expected is that the provocative words should be abstained from on the more provocative occasions, & that when Scots & others are likely to be within earshot Britain & British should be inserted as tokens, but no more, of what is really meant.

english, vb. See REVIVALS, SAXON- ISM.

engraft, in-. See EM- & IM-.

enhance. Spain felt that the war could not touch her, but that, on the contrary, while the rest of Europe was
