page: 142

ENUMERATION FORMS. One of the first requisites for the writi of good clean sentences is to have acquired the art of enumeration, that is, of stringing together three or four words or phrases of identical grammatical value without going wrong. This cannot be done by blind observance of the rule of thumb that and & or should be used only once in a list. It will suffice here to illustrate very shortly the commonest type of error:—The introductory paragraph is sure, firm, & arouses expecta at once./If he raises fruit, ve les, or keeps a large number of fowls./A matter in which the hopes & fears of so many of My jects are keenly concerned, & which, unless handled with foresight, judgment, & in the spirit of mutual concession, threatens to... (Prime Minister’s English, presumably; certainly not King’s English).

The matter will be found fully discussed under AND 2; or is liable to corresponding ill treatment; & a

articular form of bad enumeration is set forth in the article WALLED-uUP OBJECT.

enunciate makes -ciable; see -ABLE

enunciation. See -craTION.

enure. See INURE, & EM- & IM-.

envelop. See -p-, -pp-. The obso- Iete spellings envelope, envelopes, in the verb, are now to be regarded as mere mistakes.

envelope. The French spelling (-ppe) has long gone, & the French pronunciation should no longer be allowed to embarrass us, but give way to é’nveldp; all the more now that the verb envelop, from its frequency in military bulletins, has become popular instead of merely literary.

-EN VERBS FROM ADJECTIVES. It being no part of most people’s business to inquire into such matters, the average writer would probably say, if asked for an offhand opinion, that from any adjective of one syllable an -en verb could be formed

142 -EN VERBS FROM ADJECTIVES

ne meaning to make or become s0-&-so, That, at any rate, was roughly the position taken up by one party to @ newspaper controversy some years ago on the merits of quieten. A very slight examination shows it to be remote from the facts; -en cannot be called a living suffix. There are on the one hand some 50 verbs whose currency is beyond question; on the other hand as many adjectives may be found that, though they look as fit for turning into verbs by addition of -en as the 50, no-one would dream of treating in that way; some of them are allowed to become verbs without the -en (lame, wet, blind, foul); others have to go without a cognate verb (harsh,

rand, wise, sore); others have their Becta operated on instead of their end (large & enlarge, fine & refine, new & renew, plain & explain, strange & estrange, dense & condense); & the despotism of usage is still clearer when it is noti that we can say moisten but not wetten, quicken but not slowen, thicken & fatten but not thinnen or leanen, deafen but not blinden, sweeten but not souren, sharpen but not blunten, cheapen but not dearen, greaten but not largen, freshen but not stalen, coarsen but not finen. Between the two sets of adjectives whose mind is made up, some taking & some refusing -en, there are a few about which questions may arise; with some the right of the -en verb to exist is disputable, & with others the undoubted existence of two verbs (e.g. loose & loosen), one having -en, & one identical with the adjective, raiscs the question of differentiated senses; & some remarks may be offered oneach. The following is the list, thought to be fairly complete, of the ordinary -en verbs, not including anomalous ones like strengthen, nor any whose right to exist is dubious:— blacken, brighten, broaden, cheanen, coarsen, darken, deaden, deafen, deepen, fasten, fatten, flatten, freshen, gladden, — harden, lessen, liken, lighten,

sen, louden, madden, moisten,
