page: 144

deteriorate in the intransitive sense,

is quoted from Milton, George Eliot,

& others.

environs. The OED recognizes the two pronunciations énvir’onz, é’nvironz, in that order.

envisage. A 19th-century word only, & a surely undesirable Gat- LICISM. Face, confront, contemplate, recognize, realize, view, & regard, seem equal between them to all requirements. See WorkInG & STYLISH WORDS.

envoy (in prosody).

See TEcu- haps shy at it & reluctantly prefer

144 NICAL TERMS.

envy, vb. For inflexions see. VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

enwrap, in-. See EM- & Im-.

epaulet(te). ‘The anglicized spelling epaulet is preferable, on the ground that the word is fully naturalized in use; but the form in pate at prescnt more common ’—

epergne. This odd word, which seems to challenge one to show that one can pronounce French, but will be vainly sought in the French dictionary, is pronounced Iper’n by the OED.

epexegetic. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

epic, adj. An increasingly popular use is ¢. laughter, combat, contest, struggle, siege, &c.; being barely recognized in the OED, it is probably new; as the meaning is mainly such as we read of in Homer, the word HoMEnic is perhaps better. _@picene. For the grammatical Bense, S€€ COMMON. Having no real function in English grammar, the word is kept alive chiefly as a more contemptuous synonym for effeminate, implying physical as well as moral sexlessness; for this purpose it is better suited than common or neuter owing to their familiarity in other senses.

epid(e)ictic. See GREEK G.

epidemic. See ENDEMIC. epidermis. See PoLysyLiaBic HUMOUR,

epigram. See TECHNICAL TERMS,

e - So spelt; see -m-,

-MM-. Pron. épigraméa’tik.

epigraphy. See TECHNICAL TERMS,

epistle. See PronunciaTIion, Si-

lent t.

epoch, epoch-making. Under TIME,

the meani

of the word epoch is

explained. If an epoch were made

every time we are told that a dis-

covery or other event is epoch-

making, our bewildered state of ceaseless transition from the thousands of eras we were in yesterday to the different thousands we were in today would be pitiful indeed. But luckily the word is blank cartridge, meant only to startle, & not to carry even so imponderable a bullet as conviction. Cf. UNIQUE, & UNTHINKABLE,

epode. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

- The OED states that the word is ‘ now somewhat rare ’, summarizes its meaning as ‘ = epic B’, i.e. the noun epic, & shows no reason why it should still exist. That it was formerly commoner than now was due to the fact that the com-

tition between the Greek epos, the

nch épopée, & the naturalized adjective epic, for the post of English noun was not yet decided in favour of the last. Today e.’s only function is to enable learned writers to puzzle unlearned readers who know an epic but never heard of epopee. A SUPERFLUOUS WORD.

e pur si muove. See HAcKNEYED PHRASES.

equable. The quality indicated is complex—not merely freedom from great changes, but that as well as remoteness from either extreme, a compound of uniformity & moderation. A continuously cold climate or @ consistently violent temper is not e.; nor on the other hand is a moderate but changeable climate or a pulse that varies frequently though within narrow limits. equal. 1. The verb makes equalling &c.; see -LL-, -L-. 2. The navy is not e. in numbers or
