page: 146

+ brazen, buxom, crooked, equal, can take -er & -est without disagreeably challenging attention.

3. Adverbs not formed with -ly from adjectives, but identical in form with them, use -er & -est naturally (runs faster, sleeps sounder, hits hardest, hold it tighter); some independent adverbs, as soon, often, seldom, do the same; -ly adverbs, peewee comparatives in -lier are possible in archaic & poetic style (wiselier said, softlier nurtured), now prefer more wisely &c.; but there is some freedom in the way of treating the comparative adjective, even where the positive is not so used, as an adverb (easier said than done; he writes cleverer than he talks; try to state your case clearer); this, however, is chiefly colloquial.

4. Many adjectives besides those described in 1 & 2 are capable in ordinary use, i.e. without the stylistic taint illustrated in 5 & 6, of forming a superlative in -est, used with the & serving as an emphatic form simply, while no-one would think of making a comparative in -er from them: én the brutalest, civilest, timidest, winningest, cogentest, cheerfullest, cunningest, doggedest, drunkenest, candidest, damnablest, manner. The terminations that most invite this treatment are -ful, -ing, -able, -ed, & -id; on the other hand the very common adjective terminations -tve, -ic, & -ous, reject it altogether (curiouser & curiouser is a product of Wonderland). Though it is hard to draw a clear line between this use & the next, the intent is different; the words are felt to be little less normal, & yet appreciably more forcible, than the forms with most; they are superlatives only, & emphasis is their object; an attempt is made to register them in their dictionary places.

5. As a stylistic device, based on NOVELTY-HUNTING, & developing into disagreeable MANNERISM, the use of -er & -est is extended to man adjectives normally taking more 146

+ most, & the reader gets pulled up at intervals by bdeautifuller, delicater, ancientest, diligentest, delectablest, dolefuller, devotedest, admirablest, & the like. The trick served Carlyle’s

urpose, & has grown tiresome in his Imitato . The extreme form of it is that which next follows.

6. The emotional -est without the. Mule Nau, an actress of considerable technical skill & a valuable power of exhibiting deepest emotion; this sentence is so obviously critical & unemotional that it shows fully the VULGARIZATION of a use that is appropriate only to high-poetic contexts. In so analytic a mood the critic should have been content with deep emotion; if he had been talking ee ye he might have gone as far as ‘ she exhibited the deepest emotion’; not unless he had been apostrophizing her in verse as * deepest emotion’s Queen’, or by whatever lyric phrase emotion (& not analysis) might have inspired, should he have dared to cut out his the & degrade the idiom sacred to the poets. Not that he is a solitary or original sinner; half the secondrate writers on art & literature seem to think they have found in this now hackneyed device a facile way of exhibiting intense but restrained feeling.

7. Certain illogicalities to which the comparative lends itself may be touched upon. Don't do it more than you can help, meaning not what it says but the opposite (than you cannot help), is worth changing into than you need or must or are obliged to, unless it is to rank as a Sturpy INDEFENSIBLE. Better known than popular is cured by resolving better into more well. It is more or less— & certainly more than less—a standardized is a case of CaNnni- BALISM, one of the necessary two mores having swallowed the other. Unwise striving after double emphasis accounts for He excelled as a lecturer more than as a preacher, because he felt freer to bring more of his personality into play, & for Were
