page: 148

+ to shrink from the word as if it were a newfangled derivative of eruption like the clipped words in Back- FORMATION; it has in fact been in good use for some centurics.

eschatology &c. Pronounce éska-.

eschscholtzia. So spelt; pronounce Ishd‘ItsIa (not éskol-).

escort, n. & v. See Noun & VERB ACCENT.

Eskimo(s), Esquimaux. The former seems to be now the established English spelling; the pronunciation is the same either way.

especial(ly). 1.(E)special(ly). 2. Especially with inversion. 3. Especially as, 1. (E)special(ly). The characteristic sense of the longer adjective & adverb is pre-eminence or the particular as opposed to the ordinary, that of the others being limitation or the particular as opposed to the general. There is however a marked tendency in the adjectives for especial to disappear & for special to take its place; it may be said that special is now possible in all senses, though especial is still also possible or prefcrable in the senses (a) exceptional in degree, as My especial friend is Jones, He handles the matter with especial dexterity, Oxford architecture receives especial attention, (b) of, for, a ee person or thing specified

VY possessive adjective or case, as For my or Smith's especial benefit, For the especial benefit of wounded soldiers. In the verbs the encroachments of the shorter form are more limited; a writer may some-

imes fall into saying The reinforce-

arrived at a specially critical

candidates, specially

ability as able to say The hed hon Scotlana’

pecially pre-

148

andt 3s must be pared or An arbitrator i ica appointed. Two example °° hy 4 especially used where sRCO"tYy 18 clearly meant; in both ths one re not to an exceptional dep ri for one purpose & no othe®? Only

+ Mohammedans were permitted to work within the sacred zones, & Turkish engineers were especially trained by the Germans for this purpose./Agreeable features of the k will the illustrations, including a number of reproductions of prints especially lent by Lord Rosebery &

r Lewis Harcourt.

2. Especially with inversion. The word is a favourite with victims of this modern craze (see INVERSION): Springs of mineralized water, famous from Roman times onwards; especially did they come into renown during the nineteenth century./Mr Campbell does not recognize a change of opinion, but frankly admits a change of emphasis; especially is he anxious at the present time to advance the cause of Liberal Evangelism.

3. Especially as. It is worth notice that of the causal as-clauses discussed in as 2 some types intolerable in themselves are made possible by the insertion of especially before as: I shall have to ask for heavy damages, as my client’s circumstances are not such as to allow of Quizolic magnanimity; as by itself is, as. usual, insufficient to give the remainder of the sentence the fresh push-off that, introducing an unforeseen consideration, it requires; but especially inserted before as, by a eee attention, prevents the tailing off into insignificance that would otherwise ruin the balance.

espléglerie. See FRENCH WORDS.

espionage. Pronounce ¢’spyonlj.

espy. For inflexions see VERBS IN “IE 6.

ECey

essay. 1. For e. & assay, vv., see ASSAY.

2. The verb is accented on the last; the noun, in its now commonest sense of a kind of literary piece, on the first. But in the wider & now less usual sense of an attempt the old accent on the last is still often heard; that it was formerly so accented is evident from lines like Whose first essay was in a tyrani’s praise./This is th’ essay of my
