page: 150

say ‘the e.’ or ‘ the n.’, or ‘ the r.,

qualities are courage & intelligence

only’. They have reached the

meeting-point, however, from differ-

ent directions, bringing each its

native equipment, of varying suit-

ability for various tasks. For in-

stance, in We can hardly say that

capital is as r. to production as land

& labour the least suitable of the

three has been chosen, the word

wanted to class the relation of land

& labour to production being the

strongest of all, whereas +r. is the

weakest.

If we call something e. we have in

mind a whole that would not be what it is to be or is or was if the part in question were wanting; the e. thing is such that the other thing is inconceivable without it. JE. is the strongest word of the three.

When we call something n., we have in mind the irresistible action of causality or logic; the n. thing is such that the other cannot but owe its existence to it or result in it. N. doubles the parts of indispensable & inevitable.

When we call something 7., we have in mind merely an end for which means are to be found; the r. thing is that demanded by the conditions, but need not be the only thing that could satisfy their demands, though it is usually understood in that sense. The fact that r. has no negative form corresponding to une. & unn. is significant of its less exclusive meaning.

For a trivial illustration or two:-— Bails are r., but neither e. nor n., for crickct; not e., for it is cricket without them; not n., for their want need not stop the game. In the taking of an oath, religious belief is e., but neither n. nor r.; the unbeliever’s oath is no oath, but the want of belief need not prevent him from swearing, nor will belief help him to swear. Death is the n., but neither the e. nor the r. result of breaking one’s neck; that chain of cause & effect is for the present *

* j.e. in 1913; 1925 has

established; but the discovery of

a remedy is not inconceivable, & the

result that has never been e. may

some day not be even n.; r. in this

connexion can speak for itself. The

alphabetical arrangement is un-

essential, but not unnecessary, &

very requisite, in this book; the

dictionary without it would be a

dictionary all the same, but the laws

of causality make the publishers

demand & the writer supply alpha-

betical order, & without it the pur-

pose would be very badly served.

-est in superlatives. See -er & -EsT.

estate. The three estates, i.e. the

Lords Spiritual, the Lords Tem-

poral, & the Commons, is often

wrongly applied to Sovereign, Lords,

& Commons. The use of the phrase

being now purely decorative, & the reader being often uncertain whether the user of it may mean Sovereign & Parliament, or Parliament, or all bishops & all peers & all electors, it is perhaps better left alone. The third e. is a phrase often used for the French bourgeoisie before the Revolution; & the fourth e. is a jocular description of the newspaper press as one of the, powers that have to be reckoned with in politics.

esteem. For success of e., see GALLICISMS.

estimate, v. See -aATABLE.

estimate, estimation. The sense a judgement formed by calculation or consideration belongs to estimate & not to estimation, which means not the judgement itself, but the forming of it. The tendency described in LONG VARIANTS often leads writers astray, as in: Norwegians can only wish that the optimistic estimation of Mr Ponting of the British minefields at Spitzbergen will come true.

estimation. The use of in my &c. ¢. 88 a mere substitute for in my &c. opinion where there is no question of calculating amounts or degrees, as in The thing is absurd in my e¢., is illiterate. Tories love discussion ¢: disproved it, wo read.
