page: 153

+ (not evasion) of his answers is enough to condemn him. See -10N & -NESS.

eve. On Christmas E., on the E. of St Agnes, on the e. of the battle, on the e. of departure, on the e. of great developments. The strict sense of e. being the evening or day before, the first two phrases are literal, the last is metaphorical, & the two others may be either, i.e., they may mean before either with an interval of days or weeks, or with a night intervening, or actually on the same day. Nevertheless, in spite even of the chance of ambiguity, they are all legitimate; what is not legitimate is to use the word in its metaphorical sense & yet remind the reader of the literal scnse by some turn of words that involves it, as in The most irreconcilable of Irish landlords are beginning to recognize that we are on the e. of the dawn of a new day in Ireland. See METAPHOR.

Eve. For daughter of Eve see Bat- TERED ORNAMENTS, ELEGANT VARIA- TION, HACKNEYED PHRASES, PERI- PHRASIS.

even. 1. Placingofe. 2. E. so.

1. Placing of e. It will be seen in PosITION OF ADVERBS that their pecus is a matter partly of idiom & partly of sense; e. is one of those whose placing is important to the sense. The time to see them is just after breakfast, when they emerge from other door, Pugs, Poodles, Pekinese, Dachshunds, Dandies, & eer so many more whose names I do not e. know, all chattering at the top of their voices as they walk, run, trot, waddle or pitter-patter along according to their kind. e effect of puttin e. there is to contrast know wit some other verb; what other verb? if it had run J cannot e. guess, it would have been obvious to supply much less know; but know leaves no toom for a much less. The word that ought to have been marked out for contrast with another is not know, but names. Whose e. names is not possible; whose names even is always

+ é. from gravitating to 1; so the writer has been content with e. in the wrong place. The true solution was to write whose very names I do not know (i.e. much less their looks &c.).

2. Even so. This is a phrase thst has its uses; it often serves as a conveniently short reminder to the reader that the contention before him is not the strongest that could be advanced, that deductions have been made, that the total is net & not gross. But some writers become so attached to this convenience that they resort to it (a) when it is a convenience to them & an inconvenience to their readers, i.e. when it takes a reader some time to discover what exactly the writer meant by it, & (b) ss nothing, or one of the everyday conjunctions, would do as well. The following passages are none of them indefensible, but all exemplify the ill-judged e. so, used (when it conveys too much) to save the writer trouble, or (when it conveys too little) to gratify his fondness for the phrase:—Quite the most striking contrast between votes polled & seats gained in the German elections may be found in the following figures:

figures showing disproportion]. That ts on the first ballot, but e. so we can imagine the Radicals & National Liberals wondering whether the world can be so ill-contrived that nearly three million & a quarter voters returned only four members, whereas two millions return 81 (but, though the second may mend matters,)./ Just at present the Act is the subject of misconceptions & misrepresentations, some of which can only be dissipated by actual experience of its working. It may be that, e. so, the people will dislike the Act (even after experience)./We do not for a moment expect that we shall be able to retain in these islands all our population; we have Dominions over the seas in which many of them will find new homes still under the British flag. But, even so, we have to make our uncomfortable, & here would necd commas before & after e. to prevent
