page: 154

+ own countryside more _ attractive (though our population will be less? or though emigrants will still be British? Correct accordingly)./J hope it won't come to this; , &. 80, bridge-players will continue to take their finesses & call tt just the luck when they go down (if it does)./ Yesterday Mr Bonar Law actually had the boldness to repeat in the House of Commons a charge he made at the Albert Hall. E. so, tn the formula suggested by the single lady who was reputed to have had twins, we Shall do well never to believe more than a half of what Mr Bonar Law says (And yet)./It ts natural that France should be anxious not to lose on the swings what she gains on the roundabouts, & she has some reason for nervousness as to the interaction of commerce & politics. E. so, she will do well not to be over-nervous (But)./If the absent are always wrong, statesmen who have passcd away are alicays gentlemen. But, e. so, we were not prepared for this tribute to those statesmen who fought for Home Rule in 1886 & 1893 (omit e. so).

evenness. So spelt.

evensong &c. See MORNING.

eventuality, eventuate. See ANTI- Saxonism. The words are chicfly used in flabby journalese; some characteristic specimens are:—It ts therefore not as a substitute for local veto that disinterested management is advocated, but as a second string to the bow of temperance reformers, a provision for the eventuality of the people refusing to avail themselves of the option of veto./We shall of course be told before long that the Territorial Force is on the eve of a complete breakdown . . .; that, as d Haldane reminded us last week at Tranent, is very far from the case, however dear such an_ eventuality might be to the enemies of the Voluntary System./The Consular Body at Shanghai have determined upon the defence of the settlements in case of eventuality./The bogeys that were ravsed about the ruin did not eventuate,

+ yet employers still want the assistants to work for long hours./May we be so impertinent as to tnquire what policy Mr Lloyd George foreshadowed in his letter to Sir Horace Plunkett? And why did not.that policy eventuate?

ever is often used in uneducated or ultra-colloquial talk as an emphasizer of who, what, when, & other interrogative words, corresponding to such phrases in educated talk as who in the world, what on earth, where (can he) possibly (be?). When such talk is reproduced in print, ever should be a separate word—what ever &c., not whatever &c. For e. in lettcrs see LETTER FORMS.

ever SO (though tt were ever so bad &c.). See NEVER SO.

every one. 1. Every one) (everyone. 2. Number of pronoun after e.

1. Every one) (everyone. The... tea are academical in the worst sense of the word; almost one of them dcserves a gold medal. ! In this, the making of the two words into one is undoubtedly wrong; it should only be done where everybody might be substituted; that is never true when, as here, things & not

rsons are meant, nor yet when, as

ere, a partitive of follows; in either of those cases it is agreed that the words should be kept separate. Unfortunately there is not the same agreement on the corresponding rule that when everybody can be substituted everyone should be used. The question cannot be decided for everyone by itself; the parallel anyone, no one, & someone must be taken into account; of these no one alone is fixed, & that is always two words, owing to the natural tendency to pronounce noone noon. On the side of one word we have (a) the fact that all the four words, when they mean anybody &c., have only one accent instead of the two that are heard when they mean any single c., (b) the general usage of printers,

on this accentuation, with all except no one. On the side of two wo we have (a) consistency, since
