page: 156

+ putting it next-door to evident, surely evinces a fondness for it that borders on foolishness; & the other must have been unaware that, though either a person or an attitude can e. an emotion, neither a person nor an emotion can e. an attitude; an attitude is nothing if not visible, & what is evin is inferable but not visible. Both the Tories & the Labour Party evinced an evident anziety to stir up trouble on the Labour unrest in the railway world./The Opposition welcomed the Bill on first reading, did not divide against tt on second reading, & have, on the whole, only evinced a legitimately critical attitude in Committee.

evolution. See Lv.

ex-. For such patent yet prevalent absurdities as ez-Lord Mayor, ez- Chief Whip, ex-Tory Solicitor-General (except in another sense than its writer means), see HyPHENS; & for alternatives, LATE.

exactly, just. E. what has happened or what is about to happen is not yet clear; Just how the words are to be divided. This now familiar idiom, in which e. or j. is prefixed to an indirect question, 1s a modern development. The e. or j. sometimes adds point, but is more often otiose, & the use of it becomes with many writers a disagrecable MANn- NERISM.

te. So spelt (L agger a heap). E. makes exaggerable; see -ABLE 1.

exasperate makes -rable; see -ABLE 1.

exceeding(ly) & excessive(ly). The difference is the same as that between very great or very much & too

reat or too much, It is not inherent in the words, nor very old, excessive(ly) having formerly had both meanings; but it is now recognized by most of those who use words carefully, & is a useful DIFFER- ENTIATION. It follows that I am excessively obliged to you is not now standard English, & that I was excessively annoyed should be said 156

+ in repentant & not, as it usually is, in self-satisfied tones. A passage in which a good modern writer allows himself to disregard the now usual distinction may be worth giving: I have said that in early life Henry James was not ‘impressive’; as time went on his appearance became, on the contrary, excessively noticeable & arresting. He removed the beard which had long disguised his face, & so revealed the strong lines of mouth & chin, which responded to the majesty of the skull.

excellence, -cy. See -CE, -cy.

excellent. See PosITIVE WORDS.

except, as a conjunction governing a clause, i.e. as a substitute for the unless or if . . . not of ordinary educated speech, is either an ARCHA- 1sM resorted to for one or other of the usual reasons, or else an illustration of the fact that old constructions often survive in uneducated talk when otherwise obsolete. In the quotation, archaism for one of the less dcfensible reasons is the explanation:—But, e. the matter is argued as a mere matter of amour propre—¢dé, for ourselves, we think it would be unjust & unfair to Mr Bonar Law to argue it in any such way—how is it possible to use such high-flown language about a mere * change of method ’?.

excepting as a preposition has one normal use. When a possible exception is to be mentioned as not made, the form used is, instead of not except, either not excepting before the noun or not excepted after it: All men are fallible except the Pope; All men are fallible, not excepting the Pope or the Pope not excepted. Other prepositional uses of excepting are unidiomatic; but the word as a true Seana eg or a gerund does not fall under this condemnation:—He would treble the tax on brandy excepting only, or without even excepting, that destined for medicine. An ex- , ample of the use deprecated is: The cost of living throughout the world, excepting in countries where special
