page: 157

+ causes operate, shows a tendency to keep level. ‘

exception. The ¢. proves the rule, & phrases implyi it, are so constantly introduced in argument, & so much more often with obscuring than wita illuminating effect, that it is necessary to set out its different possible meanings, viz (1) the original simple legal sense, (2) the secondary rather complicated scientific sense, (3) the loose rhetorical sense, (4) the jocular nonsense, (5) the serious nonsense. The last of these is the only one that need be objected to directly, though 8 & 4 must bear the blame of bringing 5 into existence by popularizing an easily misunderstood phrase; unfortunately 5 is much the commonest use. See POPULARIZED TECH- NICALITIES.

1. * Special leave is given for men to be out of barracks tonight till 11.0 p.m.’; * The exception proves the rule’ means that this special leave implies a rule requiring men, except when an exception is made, to be in earlier. The value of this in oa preuns statutes is plain.

2. We have concluded by induction that Jones the critic, who never writes a kindly notice, lacks the faculty of appreciation; one day a warm eulogy of an anonymous novel appears over his signature; we see that this exception destroys our induction; later it comes out that the anonymous novelist is Jones himself; our conviction that he lacks the faculty of appreciation is all the stronger for the apparent exception when once we have found out that, being self-appreciation, it is outside the scope of the rule— which, however, we now modify to exclude it, saying that he lacks the faculty of appreciating others. Or

in, it turns out that the writer of the notice is another Jones; then our opinion of Jones the first is only strengthened by having been momentarily shaken. These kinds of exception are of great value in

157

+ scientific inquiry, but they prove the rule not when they are seen to be exceptions, but when they have been shown to be either outside of or reconcilable with the principle they seem to contradict.

8. We may legitimately take satisfaction in the fact that peace prevails under the Union Jack, the Abor expedition being the exception that goes to prove the rule. On the contrary, it goes to disprove it; but no more is meant than that it calls our attention to & heightens by contrast what might otherwise pass unnoticed, the remarkable prevalence of peace.

4. ‘If there is one virtue I can claim, it is decent * Were you in time for breakfast this morning? ’ ‘Well, well, the exception that proves the rule.’ It is by the joint effect of this use & 8 that the proverb comes to oscillate between the two senses Exceptions can always be neglected, & A truth is all the truer if it is sometimes false.

5. It rained on St Swithin, it will rain for forty days; July 81 is fine & dry, but our certainty of a wet August is not shaken, since today is an exception that (instead of at one blow destroying) proves the rule. This frame of mind is encouraged whenever a writer, aware or unaware himself of the limitations, appeals to the 2 use without clearly showing that his exception is of the right kind:—That the incidence of import duties will be affected by varying conditions, & that in some exceptional cases the exporter will bear a large share of it, has never been denied; but exceptions prove the rules & do not destroy them./The , ed principle of Disestablishing &

isendowing the Church in Wales will be supported by the full strength of Liberalism, with the small exceptions that may be taken as proving the rule.

exoeptionable, exceptional, unex-. The -able & -al forms, especially the negatives, are often confused by
