page: 158

+ writers or compositors. Exceptional has to do with the ordinary sense of exception, & means out of the common; ezxceptionable involves the sense of exception rarely seen except in take exception to & open to exception; it means the same as the latter phrase, & its negative form means offering no handle to criticism. The usual mistake is that shown in:— The picture is in unexceptional condition, & shows this master’s qualities to a marked degree.

excerpt. See NouN & VERB ACCENT.

excessive(ly). See EXCEEDING(LY).

exchangeable. So spelt; sec MUTE E.

excisable. So spelt; see MUTE E.

excise, not -ize; see -ISE)(-IZE. For synonymy of ¢., n., see TAX.

excitable. So spelt; see MUTE E.

EXCLAMATION MARK. See STOpPs.

excommunicate makes -cable; see “ABLE 1.

exculpate. See -ATABLE.

excusable. So spelt; see MUTE E.

execrate makes -crable; sec -ABLE I.

executor. See -or. In the special sense (testator’s posthumous agent) pronounce ikzé’kitor, in other senses é’kzikiitor. The feminine is ezxecutrix (ikzé’k-), pl. -trices (for pronunciation of which see -TRIX).

exercisable. So spelt; see MUTE E.

exercise, not -ize; see -ISE)(-IZE.

exhalation, exhale. The h is pro-

nounced in the verb, but usually not in the noun; exhale makes -lable,

see MUTE E.

exigence, -cy. -cy is now the

commoner form; -ce has no senses in

which - : Aisle be unsuitable, while

-ce sounds archaic in some; it would

be well to make -cy universal; see

-cE & -cy. The sense exactingness

belongs to the French word ezigence,

which should be italicized & pro-

nounced as French, at least until

exigence is no longer used as synony-

mous with exigency.

exit, vb. Those who neither know

Latin nor read plays are apt to

forget or not know that this is a

singular verb with plural ezeunt, &

+ to write exit the tariff-reformers as complacently as exit tariff-reform. All the following are actual newspaper headings:—EXIT THE DA- GOS./Exit the McKenna Duties. EXI BLACK LISTS./EXI HERTLING & VON HINTZE./ EXIT THE COAL AND DUMP- ING MEASURES./EXIT THE MONITORS.

-ex, -ix. Naturalized Latin nouns in -ex & -iz, genit. -icis, vary in the form of the plural. The Latin plural is -ices (-iséz), the English -exes (-éksiz); some words use only one of these, & some both. See LATIN PLURALS.,

1. Words in purely scicntific or technical use (codez, cortex, murez, silex, &c.) are best allowed their Latinity; to talk of cortezes, codezes, murezes, & silexes, is to take indecent liberties with physiology, pelecorepe ys ichthyology, & gco-

ogy, the real professors of which, moreover, usually prefer -ices.

2. Latin words borrowed as trade names (simplez, duplex, &c.) are for the period of their lives English; if in talking of lamps you sa P hess find duplices better than central-draughts, you are scarcely intelligible.

8. Words that have become the

established English for an object

(ilex) use -exes; under the shade of

the ilices shows ignorance of English

more cone than knowledge

of Latin; cf. -us & -um. The ques-

tion whether the ousting of the

native names (e.g. of holm-oak by

ilex) should have n or should be

prevented is a separate one, to be

decided for the individual word.

4. There are some words, however,

whose use is partly scientific &

partly popular, e.g. apex, appendix,

andex, matrix, vertex, vorlex; of

these both plurals are used, with

some tendency, but no more, to

keep -xes for popular or colloquial &

-ices for scientific or formal con-

texts:—The line just avoids the

apexes of the hills, but The shells huve

their apices eroded. Six patients had
