page: 159

+ their appendixes removed, & I hate books mel ta ee but The evidence is digested in appendices. A dial like a clock face doith two indexes, but Integral, fractional, & negative indices. A heap of old stereotype matrixes, but Some of the species of whinstone are the common matrices [for pronunciation see -TRIX] of agate & chalcedony. Arrange the trestles with their vertexes alternately high & low, but In the vertices of curves where cut the abscissa at right angles, hirlpools or vortexes or eddies, but The vortices of modern alomists. There is thus considerable liberty of choice; but with most words of this class the scientific use, & consequently the Latin plural, is much commoner than the other.

ex officio. When used as an adjective, the words should be hyphened: I was there ex officio, but the exofficio members of the committee. See HYPHENS.

exonerate makes -rable; see -ABLE 1.

exordium. Pl.-ms or -ta; see -UM.

exoteric & exotic, of the same ultimate derivation, have entirely diverse applications. That is exoteric which is communicable to the outer circle of disciples (opp. esoteriec); that is exotic which comes from outside the country (opp. indigenous); exoteric doctrines; exotic plants.

le, -ansible. See -ABLE, “IBLE, 2.

ex » when used as an adj., should be hyphened: speaking ez parte, but an ex-parte statement; see Hypaens (Group *sub judice).

expatiation. See -c1iATION.

expect. Exception is often taken to the sense suppose, be inclined to think, consider probable. This extension of meaning is, however, s0 natural that it seems needless Punts to resist it. E. by itself is used as short for e. to find, e. that it will turn out that, that is all:—ZJ e. he will be in time; I ¢. he ts there by this time; 1. he was there; le.

159

+ you have all heard all this before; Mr ’s study is scholarly & thorough, & has had a good deal of expansion, we eé., since it took the

Essay Prize, i.e., if the facts ever happen to come to our knowledge, we shall be surprised if they are not to that effect. The OED remarks that the idiom is ‘ now rare in literary use’; that is owing to the dead set that has been made at it; but it is so firmly established in colloquial use that if, as is suggested above, there is no sound objection to it, the period of exile is not likely to be long.

expectorate, -ation, seem to be now the established American for spit- (ting) & spitting) out. In British use they have as yet only the currency of medical terms & GENTEELisms. This difference of status, which it is to be hoped will not be diminished from our side at least, is an object-lesson on the vanity of genteelism. The mealy-mouthed American must be by this time harder put to it with eaxpectorate than the mealy-mouthed Englishman with spit; his genteelism has ee its gentility & become itself the plain rude word for the rude thing; it must be discouraging to have to begin the search for decent obscurity all over again—with so comes a failure behind one, too.

POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES,

expediency, -ce. The form first given is now much commoner in all surviving senses; there is no incipient differentiation, & it is desirable that the now rare -ce should be abandoned. See -cé£, -cy.

expedite. See FoRMAL WORDS.

experiment, n. & v. See Noun & VERB ACCENT,

experimentalize. See LONG VARI- ANTS.

expert. See Noun & ADJ. ACCENT.

explate makes exrpiable, expiator; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

expiry. Pronounce -iri.

expletive. The OED gives the pro-
