page: 160

+ nunciations é’ksplitiv, éksplé’tiv, in that order. The noun use (oath or other interjection) being frequent & popular, & the adjective use (serving to fill out) literary & especially grammatical, the two pronunciations might well be made use of for DIFFERENTIATION; cf. expert, & see Noun & ADJECTIVE ACCENT; the noun would be é’ksplitiv. roe of nouns (e.g. declaration, testi-

explicit & express. With a certain mony, promise, contract, understanding, incitement, prohibition), either adjective can be used in the general sense of definite as opposed to virtual or tacit or bs or general or inferable or implied or constructive. One may nevertheless be more appropriate than the other. That is explicit which is set forth in sufficient detail; that is express which is worded with intention. What is meant by calling a promise explicit is first that it has been put into words & secondly that its import is plain; what is meant by calling it express is first, as before, that it has n put into words, & secondly that the maker meant it to bind him in the case contemplated. This second element in the meaning of express is now generally present in it where it is roughly synonymous with explicit, but has come into it by accident. An express promise was by origin simply an expressed promise, i.e. one put into words, express being a Latin participle of the kind seen in suspect = suspected, subject = subjected, & many others. When its participial sense ceased to be appreciated, it was natural that the familiar adjectival sense (for the express purpose of; express malice is w one with a sedate deliberate mind & formed design doth . . .) should influence its meaning; the idea’ of special intention is now almost invariably distinctive of ezpress when it is preferred to explicit.

exploit. See Noun & VERB ACCENT.

explosive (in phonetics). See TEcH- NICAL TERMS,

export, n. & v. See Noun & VERB ACCENT.

exposé. See FRENCH WORDS.

exposition in the sense public show of goods &c. is a GALLICISM (or Americanism) for exhibition.

ex post facto. This is the established spelling; but the person who knows the Latin words is worse off with it in this disguise than one who does not; it should be ez postfacto (ez on the footing oh orienta later enactment). The ordinary rule of HYPHENS would then be applied, & we should say It is undesirable to legislate ex postfacto, but ee Bos lace legislation 1s undesirable. - legislation is, for instance, the making of an act illegal after it has been committed; but what is referred to in facto is not the ‘ doing’ of the action but the ‘ enacting ’ of the law.

express, adj. See ExPuicit.

s, vb. Mr Justice Sankey expressed himself much troubled by the views expressed in Lord Wrenbury’s letter./Both men afterwards e2poe themselves perfectly satisfied.

nsert as after himself & themselves. There is no authority for to express oneself satisfied &c.; at any rate the OED has no acquaintance with it; & it certainly requires the support of authority, whereas no such support is needed for the use with as. The fact is that ANALoGy is being allowed to confuse express with declare just as regard is wrongly given the construction of consider.

expressive. For‘ to use an e. word” see SUPERIORITY.

e - See -ATABLE.

extant had formerly the same sense as existent or existing, & was as widely applicable. Its sense & its application have been narrowed till it means only ‘ still in existence or not having perished at the present or the given past or future time ’, & is applied almost exclusively to documents, buildings or monuments, & customs. ££. memory, the ec. generation, the e. crisis, e. States, are unlikely or impossible phrases, &
