page: 161

+ the e. laws would be understood only of such as were on record but not in operation, of laws as documents & not as forces. The pronunciation recommended is é’kstant, but Iksta’nt is not uncommon.

extemporaneous(ly) & extemporary, -lly, are cumbersome words; eztempore is seldom unequal to the need, See LONG VARIANTS.

extend. .1. For extendable, extendible, extensible, see -ABLE, 2.

2. E. for give or accord is, in its present vogue, a piece of turgid journalese. It might have been natural English; you e. your hand literally, & from that through extending the hand of welcome to the metaphorical extending of a welcome is a simple enough passage. But native English did not go that way, perhaps because give & accord were already in constant use, one for everyday & the other for more formal contexts. E. in this sense has done its development in America, & come to us full-grown vii the newspapers—a bad record. Toe. a welcome is just tolerable because of its obviousness as a metaphor; but the extending of a hearty reception, sympathy, congratulations, a hearing, & magnificent send-off, & the like, should if possible be barred (in America a congregation ‘ extends a call’ to the reverend gentleman of its choice); we have still give & accord to choose between, with offer & proffer to meet the demand for other shades of meaning. The following quotation shows an application in which even the notion of friendliness inherent in the metaphor has disappeared: Being promptly pel bhai by the German police, he appea to the Foreign O or redress, but Lord Salisbury Tien kim in a characteristically pointed official oie iar he co see no grounds w for taking exception to the treatment which had been extended to him.

Two points are to be observed in regard to the above advice: (a)

1351 6

+ The condemnation does not touch such sentences as You should e. to me the same indulgence, where the metaphor may be different, & the meaning * widen it so as to include me as well as someone else’; (2) it is not maintained that ¢e. has never had the sense of give or accord in native English—it had in the 16th- 18th centuries—, but only that the modernism does not descend direct from the native use; having been reimported after export to America, it is now ill at ease in the old country.

extent. In the phrase to... extent, e. should not be qualified by adjectives introducing any idea beyond that of quantity; to what, to any, to some, to a great or vast or enormous or unknown or surprising, ¢., but not Some of the girls even go to the manlike e. of holding meetings in the Park to discuss their grievances.

extenuate. 1. E. makes -uable; see -ABLE 1, 2. The root meaning being to thin down or whittle away, the proper object of the verb in its sense of make excuses for is a word expressing something bad in itself, as guilt, cowardice, cruelty, & not a neutral word such as conduct or behaviour. But since these latter, though neutral in themselves, are often converted by context into unmistakable words of blame, & are then legitimate objects of ¢., the misapprehension arises that it can always govern them, & consequently that the meaning of excuse belongs to the verb, instead of to the combination between the verb & an object cxpressing something blamable. From this comes the further error of supposing that you can e., i.e. make excuses for, a person. In such cases etymology is of value.

exterior, external, extraneous, extrinsic. Etymologically the four differ only in the formative suffixes used, & there is no reason why any of them might not have acquired the senses of all; outside is the fundamental meaning. It will be best to take them in pairs.
