page: 162

1. exterior & external. That is exterior which encloses or is outermost, the enclosed or innermost being interior. These opposites are chiefly applied to things of which there is a pair, & with conscious reference, when one is spoken of, to the other: the exterior court is one within which is an interior court; the exterior door has another inside it; exterior & interior lines in strategy are concentric curves one enclosing the other; the exterior ear covers & leads to the interior ear; & the exterior surface of a hollow ball, but not of a solid one, is a legitimate phrase.

That is external which is without & apart or whose relations are with what is without & apart, that which is within being internal. The ezternal world, external things, external evidence, illustrate the first part of the definition; ezternal appearances, worship, & action (those t affect other persons or things somehow) illustrate the second part; external debt & relations are those a country has to or with other countries.

In many phrases either exterior or external may be used, but usually with some difference of underlying meaning; e.g., the exterior ear is thought of as the porch of the intcrior ear, but the external ear is the ear as seen by the outsider. Again, a building’s exterior features & external features are different things, the former being those of its outside only, & the latter all, whether of outside or inside, that are visible as opposed to the structure that can only be guessed at. Similarly, with the nouns, ezterior has the definite narrow material meaning of the outside, as opposed to the inside of a building or the inner nature of a person, while externals includes all about a person that reveals him to us, his acts & habits & manner of speech as well as his features & clothes.

2. extraneous & extrinsic.

That is extraneous which is brought in, or comes or has come in, from

+ without. A fly in amber, a builet in one’s chest, are extraneous bodies; extraneous atid, interference, light, sounds; extraneous points are questions imported into a discussion from which they do not naturally arise.

That is extrinsic which is not an essential & inherent part of something but is attached to it as a separable belonging, essential properties being intrinsic. A florin’s intrinsic value is what the metal in it would have fetched before it was coined; its extrinsic value is what is added by the stamp. A person’s extrinsic advantages are such thin as wealth & family interest, while his courage & talent are intrinsic advantages.

It is worth notice that extrinsic is now rare, being little used except when a formal contrary is wanted for the still common infrinsic. Ezxtraneous on the other hand exists on its own account; it has no formal contrary, tntraneous being for practical purposes non-existent, & must make shift with internal, tntrinsic, indigenous, domestic, native, or whatever else suits the particular context.

exterminate makcs -nable; see “ABLE 1.

exterri See EXTRATERRI- TORIAL.

extract, n. & v. See Noun & VERB ACCENT.

extraneous. See EXTERIOR.

extraordinary. Pronounce as five syllables (-tror-) not six (-traor-); the OED gives dence to the shorter; for the effect of spelling on sound, see PRONUNCIATION.

ex(tra)territorial(ity). The forms secm to be used quite indifferently. To the classical latinist, that is to say to 99% of those who are acquainted with Latin at all, the longer seems the only reasonable one, since eztra, & not ez, is the classical Latin for outside of; & this is perhaps a stronger consideration than the saving of a syllable. It would certainly be better to have
