page: 164

+ Jeanie; Jemmy; Jenny; J: Jessie; Johnny; Katy AP kiddy: kilty = Highlander (-te); Kitty; laddie; lassie; looby; lovey = my love; mammy; Marie, French name; Mary, ee name; maty = mate ey 3; Milly (-ie); Minnte; Missy;

olly; mummy=mother; Neddy; Nelly (-ie); nicy; nighty; Nosy= big-nosed one (-ey); nunky= uncle; nursy (-te); Paddy; Patsy; Patty; Peggy; piggy (-ie); pinny; Polly; puppy; Regey (-te); Robby (-te); rooty=bread; Sammy; Sandy; Sawney; repeat: sis: = sister; slavey; sonny; Sophy (-ie); spooky (-ey); Sukey; Susy (-te); sweety; Teddy; toddy; Tommy; tommy= bread; tummy; Watty= Walter; wifie; Willy (-ie); Winnie.

eyot. Pronounce at; the OED

Ils it ‘ a more usual variant of ait ’, & ‘an artificial spelling ’.

eyrie. See AERY.

F

fabricate makes -cable, -tor; see -ABLE I], -OR.

facetiae, in booksellers’ catalogues, is a euphemism for obscenities; the following extract from such a catalogue is vouched for b the Westminster Gazette:—FACETIAE. 340 —Kingsley (C.) Phaethon; or Loose Thoughts for Loose Thinkers, 2nd ed., 8vo, boards, 1s., 1854.

facetious. For synonymy see JOCOSE,

FACETIOUS FORMATIONS. A few specimens may be collected in groups illustrating more or less distinct types.

Pun or parody: anecdotage (anecdote, dotage); gigmanity (gigman, humanity); correctitude (correct, rectitude); bee hepa (judge, dogmatic); goloptious (voluptuous); sacerdotage.

Mock mistakes: underconstumble, mischevious, splendiferous, Eyetalian,

Popular etymology, real or sup-

164

sed: highstrikes (hysterics); jaw-

tion (jobation).

Mock in; bonus, bogus, hocuspocus, hi-cocalorum (hic, hoc, horum?).

Porimanteau words:

galumph iP eeuey. ( op, triumph);

chortle (snort,

Incongrutty of Latin trimmings to common English words: absquatulate; circumbendibus; omnium

therum; fistical; babyolatry; Fisgruntled; contraption; squandermania.

Irreverent familiarity: blimy (God blind me); crikey (Christ).

Onomatopoeia, obvious or obscure: bubblyjock;_ collywobbles; ramshackle: pernickety; rumbustious.

Long & ludicrous: galligaskins; ann ore oes cantankerous; skedaddie; panjandrum; spiflicate.

facile. Its value as a synonym for easy or fluent or deztrous lies chiefly in its depreciatory implication. A f. speaker or wmiter is one who needs to expend little pains (& whose product is of correspondingly little import); a f. triumph or victory is easily won (& comes to little). Unless the implication in brackets is intended, the use of f. instead of its commoner synonyms (a more economical & f. mode; with af. turn of the wrist) 1s ill-judged & usually due to AVOIDANCE OF THE OBVIOUS,

facile princeps. Pronounce fai’sill; Latin adv. =easily (first).

facilitate. The officer was facilitated in his search the occupants. We f. an operation, not the operator, A SLIPsHoD EXTENSION.

facsimile. Pronounce faksi’mfl.

fact is well equipped with idiomatic phrases. There are unquestionably established in f., in point of f., as a matier of f., the f. 18, & the f. of the matter is. Itisa pity that the recent invention as a wd

(of which no example is recorded in the OED) should be thrust upon us in addition to all these. It will be seen that in each of the few quotations that
