page: 165

+ must suffice on so trifling a matter one or other of the familiar forms would have been more at home than this parvenu. He says that a ‘considerable part’ of the 25 mil- Lions is on new officials like locusts devouring the land; asa f., barely one-thirtieth of that figure is due to new officials (as a matter of f.)./The Foreign Office has more than once been severely criticized for similar mistakes in the Reichstag & in the Press; asaf., it is no more above serious blunders than are many other German institutions (the f. is)./It ts quite arguable that the time gi might have been better allocated, but asa f. nearly all the important points raised have been discussed (in point of f.)./The Pan-Germans & Natvonalists can afford to be more independent than the Conservatives; & as a f.

are 8o (in f.).

t others besides journalists like the sound of the phrase appears from the following business letter:— Dear Sirs ... I accept your statement that the casks returned in March were steel not wood barrels. As a f. [i.e., as a matter of f.] the ledger clerk who was in our employ at the time is not noc with us & he is entirely to blame . .. When your man returns sacks, casks, or as a f. [i.e. in f.] any other goods, a credit note is handed to him at the time.

factious factitious, fictitious. Though the words are not synonyms even of the looser kind, there is a certain danger of confusion between them because there are nouns with which two or all of them can be used, with meanings sometimes more & sometimes less wide apart. Thus factious tancour is the rancour that lets party spirit prevail over patriotism; factitious rancour is a rancour that is not of natural growth, but has been deliberately created to serve someone’s ends; & fictitious rancour is a rancour represented as existing but imaginary. A party cry has a factious ue, a silver coin a factitious value (cf. ExTRINSIC), &

165

+ a bogus company’s shares a fictitious value.

factitive. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

factotum. Pl. -ms; see -um.

fadeless. See -.Ess.

faerie, faery. Pronounce f&’erl. ‘A variant of fairy. In present usage, it is practically a distinct word, adopted either to express Spenser’s peculiar modification of the sense, or to exclude various unpoetical or undignified associations connected with the current form fairy ’—OED. The distinction should be respected by all who care for the interests of the language & not only for their own momentary requirements. To say Faerie when one merely means Fairyland in trivial contexts is VULGARIZATION.

fag(g)ot. Spell with two gs.

ence. The use in English of a foreign ‘ general term comprising

the various kinds of glazed earthenware & porcelain ’—the whole definition given in the OED— is hard to divine. Most of those who read the word are disappointed to find, on appeal to a dictionary, that it means nothing more specific. A SUPERFLUOUS WORD.

fail. 1. For a failed harvest, coup, stockbroker, &c., see INTRANSITIVE PAST PARTICIPLES.

2. Failing=in default of is a participle developed through the absolute construction into a preposition; tf or since so-c&-so fails means the same as in case of or on the failure of so-&-so. Either the absolute or the prepositional use is accordingly legitimate, but not a mixture of the two; the form whom failing familiar in companies’ proxy notices is such a mixture; it should be either ‘ failing whom ’ (preposition & objective) or ‘who failing ’ (absolute & subjective).

8. Fail is one of the words apt to cause the sort of lapse noticed in NEGATIVES GONE WBONG: New Year's Day is a milestone which the least obseroant of us can hardly fail to pass unnoticed.
