page: 170

+ running it that they consented to it reluctantly. It is always open, however to those who dislike illogicality to drop the so in the short form—Far from running it they consented to it reluctantly. But it is waste labour to titt against STURDY INDEFENSIBLES.

3. Far-flung. The f.-f. battle-line, our f.-f. empire, &c. The present emotional value of this as a VOGUE- WORD is reckoned so high as often to outweigh such trifling matters as appropriateness:—Set agatnst all its [the war’s] burden of sorrow & suffering & waste that millions of men from f.-f. lands have been ht to know each other better. The lands are distant; they are not far-flung; but what matter? /f.-f. is a signal that our blood is to be stirred; & so it is, if we do not stop to think./ He is already popular, even tn the remotest parts of this f.-{. constituency.

4. As & so f.as. As or so f. as & cannot be used as short for as far as x goes or so far as concerns 2; in the following examples concerns, regards, is concerned, goes, &c., should have been inserted where omission is indicated:—As far as getting the mo he asked forA, Mr Churchill had little difficulty./The result was that the men t met with a defeat so far as Aobtaining a definite pledge in regard to their demands./There is no case for the decision of the Law Lords, so far as A ‘* Parliamentary representation” being a recognized method by which unions could fulfil their legal function of ‘regulating the relations between masters & workmen’./They scem to treat the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s Budget proposals as something which the moment they are made ought to be considered as wunaltcrable in any respect, at all events so far asAwhat is proposed by way of taxation,

As or so far as, regarded as a compound preposition, is followed primarily by a word of place (went as far as York); secondarily it may have a noun (which may be an infinitive or gerund) that expresses

170

+ a limit of advance or progress (He knows algebra as far as quadratics; I have gone so far as to collect, or so far as collecting, statistics), But when the purpose is to say not how far an action proceeds, but within what limits a statement is to be applied, as in all the examples at the beginning of this section, as & so far as are not prepositions, but conjunctions requiring a verb. The genesis of the misuse may be guessed at thus:—I have gone as far as collecting statistics (right). As far as collecting statistics you have my leave to proceed (correct, but unnatural order). As far as collecting statistics he ts competent enough (cf. knows algebra as

ar as quadratics; defensible, but

tter insert goes; the Churchill sentence quoted is just below this level). As far as collecting statistics, on industry is necessary (impossible).

5. So far asso far that. His efforts were so far successful (a) as they reduced, or (b) as to reduce, or (c) that reduced, the percentage of oe ge & ¢ forms mean the same, ir gies phar gat: is not in doubt: he uced the percentage, & had that success. The meaning of a is different: if you want to know whether & how far he succeeded, find out whether & how far he reduced the percentage;_ perhaps he did not reduce it, & therefore failed. But the a form is not infrequently used wrongly instead of b or c:—The previous appeal made by M. Delcassé was so far successful as the Tsar himself ‘sent orders te comply (read that for as; the sending of orders clearly took place, & such sending is not a variable by the degree of which success could be measured).

farce. See TECHNICAL TERMS, & COMEDY.

farceur. See FRENCH WORDS.

faro. Pronounce far’d.

farouche. The meaning, simply sulien-mannered from shyness (cheval f., cheval qui cratnt la presence de
