page: 171

+ Chomme—Littré), is obscured by association (‘the connexion is untenable ’—OED) with ferocious; see TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY.

farrow, litter. #'. is used of swine only, 2. of any quadruped producing several young at a birth.

farther, further. The history of the two words appears to be that

urther is a comparative of fore & should, if it were to be held to its etymology, mean more advanced, & that farther is a newer variant of further, no more connected with far than further is, but affected in its form by the faet that further, having come to be used instead of the obsolete comparative of far (farrer), seemed to need a Sad saat that should assimilate it to far. This is intended for a popular but roughly correct summary of ‘the OED’s etymological account. As to the present use of the two forms, the OED says:—‘ In standard English the form farther is usually preferred where the word is intended to be the comparative of far, while further is used where the notion of far is altogether absent; there is a large intermediate class of instances in which the choice between the twoforms is arbitrary ’.

This seems to be too strong a state-

ment, or a statement of what might

be a useful differentiation rather than of one actually developed or even developing. The fact is surely

that hardly anyone uses the two

words for different occasions; most

people prefer one or the other for

all purposes, & the preference of the

majority is for further; the most

that should be said is perhaps that

Jarther is not common except where

distance is in question. The three

pairs of quotations following are

selected for comparison from the

OED stores.

1. Comparative of far:—If you can

your load no farther, say so.—

Ht Martineau. Jt was not thought

safe shed the ships to proceed further in

the darkness.— Macaulay.

171

2. No notion of far:—Down he sat without farther bidding.— Dickens, I now proceed to some further instances. —De Morgan.

3. Intermediate:— Punishment cannot act any farther than in as far as the idea of tt is ent in the mind.— Bentham. en who pretend to believe no further than they can see.— Berkeley.

On the whole, though differentiations are good in themselves, it is less likely that one will be established for farther & further than that the latter will become universal. In the verb, further is very much more common.

fascinate makes -nable, -ior;

see -ABLE ], -OR.

fascine. Pronounce fasé’n. |

fascist &c. The Italian words— fascista pl. -ti, fascismo—are pronounced (roughly) fahshé’stah -té, -é’smé. In English they should be fashi’sta, -té, -I’zmG, or else anglicized to fascist pl. -s, -ism, pronounced fa’si-. Whether this full anglicization of the words is worth while cannot be decided till we know whether the things are to be temporary or permanent in Engl "u.

fasten. Pronounce fah’sn;

see PRONUNCIATION, Silent t.

fasti, Pronounce fa’sti.

fatalism)(determinism. The philosophical distinction between the words cannot here be more than roughly suggested, & is itself more or less arbitrary. F: says: Every event is pre-ordaincd; you cannot act as you will, but only in the preordained way. D. says: You can act (barring obstacles) as you will; but then you cannot will as you will; your will is determined by a complex of antecedents the interaction of which makes you unable to choose any but the one course. That is,

. assumes an external power decreeing irresistibly has event from the greatest to the least, while d. assumes the dependence of all things, including the wills of living beings, upon sequences of cause & effect
