page: 173

fay. See Farry 2.

feasible. With those who feel that the use of an ordinary word for an ordinary notion does not do justice to their vocabulary or sufficiently exhibit their cultivation (see WoRrkK- Inc & STYLISH WORDS), f. is now a prime favourite. Its proper sense is ‘capable of being done, accom-

lished, or carried out’ (OED).

hat is, it means the same as possible in one of the latter’s senses, & its true function is to be used instead of possible where that might be ambiguous. A thunderstorm is possible (but not f.). Irrigation is possible (or, indifferently, f.). A counter-revolution is possible; i.e. (a) one may for all we know happen, or (6) we can if we choose bring one about; but, if 6 is the meaning, f. is better than possible because it cannot properly bear sense a & therefore obviates ambiguity.

The wrong use of f. is that in which, by StiepsHoOD EXTENSION, it is allowed to errr a a a of possible, & that of pr ‘ is is described by the OED as ‘ hardly a justifiable sense etymologically, &... ized by no dictionary ’. It is however becoming very common; in all the quotations, it will be seen that the natural word would be either probable or possible, one of which should have bcen chosen:— Continuing, Mr Wood said: ‘ I think tt is very f. that the strike may be spi elirs Paani siadh week, & it } a signi ) e that...’. Witness said it was quite f. that if he had had night binoculars he would have seen the iceberg earlier./We ourselues believe that this is the most f. explanation of the tradition./This would ar to offer a f. explanation ) the scaffold ./ The reason given

or the Hy hero was quite different & more f./It is f. that the airship was struck by lightning & totally destroyed.

feast. For ‘ f. of reason ’ see Hack- NEYED PHRASES.

feature, vb. The use of this in

cinema announcements instead of

+ represent or exhibit is perhaps from America; at any rate, while British dictionaries give no meanings that support it, the American ‘ Standard’

ives as normal ‘ The newspapers

eature aviation’, Wherever it comes from, it is to be feared that from the cinema bills it will make its nay into Se “aoa use, which would be a pity. (Yes! 1924: Boys’ school & college outfits, men’s hase wear & under-garments, as well as . «, are also featured.)

fecund. The OED gives precedence to [é’- over fé’-.

federate makes -rable, -tor; see -ABLE I, -OR.

federation, confederation, confederacy. Writing in 1918, one may say that the Entente Powers are now a confederacy, that the proposed League of Nations would be a con- federation, & that if that w-c — further developed into a United States of Europe, that would be a federation. The following extracts from the OED bear this out:—

* Confederacy now usually implies a looser or more temporary association than confederation, which is applicd to a union of States organized on an intentionally permanent basis.’/‘ In modern political use, confederation is usually limited to & permanent union of sovercign States for common action in relation to externals ...The United States of America are commonly described as a Confederation (or confederacy) from 1777 to 1789; but from 1789 their closer union has been considered a ‘ federation ’’ or federal republic.’/[On federation} ‘ Now chiefly spec. the formation of a political unity out of a number of separate States, so that each retains the management of its internal affairs ’,

fee, n. For synonymy see TAX.

fee, vb. The past & p.p. are best written fee’d; see -ED & ’D.

feint, adj. See FAINT.

feldspar, not felspar. The first part is German vekt field, not Fels rock.
