page: 175

+ tival use, we say so-&-so is female, meaning that it is of or for the female sex. Beyond that point as an adjective female has not gone; feminine, on the other hand, is not a noun that has gone part way to complete adjectivehood; it has been an adjective all its life, & means not merely of or for women, but of the kind that characterizes or may be expected from or is associated with women. That is, there are two factors in choosing between female & feminine, (a) that of the difference between all sex & human sex, & (b) that of the difference between the noun-adjective & the true adjective.

The result is this: when the information wanted is the answer to the question Of (or for) which sex?, use female, provided that the context sufficiently indicates the limitation to humankind; when the question is Of what sort?, use feminine. So we get female ruler, cook, comparien, Paul Pry, but feminine rule, cookery, companionship, curiosity; female attire, organs, children, servanis, screws; the female ward of a prison; female education is the education provided for (of course, human) females, while feminine education is that which tends to cultivate the qualities characteristic of women. Feminine is the epithet for beauty, features, arguments, pursuits, la , weakness, spite, & the like. The feminine gender is the one that includes nouns resembling women’s names; a man may be called feminine, but not female, if he is like women. For female or feminine rkyme &c., see MALE 2.

WwW is used only to describe qualities peculiar to (a) good women a8 opposed to men (w. compassion, sympathy, intuition, &c.) or (b) developed women as opposed to girls (w. beauty, figure, experience).

femaleXwoman. F. in its noun use is sometimes convenient as a word that includes girls as weil as women, & sometimes as includin non-human as well as human f.

+ creatures. Where such inclusion is not specially desired, to call a woman a female is exactly as impolite as to call a lady a woman, without any of the sentimental implications that often make woman preferable to lady; it is reasonably resented. It is not reasonable to extend this resentment to the adjective use of

but it is the mistaken extension that probably accounts for the apparent avoidance of the natural phrase f. suffrage & the use of the clumsy woman suffrage instead. As with f. education (for which see the previous article), f. suffrage is the short for the suffrage of (of course, human) f. creatures, i.e. women. It is to be hoped that when the way the women are going to vote comes, as ft now will, to be a@ common theme of discussion, it will be called the female vote & not the woman vote, just as its counterpart will certainly be the male vote & not the man vote; to turn woman into an adjective with female ready made is mere perversity.

FEMININE DESIGNATIONS. This article is intended as a counterprotest. The authoress, poetess, & paintress, & sometimes the patroness & the inspectress, take exception to the indication of sex in these designations. They regard the distinction as derogatory to them & as implying inequality between the sexes; an author is an author, that is all that concerns any reader, & it is impertinent curiosity to want to know whether the author is male or female.

These ladies neither are nor pretend to be making their objection in the interests of the ss or of people in general; they object in their own interests only; this they are entitled to do, but still it is lower ground, & general convenience & the needs of the King’s English, if these are against them, must be reckoned of more importance than their sectional claims. Are these against them? Undoubtedly. First, any female;
