page: 178

+ FETISH

178 words lack dignity (see FoRMAL WORDS).

fetish, fetiche. The modern -ish seems to have superseded the older -iche. The OED gives fét- precedence over fét-. Though it has the air of a mysterious barbarian word, it is in reality the same as factilious, & means (like an idol, the work of men’s hands) a made thing.

fetus. See FOETUS.

feuilleton. See FRENCH WORDS.

feverish, feverous. The differentiation is incomplete. What can be done to help it on is to abstain from feverish in the one sense apt to cause fever (of places, conditions, &c.), & from feverous both in the literal senses suffering from fever, feeling or showing symptoms of fever, & in the metaphorical sense excited or eager or restless. This would be in conformity with the present tendency, which, though often disregarded, is plainly observable

few. 1. Comparatively f. 2. Fewer number. 1. As will be seen from the newspaper extracts below, ugly combinations of comparafive(ly) with a few & few are now common. There is no possible objection to purine the adverb comparatively before the adjective few, as in Comparatively few people are in the secret; that is & normal construction not requiring comment; but a comparatively few is quite another matter, & so is the comparative few. The extracts now follow:—The one _ beneficial treatment for such men could not be obtained cacepting for a comparatively few./Its climate is such as to limit the residence of officials to a comparatively few months in the

ies /The whole area has been drained,

elled, & planned out in a comparatively few weeks./Those who do not marry, you may conclude, are used up by the work in a comparatively few years./Discussion in & out of the Ilouse has reduced these to a comparatively few points./The comparative few who take season tickets seldom travel every day.

It is remarkable in the first place that of an idiom now enjoying such a vogue no trace whatever should appear in the OED’s quotations either for few or for comparative(ly); the explanation is doubtless that people of literary discernment, & even the writers of books in general, recoil from such a monstrosity, or did twenty years ago. It is, indeed, easier to call or feel it a monstrosity than to prove it one, because 2 few is itself an anomalous phrase, & therefore analogies for its treatment are not abundant; we must make the best of the few available; the main question is whcther the few in‘ a few is a noun or an adjective, & ‘“s therefore to be qualified by an

* adjective or an adverb. There is first the familiar a good few, still current though colloquial; next there are a good many & a great many, extant modifications of the now dialectal a many; thirdly, we know that quite a feo & not a few are English, while a quite few & a not few are impossible. These show sufficiently that while a few taken together may be modificd by an adverb, a modifying word pla d

ce between a & few can only an - adjective; in fact, the few of a few is itself a noun meaning small number. That it can be followed by a plural noun without an intervening of (there are a few exceptions) is nothing against this; it is parallel to dozen, score, & hundred: a dozen efzs, a score years, a hundred men, where, whether of is inserted or not, any modifying word is an adjective after, or an adverb before, the a (a round dozen eggs, a Phage score of years, a good hundred men, but roughly or fully or quite a dozen &c.). Consequently, if comparative(ly) is to be sandwiched it must be a comparative few, but if it is to precede the whole, or if it is to qualify few without a, it must be comparatively. On this showing all the above examples are wrong, the last as well as the others.

The objection will probably occur
