page: 181

+ naturally symbolized by the three short is; cf. niggling & fiddling; -cal is now chiefly in literary & not colloquial use.

finish, = rather fine, should be spelt so, not fineish; see MUTE E.

fiord, fjord. The OED gives precedence to fi-. The other spelling is apparently used in English only to help the ignorant to call it fyord; as, instead of helping, it only puzzles them, it should abandoned.

fire-arms. ‘ The singular is late & rare in use "—OED (which, however, quotes ‘the report of a fire-arm’ from Thackeray).

fire out, in the sense expel or dismiss (a person), is still an Americanism.

fir, pine. Most of us have wished vaguely & vainly at times that they knew a fir from a pine. As the Scotch fir is not a fir, strictly speaking, but a pine, & as we shall continue to ignore this fact, it is plain that the matter concerns the botanist more than the man in the street. The following from the Encyclopaedia Britannica may, however, be useful:—‘ The firs are distinguished from the pines & larches by having their needle-like leaves placed singly on the shoots instead of growing in clusters from a sheath on a dwarf branch. Their cones are composed of thin, rounded, closely imbricated scales’, Pines differ ‘ from the firs in their hard woody cone-scales being thickened at the apex, & in their slender needle-shaped leaves growing from a membranous sheath either in pairs or from three to five together *.

first. 1. For first &c. floor, see FLoor. 2. For first &c. form, see FoRM. 98. First thing is tere idiomatic with the first thing (shall do it f. t. when I get there). 4. The first two &c.)(the two &c. first. When the meaning is not the possible but uncommon one of ‘ the two of which each alike is first ’, modern logic has decided that the first two is right &

181

+ the two first, though the older idiom, Une Since many find themselves unable to remember which is logical without working it out, & disinclined to do that afresh every time, the simplest way is to suit the treatment of 2, 8, & 4 (beyond which the doubt hardly arises) to that of larger numbers; no-one would say the 23 first instead of the first 23, & neither should one say the two first instead of the first two.

5. First(ly), secondly, lastly. The ps for first over firstly in

ormal enumerations is one of the harmless pedantries in which those who like oddities because they are odd are free to indulge, provided that they abstain from censuring those who do not share the liking. It is true that firstly is not in Johnson; it is true that De Quincey labels it ‘ your ridiculous & most eto a neologism of firstly’; the

t is on the other leg now; it is the pedant that begins his list with jirst; no-one does so by the light of nature; itis an artificialism. Idioms grow old like other nee & the idiom-book of a century hence will probably not even mention first, secondly.

firth, frith. Firth is both the older form & the prevailing one.

fisc, fisk. ‘ The current spelling in Scots Law is fisk, in other uses fisc ’ —OED.

fish. For pl. see COLLECTIVES 4.

fisher(man). See ANGLE(R).

fistic(al). See HYBRID DERIVA- TIVES, & FACETIOUS FORMATIONS,

fistula. P1}. -as.

fit. For ‘ fit audience though few ’ see HACKNEYED PIRASES.

fivepenny, fivepence. The pronunciations fi’pen!, fi’pns, will no doubt become universal if decimal coinage is introduced.

fix. 1. Fizedly. Three syllabics; see -EDLY. . Fixedness)(fizity. Fizedness is preferable in the sense intentness, perhaps from the connexion with fizedly; in other senses the doubt about its pronunciation
