page: 182

+ (it should have three syllables) has caused it to give place to fizity; compare Looking at her with mild fizedness with The unbending fixity of a law of nature. 3. Fiz up (arrange or organize), and firings (apparatus or trimmings), are both Americanisms not yet naturalized in England.

4, Fixation. Most literary men know some Latin; that Latin is chicfly of the classical kind, & a little of it is enough to make them aware that figcre, & not fizare, is the classical Latin for fix. Consequently they feel an instinctive repugnance to the word fixation, &, perhaps unreasonably, prefer to say firing instead of it whenever they can; it is mostly left to those who need it in technical contexts. If a comparison could be made _ between fixing & firation on the one hand, & (say) liberating & liberation on the other, it would be found that avoidance of fixation was far the more frequent.

fiz(z). See -z-, -zz-.

flaccid. Pronounce -ks-.

eolet. Pronounce flajolé’t.

flail-like. For the hyphen see -LIKE,

flair means keen scent, capacity for getting on the scent of something desired, a good nose for something. The following quotations illustrate the risks taken (see FOREIGN DAN- GER) by writers who pick up their French at second hand:—And JI was eager to burst upon a cwilian world with all the flaire [sic] of a newly discovered prima donna./Mrs has homely accomplishments; a f for cooking goes with her f. for writing (a tuste & a scent are diffcrent metaphorically as well as litcrally).

Pl. -s, or -z (pron. -z); 182

filambeau. see -xX.

flamboyan* is a word borrowed from writer; on architecture, who apply it to the French style (contemporary with English perpendicular) characterized by tracery whose wavy lines suggest the shape or motion of tongues of flame. It

+ is now fashionable in transferred senses; but whereas it should be synonymous with flowing or flexible or sinuous or free, it is more often made to mean florid or showy or vividly coloured or courting publicity. A word of which the true & the usual meanings are at odds is ambiguous, & could well be spared. See POPULARIZED TECUNICALITIES,

Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 1.

flamingo.

flaneur. See FRENCH

flanerie, WORDS.

flannel. Spell flannelled, flannelly, but flannelette. See -u-, -L-.

flatulence, -cy. The prevailing form is -ce; -cy might well be disused, unless it were worth while to assign it to the figurative sense of verbosity, & that sense is hardly common enough to need a spccial form, See -Ck, cy.

flatways, -wise. See -ways, -WISE.

flautist, flutist. It is a comfort to learn from the OED that flutist (1603) is a much older-established word than flautist (1860). With three centurics behind us we can face it out against PRIDE OF KNOW- LEDGE,

flavour makes flavorous, but flavoursome; see -OuR- & -On-.

flaxen. See -EN ADJECTIVES.

fiéche. See FRENCH wonrDs.

fledg(e)ling. Of the eight quotations in the OED, not one has the -e-; but see JUDGEMENT.

flee. The verb is now little used except in the form ficd, fly & flying having taken the place of f. & flecing. For is fled &c., see INTRAN- SITIVE P.P.

fleece makcs flecceable (see -ABLE 1) & fleecy (sec -EY & -Y).

fleshly, fleshy. The distinction is much the same as between earthly & earthy. Fleshy has the primary senses consisting of flesh (fleshy tablets of the heart), having a large proportion of flesh (fleshy hands, fruit, &c.), & like ficsh (fleshy softness, pink, &c.); while fleshly has the secondary senses of proper to the
