page: 183

+ flesh or mortal body, sensual, unspiritual, worldly, hly pleasures, perception, inclinations, affairs, &c.).

fleur-de-lis. Pl. fleurs-de-lis; pronunciation, alike in sing. & pl., flerdelé’. ‘The form flower de lute survives as a poetical archaism & in U.S.’,—OED.

flier, flyer. The first is better; see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6. . iippant. For synoaymy see JOCOSE.

flirtation, -atious, floatation. See HYBRID DERIVATIVES.

flock, =tuft of wool &c. Flocks or flock (see COLLECTIVES) is used as the name for the material.

flock, flood, vbs. See INTRANSI- TIVE P.P.

floor, storey. The numbering of floors & storeys is peculiar, the second floor, e.g., being the third storey. The ground-floor & the ground storey are the same, but the first floor & first storey are different, first storey being another name for

storey, but the first floor

ing above it. In houses other than the one-storeyed there are: (1) Sometimes cellars (underground, & not used for habitation); (2) Sometimes a basement (partly or all underground, & used for habitation); — (83) The first or ground storey, or ground floor; (4) Sometimes a mezzamine or entresol (low, reckoned in numbering); (5) The second storey or first floor; (6) Sometimes other storeys or floors numbered onwards from the preceding; (7) Sometimes garrete or attics or lofts (with part of the upper room-space cut off by the roof).

flora. See FAUNA.

Pl, -ia.

floruit (-or’dolt) is a Latin verb meaning he flourished used with a date to give the period to which a person’s activity may be assigned; it is also used as a noun—his f. &c., i.e. the date at which he was active.

flotation. See HyBrIp DERIVATIVES. flotsam & jetsam. The distinction | is between goods faund afloat in the & not.

183

+ sea & goods found on land after being cast ashore. The original sense of jetsam was what had bec jettisoned or thrown overboard.

flour, meal. Flour is bolted meal, i.e. meal from which the husks have been sifted out after grinding. Meal is the ground product of any ceread or pulse. Flour used by itself means wheat-flour; applied to other kinds it is qualified (rye-flour, corn-flour i.e. flour of maize, &c.), Meal when used of wheat has wheat prefixed.

flow, in such phrases as flown with insolence, is said by the OED to be an obsolete past participle of flow, meaning flooded or swollen.

flow. For ‘f. of soul’ see Hack- NEYED PHRASES.

flower-de-luce. See FLEUR-DE-LIS.

flu(e), for influenza. See Cur- TAILED worDs; flu is better than flue. fluid, gas, liquid. Fluid is the wide term including the two others; it denotes a substance that on the slightest pressure changes shape by rearrangement of its particles; water, steam, oil, air, oxygen, electricity, ether, are all fluids. Liquids & gases differ in that the first are incompressible, & the second elastic; water & oil are liquid & fluid, but not gaseous; steam & air & oxygen are gases & fluids, but not liquids.

flunkey. PI. -eys.

fuierine. For pronunciation see IODINE.

flurried, flustered, fluttered. There is often a doubt which is the most appropriate word; the following distinctions are tentative:—

A person is flurried who, with several things to attend to, lets each interfere with the others; a person is flustered in whom different impulses or emotions contend for ex-

ression; a person is fluttered who,

ing of a timid or apprehensive disposition, is confronted with a sudden emergency.

flute. 1. Fluty, not flutey; see -EY & -y. 2. For flutist see rLAuTIST.
