page: 186

+ matical; to show that it is no more ungrammatical than the innovation is enough to condemn the latter.

fool’s-cap, foolscap. The name of the paper size is usually written foolscap.

foot, n. For at the foot of the letter sec GALLIcISMS. Footgear & footwear are words little used except in advertisements.

foot, vb. The bill, or the cost, foots up to {50 means that £50 is the amount at the foot of the paper on which the addition is done. The origin of Who will foot (i.e. pay) the bill? is not so clear; perhaps pay the sum to which it foots up. Bot phrases are good colloquial English.

footing. We have not the smallest doubt that this is what will actually happen, & ... we may discuss the situation on the footing that the respective fates of these two bills will be as predicted. To give f. the sense of assumption or hypothesis is a SLIPSHOD EXTENSION; the writer, in fact, on however intimate a f. he may be with lobby proper is on a slippery f. with the English vocabulary.

for, conj. Two questions of punc- /tuation arise. F. is a coordinating conjunction, i.e. one that connects two independent sentences; it is neither, like therefore & nevertheless, strictly speaking an adverb though serving the purpose of a connexion; nor, like since & because, a subordinating conjunction that joins a mere clause to a sentence; hence the two points.

1. Whereas, in Therefore A is Equal to B, & in Nevertheless he did it, it is a mere matter of rhetoric, depending on the emphasis desired, whether n comma shall or shall not follow therefore & nevertheless, it is with for a matter of grammatical correctness that there should be no comma; For, within it is a house of refinement & luxury is wrong; this naturally docs not apply to places where a comma is needed for independent

186 , -

+ reasons, as in For, other things being equal, success is a fair test.

2. Whereas since & because, connecting a clause to a preceding sentence, are rightly preceded by a comma only, the presumption with for, which connects two sentences, is that a semicolon should be written; this does not rule out the comma, which will often pass when the for sentence is a short one; but in such passages as the following the comma is clearly inadequate, & in general the semicolon should be regarded as normal, & the comma as the licence:—This is no party question, for it touches us not as Liberals or Conservatives, but as citizens.

foramen. PI. -mina.

forasmuch as. Write thus.

forbears, n. See FOREBEARS.

forbid. 1. forbad(e). The pronunciation is -&d, not -Ad, & the spelling -ad is, to judge by the OED quotations, nearly twice as common as -ade.

2. To forbid one from doing (You may f. him, if you like, from toiling ten hours a day) is an unidiomatic construction on the ANALoGcy of prohibit or prevent.

forcedly. Threc syllables, if used; see -EDLY.

forceful, forcible. The main distinction in sense is that, while forcible conveys that force rather than something else is present, forceful conveys that much as opposed to little force is used or shown; com forcible ejection with a force-

ul personality. This leaves it often indifferent, so far as sense goes, which word is used; a forcible style is a style with force in it, a forceful style one of great force. The sense distinction, however, is the less important part of the matter. B

» forcible is the ordinary word, & forceful the word reserved for poetical or other abnormal use, where its special value depends partly on its infrequency & partly on the more picturesque suggestion
