page: 187

+ of its suffix. Unluckily recent writers have taken to exploiting, & in the process cial ha this special value, by making a VOGUE-worp of forceful & always using it in place of forcible. If this continues, we

shortly find ourselves with a pair of exact oa ie either of which could well be spared instead of a pair serving different purposes. Such writers injure the language, which perhaps leaves them cool; but they also, as regards their own / interests, lose more in the opinion of the educated than they gain in that of the ignorant by avoiding the obvious word. In the following extracts there is, except in the first, no need whatever to say forceful instead of the natural forcible:— Certainly he was a forceful & impressive personality af a time when the stature of international statesmen was not particularly great./M. Briand had rightly calculated that he would have the people of France behind him in his forceful endeavour to restore order./This may seem a trivial & inconsiderable argument to Major Morrison-Bell, but it seems to us that itis as impressive & forceful today as if was a quarter of a century ago./ It is his programme to urge upon the Throne peaceful abdication as the only alternative to forceful expulsion./The forcefulness of the utterances was tn co e accord with the Bravity of the evil which these representatiwes of the civilized world had met to grapple with.

force majeure. See FRENCH WORDS.

foreeps. Pi. the same; but see

SINGULAR -8.

fordo. See For-, FORE-.

fore. To the fore appears to mean

properly (see OED) at hand, avail-

able, surviving, extant. In bein

borrowed by English from Scotch

Irish writers as a picturesque phrase,

it has suffered a change of meaning,

& is now established journalese for

ee ee No great harm is done

except that ambiguity may arise

between the true & the new senses.

187

for(e)bears. As to the form, the prevalent but not sole modern spelling is without the e (the newspaper extracts below are exact); but the e seems better both as separating the noun from the verb forbear & as not disguising the derivation (forebeers, those who have been before); see FOR-, FORE-.

As to the use of the word by English writers, its only recommendation is that, being Scotch & not English, it appeals to the usually misguided instinct of NovE.Lry- HUNTING. Ancestors, forefathers, & progenitors, supplemented when the tie 1s not of blood by forerunners &

edecessors, are the English words.

y his forebears Lord Tankerville is connected with the ancien régime of France. Hts great grandfather, the Duc de Grammont ... (read ancestors)./Birmingham is now being afforded an opportunity for offering some kind of posthumous reparation for the great wrong its forbears inflicted, close upon 120 years ago, on the illustrious Dr Priestley (For its ee read tf, Birmingham’s for-

ars would be not an earlier generation of Birmingham people, but any villages that may have stood where Birmingham now stands. If the writer had been content with an English word, he would hardly have fallen into that trap).

forecast. So far as the operation of the guillotine resolution on the Insurance Bill can be forecasted, it seems probable that... Whether we are to say forecast or forecasted in the past tense & participle depends on whether we regard the verb or the noun as the original from which the other is formed; if the verb is original (=to guess beforehand) the past & p.p. will of course be cast; if the verb is derived (=to make a forecast) they will as certainly be forecasted. The verb is in fact recorded 150 years earlier than the noun, & we may therefore thankfully rid ourselves of the ugly forccasted; it may be hoped that we
