page: 188

+ should do so even if history were against us, but this time it is kind.

foregather. See FORGATHER.

forego. See FOR-, FORE-.

foregone conclusion. The phrase is used when an issue supposed to be still open has really been settled beforehand, e.g. when a judge has made up his mind: before hearing the evidence; or again, when an event is so little doubtful that the doubt is negligible.

forehead. Pronounce f6’réd; see PRONUNCIATION.

FOREIGN DANGER. Those who use words or phrases belonging to languages with which they have little or no acquaintance do so at their peril. Even in ¢.g., t.e., & et cetera, there lurk unsuspected possibilitics of exhibiting ignorance; with {toto caclo, bite notre, cui bono?, bond fide, qua, & pace, the risk is greater; & such words as protagonist & phantasmagoria, which one hesitates whether to call English or foreign, require equal caution. See all or any of the words & phrases mentioned, & FLAIR. Two or three specimens follow, for those who do not like cross references:—I suggest that a Compulsory Loan be made pro ratio upon all capital (pro rata)./ Ricasoli, another of his bétes noirs (noires)./A man who claimed to be a Glasgow delegate, but whose bona fides were disputed, rose to propose the motion (was)./We are calmly told that Cambridge was neither worse nor belter than the rest of the world; in fact, it was, we are assured, in petto the reflex of the corrupt world unthout (in petto is not in little, but in one’s heart, i.e. secretly). /TIE TRAMP AS CENSOR MORES (A headline; morum).

foremost. See -mosrt.

forenoon. The Church Congress sat in two sections this forenoon ... The afternoon programme was divided into three sections. Even in contexts that, by the occurrence as here of afternoon in contrast, most suggest

188

+ the use of f., the natural English

man 48 perhaps not the natural

cotch) is morning. Forenoon, having fallen out of use as the name for the first half of daylight, is now used by writers who dislike saying a plain thing in the plain way. See ForMaAL worps, & WorKING & STYLISH WORDS.

See Noun &

foretaste, foretoken. VERB ACCENT,

foreword, preface. F. is a word invented fifty years ago as a SAXxON- 1sM by anti-latinists, & caught up as a VOGUE-WORD by the people who love a new name for an old thing. P, has a 500-year history behind it in ee Pe &, far from being antiquated, is still the name for the thing. It is to be hoped that the vogue may pass, & the taste of the general public prevail again over that of publishers & authors. A decent retirement might be found for f. if it were confined to the particular kind of preface that is supplied by some distinguished person for a book written by someone else who fecls the need of a sponsor.

But how one vogue-word drives out another! Here in 1924 comes a book on whose title-page is mention of neither preface nor foreword; instead, it is *‘ With a Prefatory Gesture by *, Poor old foreword! your vogue is past, your freshness faded; you are antiquated, vieux jeu, passé, démodé ; your nose is out of joint. And, when gesture shall have followed you to limbo, we may hope to get back to preface.

FOR-, FORE-. The prefix of the words forbear (vb), forbid, forby (Sc. for besides &c.), fordo (exhaust), forfend, forgather (assemble), forget, forgive, forgo (relinquish), forlorn, forpined, forsake, forspent, forswear, forwearied, & forworn, is unconnected with the English words for & fore, & means away, out, completely, &c. All these should be spelt with for-, not fore-, & the pronunciation should be, as it invariably is in the commoner ones such as forbid, fer- &
