page: 190

+ (food); commence Sa a complete (finish); conceal (hide); conveyaunce (carriage); dispatch (send off); don (put on); donation (gift); draco (pull); emoluments (pay); endeavour (try); evince (show); erpedite (hasten); extend (give); felicitate (wish joy); forenoon (morning); imbibe (drink); inquire (ask); luncheon (lunch); mucilage (gum); obtain (get); peruse (read); physic (medicine); preserve (jam); proceed (go); purchase (buy); remark (say); remove (tuke away); seck (try, look for); suborn (bribe); summon (send for); sustain (suffer); valiant (brave); veriiable (real or positive); vessel (ship).

There are very few of our notions that cannot be called by different names; but among these names there is usually one that may be revarded as the thing’s proper name as the Greeks called it, for which another may be substituted to add

began or for many other reasons,

ut which is present to the mind even behind the substitute. A ‘destroyer is a ship, &, though we never forget its shiphood, the reader is often helped if we call it a destroyer; a vessel also is a ship, but the reader is not helped by our calling it a vessel, for the most part; «, though to evince is to show, it does not help him to call showing evincing: what happens is first the translation of show into evince by the writer, & then the retranslation of evince into show by the reader; mind communicates with mind through a veil, & the result is at best dullness, & at worst misunderstanding. ‘The proper name for a notion should not

e rejected for another unless the rejector can give some better account to himself of his preference for the other than that he thinks it will look better in print. If his mental name for a thing is not the proper name, or if, being the proper name, it is also improper, or essentially undignified, let him translate it; but there is nothing to be ashamed of in

+ buy or jam or say that they should need parigecnan} into purchase & preserve & remark; where they give the sense equally well, they are fit for any company & need not be shut up at home. Few things contribute more to vigour of style than a practical realization that the skuria onomata, the sovereign or dominant or proper or vernacular or current names, are better than the formal words.

format. See FRENCH woRDs.

former. For the f. as a pronoun, see LATTER. When the reference is to one of three or more individuals, the first, not the f., should be used: Among the three representatives of neutral States, Dr Castberg & Dr Nansen stand for Norway & M. Heringa for Holland; the former 1s so convinced of ...

formula. The plurals -lae, -tas, are equally common; see LATIN PLURALS.

formulate makes -lable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

fornicate. Fornication, as distinguished from adultery, implies that the woman is not a wife; it is sometimes but not always undcrstood to imply further that ncither party is married. Agent-noun, fornicator, see -OR.

forrader, owing its existence entirely to the well-known anecdote, should not be corrected into forwarder, which hardly has an independent existence; see also HACK- NEYED PHRASES.

forswear. For a forsworn lover, witness, &c., see INTRANSITIVE P.P.

forte, person’s strong point. For the spelling, which should have been (but should not be) fort, cf. MORALE.

forte (mus.). Two syllables.

forth. 1. And so forth is (cf. & the LIKE) a convenience to the writer who does not wish to rehearse his list at length, but shrinks from the suggestion, now so firmly attached to é&c. as to disqualify it for literary use, that he breaks off because it is
