page: 191

+ too mueh trouble to proceed; the slightly antique turn of the phrase acquits him of unceremoniowsness; é& so on is in this respect midway between ¢& so forth & é&c.

2. So far forth has occasionally the advantage over so far of limiting the sense to extent & excluding the literal idea of distance; more often its only claim to preference is what is always the only claim of so far forth as against so far as—its superior pomposity.

See TWENTIES.

So spelt.

fortify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

fortuitous means accidental, undesigned, &c. That it is sometimes confused with fortunate, perhaps through mere sound, perhaps by the help of lucky, is plain from:—Aill’s well that ends well, & his divorced wives, whom the autobtographer naively catls Divorcées Nos 1, 2, & 3, seem to have borne no kind of ill-will to their more fortunate successor. Reviewing my own Algerian expertences, I must say that I sh not have expected so fortuitous a termination of a somewhat ae ez-

iment. /When st produced, tis oe ity was hisnited. Nevertheless tt may now satl tnto a more fortuitous harbour on the strength of its author's later reputation. For such mistakes see MaLAPROPS.

fortune. 1. For the question between -tin & -chd0n, see PRONUN- CIATION.

2. The verb (i fortuned that, J fortuned upon) is an ARCHAISM.

forty. For ‘the Forty-five’ see FIFTEEN.

forward(s), adv. The OED says:— ‘The present distinction in usage between forward & forwards is that the latter expresses a definite direction viewed in contrast with other directions. In some contexts either form may be used without perceptible difference of meaning; the following are examples in which only one of them can new be used:

191

+ “‘The ratchet-wheel can move only

” ; ‘the right side of the

aper has the maker’s name reading

orwards”’; ‘“‘if you move at all it must be forwards”; ‘‘my comae has gone forward”; “to

ring a matter forward”; “from this time forward’. To this it must be added that there is a tendency, not yet exhausted, for forward to displace forwards, & that even in the less than twenty years since the publication of that statement there has been change. The reader will notice that, while he can heartily accept the banishment of forwards from the last three examples, it is quite doubtful whether forward is not poe in some or all of the first three.

fossil, Pronounce [6’sl; see PRo- NUNCIATION.

fostress. So spelt.

foul, adv. See UNIDIOMATIC -LY.

foulard. The OED gives precedence to fddlahr over fodlar’d.

foully. Pronounce both &. See UNIDIOMATIC -LY,

foundress. See -FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS.

fount(ain). Fount (apart from the sense in t aphy, which is another word, connected with found) is the poetical & rhetorical form of fountain; to use it in ordinary contexts (e.g. in fount-pen for fountain-pen) is VULGARIZATION.

four. On or upon all fours, apart from its literal application to a person crawling, has now for its chief use the meaning of correspondence at all & not merely some points between two things (The cases. are not o. a. f.; The analogy suggested is not o. a. f. with the actual facts). This seems due to a misunderstanding of the earlier but now less familiar metaphorical use by which a theory, tale, plan, &c., was said to run or o. a. f. when it was consistent with itself or proof against objections or without weak points— in fact did not limp like a dog on three legs or rock like a table with
