page: 193

+ raging storm, pestilence, toothache). Raving is an intensifying epithet for madness ora madman. The uses of mad & wild hardly need setting forth.

t. See FRENCH WORDS. No the old British belief arose from the peculiar white glare of the sunlight reflected from the hawthorn blossoms, which must have been far more frappant when South Britain was one vast forest. ‘ Clear, please ’ says John Bull when invited to choose between créme or purée de something & consommé de something else; &, if he must decide whether he will take his contrasts frappant or otherwise, he can but say ‘ striking, please ’.

frate. Pronounce -ah’taé; pl. frati pron. -ah’té.

friulein. Pronounce frow, froi ‘lin.

free. 1. Freeman)(free man. The single word has two senses, (a) person who has the ‘ freedom’ of a city &c., & (b) person who is not a slave or serf, citizen of a free State; in other senses (at last Iam a free man, i.e. have retired from business, lost my wife, &c.) the words should be separate.

2. Free will, free-will, freewill. The hyphened form should be restricted to the attributive use as in a free-will offering, the free-will the In nonphilosophical use free will should be written, & the OED prefers it even for the philosophical term; many writers hyphen it in that sense, but this t es the general principle of connexion between hyphen & accent (for which see HYPHENS), since the accent remains on will; &, if a separate form for the philosophical term is required, it should be freewill.

inflexions see

193

Frenchify. For VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

FRENCH WORDS. 1. Use. 2. Pronunciation. Display of superior knowledge is as great a vulgarity as display of superior wealth—greater,

1351

+ indeed, inasmuch as knowledge should tend more definitely than wealth towards discretion & good manners. That is the guiding principle alike in the using & in the i Ye a of French words in

nglish writing & talk. To use French words that your reader or hearer does not know or does notr. fully understand, to pronounce them as if you were one of the select few to whom French is second nature when he is not of those few (& it is ten thousand to one that neither you nor he will be so), is inconsiderate & rude.

1. Use or FRENCH worDs. It would be a satisfaction to have a table divided into permissible words, forbidden words, & words needing caution; but anyone who starts rn bogies on the making of it is likely to come, after much shifting of words from class to class, to the same conclusion as the writer of this article—that of the thousand or so French words having some sort of currency in English none can be prohibited, & almost none can be given unconditional licences; it is all a matter of the audience & the occasion, Only faddists will engage in alien-hunting & insist on finding native substitutes for téte-a-téte, agent provocateur, esprit de corps, cadre, chaperon, chassis, chose jugée, débris, force majeure, grand seigneur, habitué, laissez-faire, & a hundred other words that save circumlocution. Only fools will think it commends them to the English reader to decorate incongruously with such bower-birds’ treasures as au pied de la lettre, a merveille, bien entendu, les convenances, cotite que cotte, quand méme, dernier ressort, impayable, jeu de mots, par exemple, robe-de-chambre, sans doute, tracasseries, & sauter auz yeux; yet even these, even the abominations beginning & ending that list, are in place as supplyin local colour or for other specia reasons on perhaps five per cent. of the occasions on which they actually appear. It would be easy to make
