page: 194

+ a set of pigeon-holes to contain the French words; let us say:

A. The standard word for the thing (aide-de-camp, ballet, chauffeur).

B. Words accepted as practically English, though not indispensable (beau, billet-douz, char-d-bancs).

C. Circumlocution-savers (blasé, au revotr, fait accompli).

D. Diplomacy & politics (pourparders, communiqué, bloc).

E. Dress & cookery (moire antique, entrée, hors-d’auvre).

F. Local colour & travel (concierge, frottoir, lycée).

G. Sport & theatre (savate, couloir, entr’acte).

H. Art (atelier, tache, genre).

I. Literature (causerie, cliché, jeu d’esprit).

K. Euphemism (abattoir, accouchement, soutencur).

L. Pretentious decoration (agréments, cotite que cotite, frappant).

M. Needless substitutes for English words (cul-de-sac, en route, brochure).

N. Puzzles for the plain man (acharnement, fldneur, impayable).

But to distribute into such pigeonholes when made is a less simple affair, owing to the disturbing effects of audience & occasion. Every writer, however, who suspects himself of the bower-bird instinct should make & use some such classification system, & remember that acquisitiveness & indiscriminate display are pleasing to contemplate only in birds & savages & children. The list below, given primarily for pronunciation, will afford also material for practice in selection &, above all, abstention.

2. PRONUNCIATION. To say a French word in the middle of an English sentence exactly as it would be said by a Frenchman in a French sentence is a feat demanding an acrobatic mouth; the muscles have to be suddenly adjusted to a performance of a different nature, & after it as suddenly recalled to the normal state; it is a feat that should not be attempted; the greater its success as a tour de force,

194

+ the greater its failure as a step in the conversational progress; for your collocutor, aware that he could not have done it himself, has his attention distracted whether he admires or is humiliated. All that is necessary is a polite acknowledgement of indebtedness to the French language indicated by some approach in some part of the word to the foreign sound, & even this only when the difference between the foreign & the corresponding natural English sound is too marked to escape a dull ear. For instance, in téte-d-téte no attempt need or should be made to distinguish French é from English 4, but the calling it ta’tahtaé’t instead of the natural English ta&tata’t rightly stamps it as foreign; again, tour de force is better with no un-English sound at all; neither r need be trilled, & tour & force should both be exactly like the English words so spelt. On the other hand, there are some French sounds so obviously alien to the English mouth that words containing them (except such as are, like coupon, in daily use by all sorts & conditions of men) should either be eschewed by English speakers or have these sounds adumbrated; they are especially the nasalized vowcls (an, en, in, on, un, am, &c.), the diphthong cu, the unaccented ¢, & u; tosay bing for bon is as insulting to the French language as to pronounce bulletin in correct French is insulting to the man in the English street; & kodldesi’k for cul-de-sac is nearly as bad. In consulting the pronunciations given below, the reader will bear in mind that it is no business of this dictionary to tell him how French words are pronounced in French; it has only to advise him how to pronounce them in English if he would neither exhibit a conscious superiority of education nor be suspected of boorish ignorance. The list is intended, then, to mitigate the precision of those who know French at least as much as to enlighten those who do ™ ™
