page: 204

fricandeau. Pronounce fri’kandéd; pl. -cauz, pron. -dz, or -eaus (see -x).

fricative. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

Friday &c.) (on Friday &e.) The Puritan way of eating fish is, to eat il Saturday instead of Friday./Cam you dine with us Tues at 8.0?

The OED says: ‘ The adverbial use of the names of the days of the week is now chiefly U. S. except in collocations like ‘“‘ next Saturday”, “last Saturday ’”’’.

friendlily. See -.iry.

frier, fryer. The first is better; see DRY, 2, & VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

frightful(ness). The words ought to revert in due time to their true English meaning. They have properly no implication of terrorism, & owe that sense merely to ignorance of English on the part of the journalists who seized on them as the handiest translation of German words that had that implication. The felt unnaturalncss of the words had a certain value while war lasted, as suggesting the unnatural state of mind of a people that confused honest fighting with brutal cruelty; but we do not want our language permanently corrupted by such accidents.

The mistranslation represented by ruthless, the original of which means regardless of co uences, or reckless, or unrestrained, though it garbles the German phrascs, does not injure the English language, & is of temporary interest only; but culture is, like frightfulness, in danger of a change of meaning that is to be deprecated.

friseur. See FRENCH WORDS.

frith. See FIRTH.

- The OED accents the second i; but the M. Arnold line (I know what white, what purple fritillaries) scems likely to fix the bay on the first, for the flower at

east.

frivol. See BACK-FORMATION.

friz(z). The double letter is Hae

ferred in general use & in the OED,

+ for the simple words as well as for inflected forms; but see -z-, -zz-.

frock. The use of frock for a dress, & especially for a dress regarded from the decorative point of view (‘ But in the language of fashionable society the use of frock for ‘* dress ”’ has within the last few years been revived ’, said the OED in 1901), is in origin a nurseryism of the same kind as nighty & shimmy; _ see VOGUE-WORDS.

frontage, frontal, frontier, frontispiece. It seems best to make the o in all these conform to that in front (i, not 5), but the OED separates frontier, in which it prefers 6, from the rest.

frontispiece. For the use = face, see POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

froth. See FOAM.

fructify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

fruition. Pronounce fré6{’shn.

frustrate. See ParTicipLes 5 A, & -ATABLE.

- Pl. -ta, -tums; the first is recommended.

fryable, fryer. See FRIABLE, FRIER.

fuchsia. So spelt.

fucus. PI. -ct, pronounced -sfI.

fuel, vb, makes -lied, -lling; see -LL-, -L-.

fugacious. Chiefly in Prpanrtic HUMOUR.

fugue makes fugal, fuguist.

-FUL. The right plural for such nouns as handful, spoonful, cupful, basketful, is handfuls &c., not handsful &c.

fulcrum. Pronounce ful-, not fool- ; pl. -cra.

fulfil, fulfilled. So spelt; see -LL-, -L-, 8.

fulgent. A poetical variant for the ordinary refulgent.

fuliginous. Chiefly in Potrysyt- LABIC HUMOUR. Af present it isa f., not to say mysterious, matter.

full for fully in such phrases as f. twenty, f. as good as, where it means quite, & such as f. sweet, f. early, where it means quite suffi-
