page: 205

+ ciently or rather too, is idiomatic but colloquial. In the sense very, as in f. fain, f. many a, f. weary, where fully cannot be substituted, it is poetical.

ful(l)ness. Use -l- ; see DULLNESS, & -LL-, -L-, 4.

FULLSTOP. See Stops; & PERIOD IN ABBREVIATIONS.

fulsome. The OED recognizes only the pronunciation fiil- (not fool-).

fumigate makes -gable, -lor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

function. That such & such a thing ‘is a function of’ such another or such others is a POPULARIZED TECH- NICALITY:—A man’s fortitude under given painful conditions is a function of two variables. As not everyone can cope unaided with mathematical technicalities, the following may be useful: ‘When one quantity depends upon another or upon a system of others, so that it assumes a definite value when a system of definite values is given to the others, it is called a ction of those others ’.

fundamental is the established word in literary use for which writers with a taste for new fangled scientific- Sher gies terms substitute basic or

asal.

funebrial, funeral (adj.), funerary, funereal. The continued existence of the first & third words, which no-one uses if he can help it, is due to what has happened to the other two. Funeral, though originally an adjective, has so far passed into a noun that it can no longer be used as an adjective except in the attributive position, as in funeral customs, the funeral procession; funereal

has become so tied to the meaning as of a funeral, gloomy enough for

a funeral, that it can no longer mean

simply of or for a funeral. In such

a sentence as The origin of the

custom is ——, it only remains to

choose between funebrial & funerary.

Pi. }

ae

+ funicular. Cable railway is, when possible, preferable to f. ratlway. funnel makes -fied; see -LL-, -L-. funniment. See Hysrip penriva- TIVES, FACETIOUS FORMATIONS, & -MENT.

funny. For ‘ too f. for words” see HACKNEYED PHRASES.

furcate. See Panticipies 5 A.

furiously. The British journalist finds it so amusing that the Frenchman should say penser furieusement where we say think hard, & donner furieusement a penser for 4 that he bores us intolerably with his discovery. (a donne furieusement a penser is quoted, transiated, paragpnoeres & alluded to, till we are all

eartily sick of it; see GALLICISMS. Making every allowance for special circumstances, the manner in which these amateur soldiers of seven weeks acquitted themselves compels one ‘ furiously to think’./That word ‘although’ caused us furiously to think, but when we come to read the leading article in the Times we fancy that we get a clue to what may be meant./That sentence ef Professor Dicey’s makes one think furiously./The reduction in the majority from 6,000 to 1,400 has gioen many Coalition members f. to think.

furore. Three syllables (fitor’!).

reab? be See PRONUNCIATION 8.f.

er, adj. & adv. See FARTHER.

furze, gotse, whin. The first two would appear to be that very great rarity, a pair of exact synonyms, meaning the same thing & used indifferently in all localities & all contexts. The third differs not in sense, but in being chiefly a Seotch & northern word.

fuse. 1. The verb makes fusible; see -ABLE 2.

2. It is worth while to remember that a fuse is not so called because it fuses, being named solely from its shape (L fusus spindle, while the verb is from L funde pour); see TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY.

FUSED PARTICIPLE is 8 name given to the construction exemplified
