page: 206

+ in its simplest form by ‘I like pleading poverty’, & in its higher development by ‘ The collision was owing to the signalling instructions laid down by the international regulations for use by ships at anchor in a fog not having been properly followed’. The name was invented a dozen years ago for the purpose of labelling & so making recognizable & avoidable a usage considered by the inventor to be rapidly corrupting modern English style. A companison of three sentences will show the meaning of the term.

1. Women having the vote share political power with men.

2. Women’s having the vote reduces men’s political power.

3. Women having the vote reduces men’s political power.

In the first, the subject of the sentence is women, & having (the vote) is a true participle attached to women. In the second, the subject is the verbal noun or gerund having (the vote), & women’s is a possessive case (i.e. an adjective) attached to that noun. The mmar in these two is normal. In the third, the subject is neither women (since reduces is singular), nor having (for if so, women would be left in the air without grammatical construction), but a compound notion formed by fusion of the noun women with the participle having. Participles so _ constructed, then, are called fused participles, as opposed to the true peor of N° 1 & the gerund of

° 2.

We are given to ridiculing the cumbrousness of German style, & the particular element in this that attracts most attention is the device by which a long expression is placed between a noun & its article & so, as it were, bracketed & held together. Where we might allow ourselves to say This never to be forgotten occasion, the German will not crane at The since 1914 owing to the worldwar befallen destruction of capital; only a German, we assure ourselves, could be guilty of such ponderous-

+ ness. But the fused participle is having exactly the same effect on oe as the article-&-noun sandwich on German, the only difference being that the German device is grammatically sound, while the English is indefensible. The halfdozen examples that follow, in which the two members of each fused participle are in roman type, all exhibit both the bracketing cig eat that makes this construction fatally tempting to the lazy writer, & its repulsiveness to a reader who likes clean sentences. In the last three may be observed a special fault often attending the fused participle —that the reader is trapped into supposing the construction complete when the noun is reached, & afterwards has to go back & get things straight.

Mr Fred Hall asked the Home Secretary if, in order to avoid the necessity of men who desired to work & were wantonly attacked by strikers being compelled to arm elves with fire-arms, he would . . ./No one is betier qualified than Mr Charles

to write the biography of

. E. Henley; & there is some likelihood of the life-story of that influential & strenuous littérateur from his hand appearing before the close of the year./The machinery which enables one man to do the work of siz results only in the others losing their job, & in skill men have spent a i Aaeasiae acquiring becoming suddenly useless./New subsections giving the Board of Trade power to make regulations for permitting workmen who are employed under the same employer, partly in an insured trade & partly not in an insured trade, being treated, with the consent of the employer, as tf they were wholly employed in an insured trade./A dangerous operation, in which everything depends upon the General Election, which is an essential part of the operation, being won./The amazing resolution ‘to take steps to

event’ the Liberal demonstration in Belfast to be addressed by Mr
