page: 208

And now, in order that the reader

may leave this disquisition sick to

death, as he should be, of the fused

participle, a few miscellaneous speci-

mens are offered:— We cannot reckon

on the unrest ceasing with the end of

one strike, or on its not being renewed

tm the case of other trades (Compare

unrest with tts)./It may be that this

is part of the meaning & instinctive

motive of fish, such as the perch, going

tn shoals at all./The ‘ elastic defence ’,

which the Germans have prided them-

selves on being their spectality./The

Mullah’s influence (as a result of

him having been denounced at

Mecca as an impostor) was declining. /

Developments have occurred in conse-

quence of the action of one of the

accused, a man 31 years of age, & an

ex-student of several colleges, having

turned approver./It was only after

Mr Buckmaster, Lord Wodehouse,

& Mr Freake, finding that they were

unable to go, that the England team

as now constituted was decided on./

Phe holiday habit is growing upon us, possibly owing partly to the persistent

& recurrent habit of Christmas Day

falling at the week-end./We welcome Tariff Reform being discussed as Often as possible./This habit of Ministers putting forth their ideas through newspaper articles sometimes produced curious results./A place having bored & depressed one is not a reason for regretting it./But he objects to the cutting down o imports in war time, & the fact that we have to do without things being taken as an argument for our continuing to shut goods out after the war./Some similar scheme can be introduced without the school doing so suffering ecuntary loss./Good criticism combines the subtle pleasure in a thing being well done with the simple pleasure in it being done at all./The existence of these long term contracts is a large part of the case for the coalowners refusing to give increased wages to the men (ambiguous: those who refuse? or the refusal of them all?)./There 28 a big enough area for the speed men even in the narrow limits of these isles,

without them the exquisite

kittle corner of English lakeland the

special field for their trials. /Conser-

vatives pee neither want nor would

willingly submit to a question of such

Bravity as the continued existence of

the House of Lords as at present con-

stttuted being again left to . . ./One

of the jurymen absented himself from

the rest of the jury without he, or the

rest of the jury, being given in charge

of the proper officer (after all, if it 18

not to be his, it may as well be he

as him)./Nor does it call for any

great acumen to prophesy a torrent of

Spectous sophistries on single

one of the * Fourteen Points’, which

the enemy relies on being duly re-

printed tn the Allied Press./The truth

of the old saw about being a better

thing to wear out than to rust out./ Surely the force of injustice cannot be conceived of going any further./ The same objections apply to the patient telling the head attendant as to his telling the medical officer (compare patient with his).

fuselage. So spelt: pronounce -z-.

fustigate, fustigation, are PEDAN- TIC-HUMOUR words.

futurism. A dictionary definition

OS OE ee ot ed eT re is: A recent movement in (esp. Italian) art, literature, &c., marked by violent departure from traditional methods & by the use of arbitrary symbols in the expression of emotion—Concise Ozf. Dict.

G

gabelle. For synonymy see Tax,

gaberdine. So spelt.

Gaelic, Gadhelic, Gofdelic. The two longer forms are used chiefly by writers on philology & ne oe the two mean the same thing, but are distinguished from the usual meaning of Gaelic, i.e. Scotch-Celtic, a inctuding also Irish-Celtic &

anx-Celtic. When precision is not required, Gaelic is the word chiefly used both in the narrow & the wide senses, Pronounce gi-, not ga-. The corresponding term to Gadhelic,
