page: 211

+ jailer & jaileress.

garage, like many other French words in constant necessary use (e.g. billet-douz, bulletin, cadre, chaperon, commisstonaire, cordon, coupon, employé, liqueur, restaurant, valet), should be completely anglicized in pronunciation (g&’rlj).

garble. The original meaning is to sift, to sort into sizes with a view to using the best or rejecting the worst. Phe modern transferred sense is to subject a set of facts, evidence, a report, a speech, &c., to such a process of sifting as results in presenting all of it that supports the impression one wishes to give of it & deliberately omitting all that makes against or qualifies this. Garbling stops short of falsification & misquotation, but not of misrepresentation; a garbled account is partial in both senses.

m. See FRENCH WORDS.

en. For the G. in philosophy, see ACADEMY.

gargoyle, gur-. The first is the right form.

garret, attic. The two words mean the same thing, but the former is usually chosen when poverty, squalor, &c., are to be suggested.

gar(rjotte. The right spelling is

gaseous. ronunciations recognized by the OED are ea

gpa in that order of preference.

gaseous)(gassy. The first prevails in scientific use; the further the substitution of gassy for it can be carried, the better.

gasogene)(gazogene. The original is the French gazogéne; when the accent is aOR peas it seems better to go the whole hog, assimilate to the established gasometer, & write s for z.

serine it ae FRENCH hie

gauge. spelt, not guage. e verb makes gaugeabie; tote, Vile E.

Gaul means ancient Gaul or one of its inhabitants; the use of it for

GENERIC NAMES France or Frenchman is poetic or facetious. See SoOBRIQUETS.

Gaulish. See GaLtic.

gauntry. See GANTRY.

gay makes gayer, gayest, gaily, gaiety.

gazogene. See GASOGENE.

geezer, i.e. queer old character, orig. gutser or mummer, is spelt geezer in the OED.

gelatin(e). The form without final -e is in scientific (or pseudo-scientific) use only; see -IN & -INE.

gemma. PI. -ae.

gemmate. See PaRTICIPLEs 5 A.

gendarme, gendarmerie. See FRENCH WORDS.

gender, n., is a grammatical term only. To talk of persons or creatures of the masculine or feminine g., meaning of the male or female sez, is either a jocularity (permissible or re according to context) or a blun-

er.

generalissimo. Pl.-os; see -0(E)s 7.

generalize has -zable; see MUTE E.

generate makes -rable, -tor; see -ABLE I, -OR.

GENERIC NAMES AND OTHER ALLUSIVE COMMONPLACES.

When Shylock hailed Portia as A Daniel come to judgement, he was using @ generic name in the sense here intended; the History of Susanna was in his mind. When we talk of the Mecca of Free Trade, of the Huns, of Ithuriel’s spear, of a Naboth’s vineyard, of shooting Niagara, of Procrustean regulations, draconic severity, or tantalizing opportunities, we are using allusive commonplaces. Some writers revel in such expressions, some eschew them of set purpose, some are ill provided with them from lack of reading or imagination; some esteem them as decorations, others as aids to brevity. They are in fact an immense addition to the resources of speech, but they ask to be employe with discretion; this article

s not intended either to encourage or to deprecate their use; they are often in place, & often out of place;
