page: 214

+ a warning that all is not gold that glitters, there would be sufficient

ustification for their coexistence; but the OED quotations do not bear out, nor does the OED emphasize, such a distinction. It seems a pity, then, that -like should be kept in being; see SUPERFLUOUS WORDS,

gentlewoman)(lady. The first has no sense that does not belong to the second also, but /. has half a dozen for which g. will not serve—the Virgin, pl. of madam, titled woman, wife, beloved, woman politely described. It follows that in the one sense common to both (fem. of gentleman, i.e. woman of good birth & breeding, or woman of honourable instincts) f- is sometimes preferred as free of ambiguity or as more significant. It is, however, an oldfashioned if not quite archaic word, & as such tends to be degraded by facetious use, & to have associated with it constant epithets, of which some are derisive (ancient, decayed, innocent) & others are resorted to as protests against such derision (true, Nature’s, &c.); it is therefore to be used with caution.

genuine. Compare AUTHENTIC.

genus. Pronounce jé-; pl. genera, pron. jén-; see LATIN PLURALS.

geographic(al). The short form ‘now somewhat rare except in Geographic latitude °—OED. See Ae):

geometric(al). 1. The long form prevails, & there is no difference in meaning; see -IC(AL). 2. G. progression. For the misuse of this, sec PROGRESSION,

Georgy, -le. See -ry, -IE, -yY.

germ. For synonymy see Scut- ZOMYCETES.

German. [igh & Low G. ae G. is the language known ordinarily as German; Low G. is a comprehensive name for English, Dutch, Frisian, Flemish, & some G. dialects. The words High & Low are merely geographical, referring to the Southern or mountainous, & the Northern or

+ low-lying, regions in which the two varieties developed.

gerontocracy. See GREEK G.

gerrymander. The g is hard.

GERUND. 1. G. & gerundive. 2. G. = pericn: 8. G. & infinitive. 4. e i

possessive.

1. Gerund)(gerundive. The second word is of importance only with regard to the languages that possess the thing, of which English does not happen to be one; but, as its bein occasionally used for the other wo saat which ts of importance in

nglish mmar, may cause confusion, the difference between the Latin gerund & gerundive should be explained. The gerund is a noun supplying a verb’s infinitive or nounform with cases; thus amare to love has the gerund amandi of loving, amando by loving, amandum the act of loving; correspondingly the word loving as a noun (but not as an adjective) is the gerund in English, though it is of the same form as the participle. From the same stem as amand: &c. is formed in Latin an adjective amandus lovable, & this in Latin grammar is named the gerundive as being formed from the

erund. The English adjectives

ormed in -ble from verbs, like lovable, might well enough be called gerundives from their similarity in sense to the Latin gerundive; but they are not in practice so called, & the word gerundive has sig teal aed no proper function in Englis grammar.

2. Gerund & participle. The English gerund is identical in form, but only in form, with the active participle; loving is a gerund in ‘ cannot help loving him’, but a participle in ‘a loving husband’. A grammarian quoted by the OED says ‘Gerundives’” [by which he means | cake ‘are participles governe by peo but, there being little or no occasion to distinguish them from other participles, we seldom use this name °, The distinction is, on the contrary,
