page: 218

+ tinguished from gal (gal), is much affected by persons who aim at peculiar refinement. Novelists who write gurl as a representation of coarse speech are presumably of this refined class.

girlie, -ly. See -EY, -IE, -Y.

gist has soft g.

give. 1. Give one right, in the sense justify him or allow that he is in the right, is both French (donner droit @ quelqu’un) & German (einem Recht geben); but it is not English, & the OED appears to quote no example of it. In the first passage below it has been resorted to under the ELEGANT-VARIATION impulse, justify having been already used up:—The local Liberals & the Chief Whip who supported them from headquarters are abundantly justified in their belief that a radical candidate had a better chance of winning this particular constituency than a Labour one, c&: the working-class voters have themselves given them right./M. Mtllerand is much praised in France for having resisted Mr Lloyd George's efforts, & M. Clemenceau apparently gives him right.

2. Give to think. The phrase is commented on in the article GaL- Licism as one of the two or three that surpass all other Gallicisms for ineptitude. It has, however, had a lamentable vogue, & a few examples follow; others will be found under FURIOUSLY. This is a powerful impressionistic sketch, true to life, _ which gives to think. /In every chapter the author has that to say which arrests attention & gives to think./ The Labour Party has made a clean sweep of the Transvaal Provincial elections, & the result is certainly one calculated to give furiously to think. / But what we are told as to coal & cotton gives furiously to think, as they sayin France. This last gentleman seems to think he has got hold of a striking novelty; he is mistaken.

giacé. See FRENCH WORDS.

giacial, glacier, glacis. The pro-

+ nunciations preferred by the OED are gila‘shlal, gla’sier, gia’sis.

glad(den). See -EN VERBS for the distinction.

gladiolus. The pronunciation recommended is glA‘dyolus, or, if that is too difficult, gladi’olus; for further discussion see FALSE QUAN- Tiry. Pl, -luses or -li; see LATIN PLURALS.

gladsome. See -SOME.

glamour makes glamorous;

sec -OUR- & -OR-.

glass. 1. Glass-case)(glass case; the latter is better; see HYPHENS.

2. Glass eye)(glass-eye; a person has a g. e.; a horse has g.-c. (a disease); see HyPHens. 3. Glassfuls)(glassesful; see -FUL.

glimpse. Glance & g. are synonyms only in a very loose sense; the g. is what is secn by the glance, & not the glance itself; ee take or give a glance at something, but get a glimpse of it; the following sentences are not English:—Was there a member of either House who gave a glimpse at this schedule to see for himself whether all these documents deserved to be destroyed?/A glimpse at the map will show why Turkey was not receiving munitions from Germany or Austria at that time.

glissade. Pronounce glisah’d.

globe. In their primary sense

here, globe, orb, & ball, do not

iffer, except with regard to the contexts they suit. And their particular applications (a sphere of action, te as the globe, his sightless orbs, a ball of wool, &c.) are too familiar to need setting forth. ~~

giorify, glory vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

gloss. The two nouns (a, =comment; b,=lustre) are of different origins, the first Greek, the other Teutonic; but the meaning of the first, & of its derived verb gloze, has no doubt been considerably affected

see TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY) by ignorance of this fact. Greek glissa tongue had as secondary senses;
