page: 220

+ roho it can have been it means God only knows, & I do not; in Goodness knows it wasn’t I it means God knows & could confirm my statement. Ambiguity is unlikely, but not impossible.

goodwill, good will, good-will Except in the attributive use, which happens to be rare (as a good-will token, that is, as a token of good will), the choice should be between the upnhyphened forms, since the accent falls on the second syllable; see HYPHENS. Good will is required when the notion is virtuous intent &c., & goodwill is better when it is benevolence &c.

goody, -le. The first is better; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

goosy, -ey, “le. See -EY, -IE, -Y.

gormandize, gourmandise. The first is the English verb, the second the French noun, for which sec FRENCH WORDS.

gorse. Compare FURZE.

gossip makes gossiped, gossiping; gee -P-, -PP-.

gotten. See GET.

gouge. Pronounce gowj.

gourd. The OED gives precedence to the sound gord over goord.

gourmand)(gourmet. The first ranges in sense from greedy feeder to lover & judge of good fare; the second from judge of wine to connoisseur of delicacies. The first

usually implies some contempt, the

other not. See FRENCH WORDS.

gourmandise. See GORMANDIZE.

governance has now the dignity of

incipient archaism, its ih being

done, except in rhetorical or solemn

contexts, by government & control.

governor, -nour. The second is

almost obsolete; see -our & -oR.

grace. For pronouns after your g.

&c., see MAJESTY.

graduate makes graduable (sec

-ABLE 1), graduator (sec -OB).

graece, -cé. See LATINE,

Gr(a)ecism, gr(a)ecize, Gr(a)eco-,

&c. The spelling grec- is recom-

mended; see 2, &. 220

to. Pronounce grafé’ts; pil. -ti, pronounce -teé.

grammar, syntax, &c. G. is the general term for the science of language. The following list gives the chief parts of it, in their logical (not actual) order of development:— Phonology—How sounds are made

& depicted. Morphology—How words are made. Accidence—How words are _ in-

flected. Orthoepy—How words are said. Orthography—How words are writ-

ten. Composition—How words are fused

into compounds. Semantics—How words are to be

understood. Syntax—How words are arranged

in sentences. Etymology—How words are tested

by reference to their source.

Of these, orthography, accidence, & syntax, as the bare essentials for writing & reading, represent for most of us the whole of grammar; & morphology, orthoepy, phonology, & semantics, are meaningless terms to the average person.

gram(me). There seems to be no possible objection to adopting the more convenient shorter form, except that the -me records the unimportant fact that the word came to us through French.

gramophone. A bad formation; but incurable, & established.

GRAND COMPOUNDS. The separat-

ing, hyphening, or fusing, of the

chief compounds is as follows in the

grandam(e); grand-aunt;

grandchild; grand-dad;

sbi vee Grand Duke;

rand Duchess; grandfather;

Harmer prea grandmamma;

rand Master; grandmother;

grandmotherly; grand-nephew;

grand-niece; grandpapa;

grandparent; Grand Signior;

grandsire; grandson;

grand-uncle.
