page: 222

Johnson & later English lexico-

graphers, who have all given the

preference to gray’—OED.

greyhound is known to be uncon-

nected with grey, though the mean-

ing of its first part is doubtful 3 see

TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY.

gridiron, griddle, grid. What the

light of nature would suggest as to

their relations would be that grid

was the original word, griddle its

diminutive, t &ridiron a compound

of it with iron, Inquiry seems to

reveal, on the contrary, that grid is

a mere curtailment of gridiron,

which in turn has nothing to do with the word tron, but is a corruption of the earlier form gredire, a variant of gredil the source of griddle. The particular question is of no practical importance, but is here mentioned as illustrating well the kind of mistake, sometimes dangerous, against which a knowledge of etymolo may be a protection; see Trur FALSE ETYMOLOGY,

griffin, on, gryphon. Griffon is the regular zoological form, i.e. as the name of a kind of vulture; it is also the French dog name. For the monster grifin is the ordinary, & 8ryphon an ornamental spelling.

grimy. So spelt; see -Ey & -y.

gtippe, grisaille, grisette. See FRENCH worps,

grosbeak. Pronounce groés-.

gros de Naples. See Frencn WORDS.

grotto makes grottoes, see -O(E)s 1; & grotto’d, see -ED & ’p. grouse, bird. See COLLECTIVES, 1. grovel makes -Iling, -lled, &c. ; see -LL-, -L-. grow. For a grown man &c. see INTRANSITIVE P.P, groyne. It appears that the word usually so spelt, & meaning beachbarrier, is of different origin from groin the part of the body or of a vault; the separate spelling is therefore useful, gruel makes ling &c.; see -LL-, -L-.

222

GUARANTEE

Gruyére. See FRENCH worps.

gSryphon. See GriFFIin.

guano. Pronounce gwah- ; pl. -os,

see -O(E)s 8.

guarantee, guaranty. Fears of

choosing the wrong one of these two

forms are natural, but needless. As

things now are, -ee is never wrong

where either is possible. Asa verb,

-y is called by the OED ‘ now rare,

superseded by -ee’, & -ee should

therefore always be used. As a

noun, -y is correct in some senses,

but -ee is established in all. Those

who wish to avoid mistakes have in

fact only to use -ee always.

For those who either wish to use

words more accurately than their

neighbours, or are curious about the

history of the two forms, some

further remarks are offered. The

contexts in which may still be

reasonably preferred are those in

which the sense desired is rather the

act or fact of giving security than

the security given or its giver; con-

sequently, ‘ willing to enter into a

-y ’, * contracts of -y’, ‘a league of -y’, ‘an act of -y’, ‘ treaties of -y’, * be true to one’s -y ’, in all of which -y is a verbal noun & means guaranteeing.

The history (if the OED su gestion is right) is as follows. Frenc garant (person or thing that gives or serves as security) appears directly in English as warrant; warranty & guaranty (the giving of or acting as warrant) are its derived verbal nouns. Garant also came indirectly (through Spanish garante) into English as garanté, which having the “€ pronounced came to be spelt guarantee; the result was two different confusions: first with uaranty (the concrete with the a stract ), which led to guarantee’s taking to itself the senses of -y as well as its own; these it still keeps. Secondly with passive participles like lessee, by which guarantee is opposed to guarantor (though it is in one of its senses synonymous with it) & gets the sense, not much used, of person to whom security is given.
