page: 224

H

habergeon. Pronounce hia’berjn.

habiliments. See PotysyLuasBic HUMOUR.

habilitate makes habilitable; see “ABLE 1.

habit, v., has -ited; see -T-, -TT-.

habitude. In some of its obsolete senses (relation fo, intimacy or familiarity) the word was not exchangeable with habit. But in the senses that have survived it is difficult to find or frame a sentence in which habit would not do as well or better, the only difference being a slight flavour of archaism attaching to habitude. The following examples from the OED are chosen as those in which, more than in the rest, habit may be thought inferior to habitude; In the new land the fetters of habitude fall off./All the great habitudes of cvery species of animals have repeatedly been proved to be independent of imitation./They can be learned only by habitude & conversation, The sense constitution or temperament, though not called obsolete in the OED, is so rare as to be negligible, & habitude may fairly be classed as a SUPERFLUOUS WORD,

habitué. See FRENCH WORDS.

hackneyed. So spelt.

HACKNEYED PHRASES. When Punch set down a heading that might be, & very likely has been, the title of a whole book, ‘ Advice to those about to marry’, & boiled down the whole contents into a single word, & that a surprise, the thinker of the happy thought deserved congratulations for a week; he hardly deserved immortality, but he has—anonymously, indecd—got it; a large percentage of the great British people cannot think of the dissuasive ‘don’t’ without remembering, &, alas! reminding others, of him. There are thousands to whose minds the cat cannot effect an entrance unaccompanied by ‘harmless necessary’; nay, in the absence of the cat, ‘ harmless’ still

+ brings ‘ necessary’ in its train; & all would be well if the thing stopped at the mind, but it issues by way of the tongue, which is bad, or of the pen, which is worse. King David must surely writhe as often as he hears it told in Sheol what is the latest insignificance that may not be told in Gath. How many a time has Galileo longed to recant the recanting of his recantation, as ‘e pur si muove’ was once more applied or misapplied! And the witty gentleman who equips coincidence with her long arm has doubtless suffered even in this life at seeing that arm so mercilessly overworked.

The hackneyed phrases are counted by the hundred, & those registered below are a mere selection. Each of them comes to each of us at some moment in life with, for him, the freshness of novelty upon it; on that occasion it is a delight, & the wish to pass on that delight is amiable; but we forget that of any hundred persons for whom we attempt this good office, though there may be one to whom our phrase is new & bright, it is a stale offence to the ninety & nine.

The purpose with which thcse phrases are introduced is for the most part that of giving a fillip to @ passage that might be humdrum without them; they do serve this purpose with some _ readers—the less discerning—, though with the other kind they more effectually disserve it; but their true use when they come into the writer’s mind is as danger-signals; he should take warning that when they suggest themselves it is becnuse what he is writing is bad stuff, or it would not need such help; let him see to the substance of his cake instead of decorating with sugarplums. In considering the following selection, the reader will bear in mind that he & all of us have our likes & our dislikes in this kind; he may find pet phrases of his own in the list, or miss his pet abominations; he
