page: 227

6. Halfpennyworth is best spelt & pronounced kha’p’orth, ha’path.

7. H. of it ts, h. of them are, rotten. See NUMBER.

8 For half-breed, half-caste, see MULATTO 1 4.

hallelujah, halleluiah, allelufa. * Now more commonly written as in the A.V. of the O.T. hallelujah’— OED. The mispronunciation -lddlya should be avoided.

halliard. See HALYARD.

hallmark. For synonymy see SIGN.

halioo &c. The multiplicity of forms is bewildering; there are a round dozen at the least—hallo, halloa, halloo, hello, hillo, hilloa, holla, holler, hollo, holloa, hollow, hullo. Hello may perhaps be put aside as American, hillo & hilloa as archaic, & hollow as confusable with another word. Then, with interjection, noun, & verb, to provide for, the best sclection & arrangement from the remainder is perhaps: Hullo for the interjection & for the noun as the name of the intcrjection; halloo for the noun as the name of a shout, & for the verb in dignified contexts; holla (with past holla’d) for the verb in colloquial contexts. We thus get:—IIullo! is that you?; He Sopp short with a Hullo; The minstrel heard the far halloo; Do not halloo until you are out of the wood; He holla’d out something that I could not catch. The forms hallo(a), holler, & hollo(a), would thus be got rid of as well as hello, hillo(a), & hollow.

halm. See HAULM.

halo. Pl. -0es, see -O(E)s 1; adj. halo'd, see -ED & ’D.

halyard, halliard, haulyard. The first spelling is best, not on etymological grounds, but as established by usage. It is true that the original form is hallier or halyer=thing one hales with, & that -yard is no better than a popular-etymology corruption; but tilting against established perversions (cf. amucK, & see Di- DACTIcisM) is vanity in more than One sense,

227

hamstringed, hamstrung. See the

b discussion of FORECAST(ED). With h., no doubt of the right form is possible; in to hamstring, -string is not the verb string; we do not string the ham, but do something to the tendon called the hamstring; the verb, that is, is made not from the two words ham & string, but from the noun hamstring; it must therefore make hamstringed. On bowstring vb, where the notion that -string is verbal is not quite so obviously wrong, the OED says * The past tense & p.p. ought to be bowstringed, but bowstrung is also found’; the case for hamstringed is still clearcr.

hand. 1. Jiand & glove)(h. in glove. Both forms are common; the OED describes the second as ‘later’, & h. & glove gives best the oie ars notion, as familiar as a man’s h. &

love are, while h. in glove suggests, By confusion with hk. in h. (which is perhaps responsible for the in), that the h. & the glove belong to different persons. H. & glove is therefore perhaps better.

2. At close h. Those who follow the intricacies of German internal policy at close h. are able to ... seems to be a mixture of close at h. & at close quarters.

3. Get the better h. If the Imperial troops got the better h., the foreigners would be in far greater danger similarly mixes get the better of with get the upper h.

4. Handful makes -ls; see -FUL.

handicap makes -pped &c.; scc -P-, -PP-.

handsel, hansel. The OED gives precedence to the first; hk. makes -lled &c., see -LL-, -L-.

handy. For h.mansec SOBRIQUETS.

hang. Past & p.p. hanged of the capital punishment & in the imprecation; otherwise hung.

. The acroplane shed is so spelt, & pronounced -ngg-.

HANGING-UP. The indicating of

our grammatical subject & leaving it to hang up & await your returo
