page: 229

+ mar to know whether they may venture to print what they would | certainly say, to amend hard into hardly & make the latter the normal wording; see UNIDIOMATIC -LY. It is even more advisable with hard than with other such adverbs to avoid the -ly alternative, since, as the following quotations show, a misunderstood hardly will reverse the sense:—For attendance on the workkouse he recewes {105 a year, which, under the circumstances, is hardly earned./It must be remembered that Switzerland 7s not a rich country, & that she is hardly hit by the war./ Upon Saturday the 25th there was another fluctuation of the line in this hardly contested & essential tees / The history, methods, & hardly won success of the anti-submarine campaign.

2. Hardly ...than. This, & scarcely ... than, are among the corruptions for which ANALOGY is responsible; hardly ... when means the same as no sooner... than, & the than that fits no sooner ousts the when that fits hardly. The OED marks the phrases (under than) with the { of condemnation; but the mistake is so obvious that it should not need pointing out; it is, however, surprisingly common:—The crocuses had hardly come into bloom in the London parks than they were swooped upon by London children./Hardly was the Marne salient obliterated, at such an expense to the enemy, than the Amiens salient followed./Hardly has Midsummer passed than munictpal rulers all over the country have to face the task of choosing new mayors./ Scarcely had they arrived at their quarters on Ruhleben racecourse than their relations came to visit them.

8. For without hardly, see WITHOUT 4. Equally bad is no — h., as in There is no industry h. which cannot be regarded as a key industry. There ts h. any is the English.

harem, -8m,-um,-im. The established spelling & pronunciation are harem, em; kharam, harram, are

229

+ antiquated; hareem & harim, pronounced haré’m, may still fairly be called DrpACTICISMS.

haricot. Pronounce -k6.

harmattan. See wInbD, n.

harmony)(melody. When the words are used not in the general sense, which either can bear, of musical sound, but as the names of distinct elements in music, hk. means ‘the combination of simultaneous notes so as to form chords ’—OED, & m. ‘a series of single notes arranged in musically expressive succession ’ —OED.

harness. [im that putieth on his h. is a MISQUOTATION.

harquebus, arquebus. The OED

ives precedence to the h- form.

he word is the same as hackbut acheaigert Gaal corrupted in passing through Italian by confusion with Latin arcus bow. :

harry. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

hart, stag, buck, hind, doe. The following extracts from OED definitions will make the distinctions clear:-—

Huart—The male of the deer, esp. of the red deer; astag; spec.a male deer after its fifth year.

Stag—The male of a deer, esp. of the red deer; spec. a hart or male deer of the fifth year.

Buck—tThe he-goat, obs. . . . The male of the fallow-deer. (In early use perh, the male of any kind of deer.) ... The male of certain other animals resembling deer or goats, as the reindeer, chamois. In S. Africa (after Du. bok) any animal of the antelope kind. Also, the male of the hare & the rabbit.

Hind—tThe female of the deer, esp. of the red deer; spec. a female decr in & after its third year.

Doe—The female of the fallow deer; applied also to the female of allied animals, as the reindeer... The female of the hare or rabbit.

hashish, -eesh. The OED gives precedence to the first spelling, with the stress on the first syllable.
