page: 232

+ uses in speech one of the other words instead of Jew, it is for some reason, known or possibly unknown to himself. He may be deliberately avoiding Jew for whichever of the others he first thinks of, & that either at the bidding of ELEGANT VARIATION or NOVELTY-HUNTING OF facetiousness, or for the better reason that Jew has certain traditional implications (as usury, anti-Christianity) that are unsuited to the context. Or on the other hand he may be not avoiding Jew, but choosing one rather than another of the alternatives for itself: Hebrew suggests the pastoral & patriarchal, or again the possession of a language & a literature; Israelite, the Chosen People & the theocracy, & him in whom was no guile; Semite, the failure of most modern nations to assimilate their Jews. The fact remains that Jew is the current word, & that if we mean to substitute another for it, it is well to know why we do so. A remark or two of the OED bearing on the distinctions may be added:—(On Hebrew) ‘ Historically, the term is usually applied to the early Israelites; in modern use it avoids the religious & other associations often attaching to Jew’; (on Jew) ‘ Applied comparatively rarely to the ancient nation before the Exile, but the commonest name for contemporary or modern representatives of the race; almost always connoting their religion & other characteristics which distinguish them from the people among whom thcy live, & thus often opposed to Christian, & (esp. in early use) expressing a more or less opprobrious sense ’.

hecatomb. Pronounce -ém.

hectic. For ah. moment./M. Coué was taken up by some of our h. papers, & then dropped because he Vid not do what he never professed to do./ They have got pretty well used to the h. undulations of the mark. The sudden blossoming of h. into a VocuE-worp, meaning excited, rap-

282

+ turous, intense, impassioned, wild, uncontrolled, & the like, is ve singular. The OED (1901) shows hardly a trace of it, & explains its one quotation of the kind (° vehement & h. feeling’) as an allusion to the h. flush—no doubt rightly. Now a h. flush is one that is accounted for not, like other flushes, by exceptional & temporary vigour or emotion, but b és) of body called consumption. The nearest parallel to this queer development seems to be the use of CHRONIC for severe, the only difference being that while that is confined to the entirely uneducated this has had the luck to capture the journalists. :

hecto-. See CENTI-.

hedonist, Cyrenaic, epicurean, utilitarian. The first (literally, adherent of pleasure) is a general name for the follower of any philosophy, or any system of ethics, in whieh the end or the summum bonum or highest good is stated as (in whatever sense) pleasure.

The Cyrenaic (i.e. follower of Aristippus of Cyrene) is the hedonist in its natural acceptation—the pleasure-seeker who only differs from the ordinary voluptuary by being aware, as a philosopher, that the mental & moral pleasures are pleasanter than those of the asi he

The epicurean (or follower of Epicurus), bad as his popular reputation is, rises above the Cyrenaic by identifying pleasure, which remains nominally his semmum bonum, with the practice of virtue.

The utilitarian, by a_ still more surprising development, while he remains faithful to pleasure, understands by it not his own, but that of mankind—the greatest happiness of the greatest number.

It will be seen that the hedonist umbrella is a broad one, covering very different persons. Both the epicurean & the utilitarian have suffered some wrong in popular usage; it has been generally ignored that for Epicurus pleasure consisted the habit (Greek -
