page: 233

+ in the practice of virtue, &. the utilitarian is unjustly supposed (on the foolish ground that what is useful is not beautiful & that beauty is of no usc) to rate the steamroller higher than Paradise Lost. It may be worth while to quote the OED’s statement of ‘the distinctive doctrines of Epicurus:—1. That the highest good is pleasure, which he identified with the practice of virtue. 2. That the gods do not concern themselves at all with men’s affairs. 8. That the external world resulted from a fortuitous concourse of atoms ’.

hegemony. The _ pronunciation hégé’mon!l is recommended; see GREEK GC.

hegira. Pronounce hé’jira (not if’a).

heir. 1. For A. of all the ages see HACKNEYED PHRASES,

2 if. apparent}h. presumptive. These phrases are often used, when there is no occasion for either & heir alone would suffice, merely becausc they sound pose & seem to imply familiarity with legal terms. And those who use them for such reasons sometimes give themselves away as either supposing them to be

uivalent or not knowing which is

ich. Thus: By the tragedy of the death of the Crown Prince Rudolph in 1889 the Archduke Ferdinand became the Hletr Apparent to the throne. Rudolph, it is true, was heir apparent; but by his death no-one could become h. a. except his child or younger brother (whcreas Ferdinand was his cousin), since the Emperor might yet conceivably have a son who would displace anyone else. An h. a. is one whose title is indefeasible by any possible birth; an h. p. is one who will lose his position if an h. a. is born. Mistakes are no doubt duc to the double sense of the word apparent. Its old sense, retained in h. a,, & still possible elsewhere in literary use, but avoided for fear of confusion with the other & prevailing sense, is manifest or

I3

+ unquestionable. But the current sense is almost the same as that of seeming, though with slightly less implication that the appearance & the reality are different; apparent in this sense means much the same as presumptive, but in the other something very different; hence the error.

heliotro Pronounce hé-.

helix. Pl. heliccs, pronounce -séz.

hellebore. Pronounce hé’libor.

Heliene, Hellenic. The function of these words in English, beside Greek, is not easy to define; but the use of them is certainly increasing. They were formerly scholars’ words, little used except by historians, & by persons concerned not so much with Greeks in themselves as with the effects of Greck culture on the development of civilization in the world. With the modern spread of education, the words have been popularized in such connexions; at the same time the national aspirations of Greek irredentists have called pally aap) attention to pan- Hellenism & to the name by which the Greeks & their king call themsclves; so that the proportion of people to whom Greek means something, & Hellene & Hellenic nothing, is smaller than it was. Nevertheless, Greek remains the English word, into whose place the Greck words should not be thrust without special justification.

hello. See HALLOO.

helmet makes -eted; see -t-, -TT-.

help, n. For lady h., see GENTEEL- ISMS.

help, v. Than, & as, one can help, Don’t sneeze more than you can help, Sneeze as little as you can h., are perhaps to be classed as STURDY INDEFENSIBLES. Those who refrain from the indefensible however sturdy it may be have no difficulty in correcting: Don’t sneeze more than you must, Sneeze as little as you can or may. Out of Don’t sneeze if you can help tt is illogically developed Don't sneeze more than you can help, which
