page: 234

+ HELPMATE would be logical, though not attractive, if cannot were written for can. And out of Don’t sneeze more than you can help by a further blunder comes Sneeze as lilile as you can help; a further blunder, because there is not a mere omission of a negative— you cannot help’ does not mend the matter—, but a failure to see that can without help is exactly what is wanted: the full form would be Sneeze as little as you can sneeze little, not as you cither can, or cannot, keep from sneezing. The OED, which stigmatizes the idiom as ‘ erroneous ’, quotes Newman for it:— Your name shall occur again as little as I can help, in the course of these prises (where as little as may be would have done, or, more clumsily, if the J is wanted, as little as I can let i).

helpmate)(helpmeet. The OED’s remark on the latter is:—A compound ‘absurdly formed by taking the two words help meet in Gen. ii, 18, 20 (° an ng meet for him’, i.e. a help suitable for him) as one word.

hemistich. Pronounce -k.

hempen. See -EN ADJECTIVES.

hendecasyliable, hendiadys, hephthemimeral. See TECUNICAL TERMS.

her. 1. Case. For questions of her & she, see sue, & cf. HE.

2. For questions of her & hers (e. g. Her & his tasks differ), see ABSOLUTE POSSESSIVES,

3. For her & she in irresolute or illegitimate personifications (c.g. The United States has given another proof of its determination to uphold her neutrality./Danish sympathy is writ large over all her newspapers), see PERSONIFICATION,

Herculean. Pronounce herki‘lan. The normal sound of words in -ean is with the -e- accented & long; so Periclé’an, Cytheré’an, Sophoclé’an, Medicé’an, Tacité’‘an, pygmé’an, &

234 HERS

Pa GE PSE eect Se OT Ie; ee REE ee Sa eee ee ne eee scores of others. Of words that vacillate between this sound & that given by shifting the accent back & making the -e- equivalent to I, as in Herculean, most develop a second spelling to suit; so Caesarean or Caesaritan, cyclopean or -pian, Aristotelean or -lian. Herculean, like protean, changes its sound without a change of spelling; & many people in consequence doubt how the words should be said. The sound herkii’lian is not a modern blundcr to be avoided, but is established by long use. In the only three verse quotations given by the OED, -é’an is twice impossible, & once unlikely:— Robust but not Herculcan—to the

sight No giant frame sets forth his com-

mon height.— Byron Let mine out-woe me;

mine ’s

Hurculean woe.—Marston

So rose the Danite strong, Herculean Samson, from the harlot-

lap Of Philistean Dalilah.— Milton

heredity. The word is now used, by g writers, only in the biological sense, i.e. the tendency of like to beget like. The extract below, where it has becn substituted for descent solely because descendant is to follow, illustrates well what happens when zeal for ELEGANT VARIATION is not tempered by discretion:—The Agha Khan... is unique because of his heredity—he is a lineal descendant of the Prophet Mohammed—though he is more noteworthy because of his being the leader of the neo-Moslems.

heriot. For synonymy see TAx.

heritrix. For pl. see -TRIx.

hermit. For the Hermit Kingdom see SOBRIQUETS.

hero. Pl. -oes; see -o(F)s 1.

heroic (of metres). See TECUNICAL TERMS.

herr. See MYNHEER.

herring. For the h.-pond, see WoRN- OUT HUMOUR.

hers. See ABSOLUTE POSSESSIVES,
