page: 235

hesitance,, hesitancy, hesitation. The last has almost driven out the others; -ce may be regarded as obsolete; but -cy is still occasionally convenient when what is to be expressed is not the act or fact of hesitating, but the tendency to do so. Two examples from the OED will illustrate:—She rejected it without hesitation./That perpetual hesitancy which belongs to people whose intelligence & temperament are at variance.

heteroclite. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

hew. P.p. usu. hewn, sometimes hewed.

hexameter. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

hiatus. See TECHNICAL TERMS, Pl. -uses, see -Us, & LATIN PLURALS,

Hibernian differs from Jrish(man) as Gautic from French, & is of the nature of POoLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

hibernice, -cé. See LATINE.

makes -uping, -uped; see -p-, -PP-, The spelling -ough is a perversion of popular ctymology, & ‘should be abandoned as a mere error ’"—OED.

hide, vb. P.p. hidden or hid, the latter still not uncommon.

hie makes hieing; see MUTE E.

al). The long form is the commoner.

w. See MUGWUMP.

highly. 1. It should be remembered that high is an adv. as well as highly, & better in many contexts; c.g., It is best to pay your men high; INigh-placed officials; see UN1DIOoM- ATic -LY. 2. Though highly in the sense fo a high degrce is often unobjectionable (a highly contentious question; highly farmed land), it has ucquired, when used with adjectives of commendation, a_ patronizing tuint (@ highly entertaining performance) like distinctly, & is best avoided in such conncexions.

For pronouns after Your H. &c., see MAJESTY.

t. See WorN-OUT HUMOUR.

a). See HALLOO.

him. See HE.

235

hinc fllae lacrimae. See Hacx- NEYED PHRASES.

hind, deer. For synonyms see Harr,

hindermost. Sec super —<

Hindu, Hindoo. The OED gives precedence to the former; but it is perhaps still permissible for the old-fashioned to regard it as a Divacticism & keep to the anglicized Hindoo.

hinge v.

makes hinging; see MUTE E,

hippocampus. PI. -pi, pron. -pi.

hippogriff, -gryph. The first spelling is recommended; cf. GRIFFIN.

Pl. -muses better

hire, v., makes hirable; see MUTE E.

his. 1. 4 graceful raising of one’s hand to his hat. For the question between his & one’s in such positions, see ONE.

2. The member for Morpeth has lon been held in the highest respect by all who value sterling character & wholehearted service in the cause of his fellows. For this type of mistake see PRONOUNS.

historic (in syntax).

See TEcCH- NICAL TERMS,

historic(ai). The DIFFERENTIATION between the two forms has reached the stage at which it may fairly be said that the use of one in a sense now generally expressed by the other is a definite backsliding. The ordinary word is historical; historic means memorable, or assured of a place in history; historical should not be substituted for it in that sense; the only other function retained by historic is in the grammarians’ technical terms _ hisioric tenses, moods, sequence, present, &c., in which it preserves the notion appropriate to narration of the past of which it has been in general usc robbed by historical.

historicity. The earliest OED example of this ugly word is dated 1880 ; but, being effective in imparting a learned air to statements that are to impress the unlearned, it has had a rapid success, & is now com-
