page: 238

+ hopefully expect, thereforeit can have the construction that that phrase might have is utterly at variance with the facts of language.

Thirdly, writers have taken a fanc to playing tricks with ‘ it is hoped ', & working it into the sentcnce as an essential part of its grammar instead of as a parenthesis; the impersonal tt is omitted, & is (or are) hoped is forced into connexion with the subject of the sentence, with deplorable results. See also 1T. In the first two examples, it should be reinstated; in the third, read are not even yet, tt may be hoped, at an end:—The actual crest of the Villeneuve hill was not reached, as was hoped might bc possible. tien final arrangements or what is hoped will prove a ‘monster demonstration’./ Who has held two of the most distinguished positions under the Crown, d:; whose sclf-sacrificing services for the Empire may be hoped even yet not to be at an end./Which cnded in what is hoped ts only a temporary breakdown./The chief actors in what is hoped will prove the final act./ During what is hoped will prove to be a more active autumn.

hopeful. For young h. sec Hack- NEYED PHRASES.

horehound, hoarhound. Though ‘the analogical spelling is hoar-’ (i.e. the word is connected with hoary), ‘this is much less usual in England than hore- ’—OED.

horrible)(horrid. The distinctions between the two are (1) that horrid is still capable in poctical & literary use of its original sense of bristling or shaggy; & (2) that while both are much used in the trivial sense of disagreeable, horrible is still quite common in the graver sense inspiring horror, which horrid tends to losc, being now ‘ especially frequent as a feminine form of strong aversion ’— OED.

horrify. For inflexions sec VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

hors concours, hors de combat, hors-d’ceuvre. See FRENCH WORDS.

horse makes horsy, not horsey; see -EY & -Y.

hose (stockings) is archaic, or a shop name, or rarely a GENTEELISM.

hospitable. The stress should be on hos-, not on -pif-; for doubtful cases of such stress see RECESSIVE ACCENT; but the stress on hos- is as old as Shakspere & Drayton (lines quoted in OED).

bas omg not -aler; see -LL-, -L-.

hostler. See OSTLER.

hotchpot, hotchpotch, hodgepodge, hotpot. The first is nearest to the original form (Fr. hochepot = shakepot); 2, 8, & perhaps 4, are succcssive corruptions dictated by dcsire for expressiveness or meaning when the real sense was forgotten. Hotchpotch being the preveune form, it would be best if the two later ones might perish; hotchpot, being a technical legal term, would naturally resist absorption in hotchpotch, but might be restricted to its special use.

hotel. The old-fashioned pronunciation with the h silent (cf. humble, humour, humorous, honorarium) is certainly doomed, & is not worth fighting for.

hough. See HOcK.

hourl. Pronounce hoor’! or howr’l.

houseful. Pl. -is; see -FUL.

housewife. The shortened pronunciation (hi’zif or hi’zwif), which is almost invariable for the sewingcase, is still fairly common also for the mistress or domestic manager; displacement of thc_ traditional hii'zif or hii’zwif by how’swif was in part brought about in the 16th c., when housewife & hussy were still realized to be the same word, by the feeling that a distinction between the two was due to the reputable matron.

housewifery. Pronounce hi/’zifri, hii’zwl’fri, or how’swifri; see HOUSE- WIFE.

hover. The OED gives precedence to the pronunciation hi’ver.

howbeit, according to the OED, is archaic in one of its senses (neverthcless) & obsolete in the other (al-
