page: 239

though). The archaic has its place in modern writing, the obsolete has not; see ArRcHAISM. Those who, without much knowledge of the kind of literature in which archaism is in place, are tempted to use this word should carefully note the distinction. It is often a delicate matter to draw it aright; but there is little doubt that the OED has done so here.

however. Several small points require mention. 1. however, how ever, how ... ever. In everyday talk, how ever is common as an emphatic form of the interrogative how (How ever can it have happencd?); it should not appear in print except when dialogue is to be reproduced, being purely colloquial; this does not apply to cases where ever has its full scparate sense of at any time or under any circumstances, but it is then parted from how by some other word or words. We believe that before many years have passed employers & employed alike will swconder however they ot on without it; this should have n how they ever got on; the other order is an illitcracy in itsclf, & the offence is aggravated by the printing of however as one word. EVER.

2. But however)(but . . . however. But t must be remembered, however, that the Government had no guaranteec./ But these schemes, however, cannot be carried out without waa And for other examples of this disagrecable but common redundancy see BUT 5 ; either buf or however suffices; one should be taken, & the other left; sitting on two stools is little better than falling between them. It is noteworthy that But however with nothing intervening, which would seem the most flagrant case, is on the contrary better than the form illustrated above; the juxtaposition suggests that there is more in it than mere carelessness, & that however has the definite sense in spite of ali—is in fact a full adverb & not & conjunction, & therefore strictly defensible as not trespassing on but's

239

+ ground. The usage is colloquial only.

3. However too late. These extravagant German counter-attacks in mass on the Cambrai front, however, materially helped the French operations in Champagne. The excuse for such late placing of the conjunction —that these . .. front is in effect a single word—is sound only against a suggestion that it should be placed after attacks; it, or Nevertheless, or All the same, could have stood at the head of the sentence. The undue deferring of however usually comes from the same cause as here, i.e. the difficulty of slipping it in where it interrupts a phrase, & should be recognized as a danger to be avoided.

Towever too early. It should be borne in mind that the placing of however second in the sentence has the effect, if the first word is one whose meaning is complete (e.g. He as compared with When), of throwing a strong emphasis on that word. Such emphasis may be intended, or short of that may be harmless; but aeain it may be misleading; emphasis on he implies contrast with other people; if no others are in question, the reader is thrown out. The Action Commission wished to get permission for mectings & had telephonic communication with Wallraff, who declared that he would not negotiate with the workmen. He, however, would receive the Socialist members of Parliament. The only right place for however there is after would, the contrast bcing not between him & anyone else, but between would not & would. The mistake is made with other conjunctions of the kind pce cut off

y commas, but is especially common with however & therefore.

hue. For synonymy see TINT.

hugeous. Those who usc the form perhaps do so chiefly under the im-

ression that they are satirizing the ignorant with a non-existent word, as others of their kind do with mischevious or tunderconstumble or
