page: 241

MOTIVE

or AIM PROVINCE humour Discovery Human

nature Observation The sympathetic wit Throwing light | Words & satire Amendment Morals & sarcasm Inflicting pain Faults & invective Discredit Misconduct irony Exclusiveness Statementoffacts cynicism Self-justification | Morals The sardonic | Self-relief Adversity eee

hundred. See CoLLecrives 8.

huntress. See FEMININE DESIGNA- TIONS.

hurricane. See wINp, n.

hurry, vb. For inflexions see VEBBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

hussy, huzzy. In the OED examples, the spelling with -ss- occurs nearly five times as often as that with -zz-. The traditional pronunciation (hi’zI, cf. HOUSEWIFE) is giving way before hi’s!I, which, with the assistance of the spelling, will no doubt prevail.

hyaena. See HYENA.

hybrid. See muLatTro 1.

HYBRID DERIVATIVES are words formed from a stem or word belonging to one language by applying to it a suffix or prefix belonging to another. It will be convenient to class with these the words, abortions rather than hybrids, in which all the elements belong indeed to one language, but are so put together as to outrage that language’s principles of formation. English contains thousands of hybrid words, of which the vast majority are unobjectionable. All such words as plainness or paganish or sympathizer, in which a Greek or Latin word has become English & has afterwards had an English suffix attached to it, are hybrids technically, but not for practical

urposes. The same is true of those

ike readable, breakage, fishery, disbelieve, in which an English word has received one of the foreign elements that have become living prefixes or suffixes; -able, -age, -ery,

METHOD

or MEANS AUDIENCE ideas Surprise The intelligent manners | Accentuation The self-satisfied foibles | Inversion Victim & bystan-

der

Direct statement | The public

| Mystification An inner circle

ee of na- | The respectable

edness

Pessimism Self dis-, though of Latin-French origin, are all freely used in making new forms out of English words.

At this point it may be well to clear the ground by collecting a small number of the words that may be accused of being hybrids in either of the senses explained above—i.e. as made of heterogeneous elements, or as having their homogeneous elements put together in an alien fashion:—amoral, amusive, backwardation, bi-daily, bureaucracy, cablegram, climactic, coastal, colouration, dandiacal, floatation, funniment, gullible, impedance, pacifist, racial, sendec, speedometer. An ill-favoured list, of which all readers will condemn some, & some all. It will not be possible here to lay down rules for word-formation, which is a complicated business; but a few remarks on some of the above words may perhaps instil caution, & a conviction that word-making, like other manufactures, should be done by those who know how to do it; others should neither attempt it for themselves, nor assist the deplorable activities of amateurs by giving currency to fresh coinages before there has been time to test them.

A great difficulty is to distinguish, among the classical suffixes & prefixes, between those that are, though originally foreign, now living English, & those that are not. Of the former class -able & dis- have already been mentioned as examples; to the latter -ation, -ous, -te,

& a- (not), may be confidently assigned. But others are not so
