page: 245

+ expression consisting of a noun qualified adjectivally by the other element means something different from what its elements left separate would or might mean; in _ this function the hyphen ia a recognition in print of what has already happened in speech, i.e. that the compound has kept only one accent, & that on the first element, whereas the elements had originally two, of which the stronger was usually on the second (compare the accentuation of Thruskes are not black birds with that of Thrushes are not blackbirds or blackbirds). If this modification of accent has not occurred, the hyphen is out of place & the words should be separate. The expressions coming under this head are chiefly those of which the sccond element is a noun & the first is an adjective (as in black-bird, red-coat) or an attributive noun (as in waterrat).

C. To render such compound expressions as a verb & its object or other appurtenances, or a noun & its adjective, amenable to some treatment to which it could not otherwise be subjected. Thus Court Martial, if it is to have a possessive case (the Court-martial’s decision was ...), must be one word; long legs, storms beat, rend hearts, carry weight, come home, handle by means

men, proof against bombs, spits

re, go by, can be converted into handy adjectives, nouns, or verbs, fit to receive suffixes or to play the

that may be required of them In a sentence, by being combined with the hyphen (often afterwards dropped out) into single words; so we get longlegged, stormbeaten, heartrending, weight-carrier, hamecoming, man-handle, bomb-proof, spitfire, & (the) go-by. aa

D. To show that two adjectives, each of whith could be applied separately to a noun (J saw a red hot face, i.e. one both red & hot), are not to be so applied, but are to form one epithet conveying a compound idea (holding a red-hot poker); such 245

+ are dark-blue, worldly-wise, mockheroic, bitter-sweet, forcible-feeble.

E. To attach closely to an active or passive participle an adverb or pre« position preceding or following it that would not require hyphening to the parent verb (you put up, not pul-up, a job, but the result is a pul-up job). The question whether this hyphening is to be done or not is answered, as in B, by the accentuation; the hyphen is wrong unless the compound will have only one accent, & that on the first element; thus oft-repeated will usually be hyphened, & ill served usually not.

If the above statements & classification are adequate, we should now be able to pass judgement not ony on the temporary combinations with which the article started, but on the more difficult questions of permanent compounds. The guiding principles will be: No hyphening of words that will do.as well separ- __ ate; no hyphening of words in the B or E class if they retain the normal accentuation; no hyphening together of double-barrelled expressions that themselves lack internal hyphens; the difference between hyphening & full coalescence, in permanent compounds, a matter of expediency merely. It must be admitted on the one hand that the results will often differ from current usage, but on the other that that usage is so variable as to be better named caprice. Illustrative words will be roughly grouped, with occasional quotations to show that imaginary offences are not being set up in order to be knocked down, & the beginning of cach group will be marked with an asterisk.

*Ex-, ante-, pre-, anti-, post-, &¢., are often wrongly prefixed to unhyphened double expressions. The difficulty is real, but should always be circumvented; e.g., the first quotation should be corrected to opened the campaign against Home

ule.

Quotations: Mr Austen Chamber-
