page: 248

+ specimens of wrong hyphening contained in it; the order is that in which they have occurred above, so that what was said about them may be referred to without much difficulty; they are all printcd in the wrong form, standing here in the alana Superfluous hair-remover;

he Lloyd George- Winston Churchill Government; The Unionist Housing of the Working-Classes Bill; His fellow-Free Churchmen; Peace Mceting Riot; The bigoted antitrade unionist; The Conscrvative- National-Liberal Block; The Acting-British Consul; Sir Henniker- Heaton; Lay-writers; A _ strong Navy agitation; The mid-nincteenth century politicians; British Columbia peaches; The Sidney Webb- Bernard Shaw-Fabian Socicty type: The silk stocking-tax; The Free Trade-Protectionist | controversy; South African-born Indians; Dean Stanley-strect; Abingdon-street; The Sambre Canal-Scheldt front; His fellow-theatrical managers; The anti-Home Rule campaign; the anti-high tariff Press; The pre-Boer war figures; The ex-Chief Whip; An ex-Lord Mayor; The ex-Navy League President; Red-herring; Holy-Ghost; Golden-syrup; Fullback; Full-stop; Full-pitch; Easygoing (n.); The ruling-class; A

en-leg; Clean-living (n.); Great-coat; Good-will; | Court- Martial; Governor-General; Solicitor-General; Princess-Royal; The time-being; Lord-Mayor; Lady- Superior; Lady-help; Deputy- Speaker; Rogue-elephant; Cockrobin; Actor-managcr; Trial-hceat; Fellow-man; Man-child; Headmaster; Head-quartcrs; Rule-ofthumb; Business-man; Hay-fever; Summer-time (Willett’s); Winter-

rden; Sea-change; Sea-monster;

ass-case; Sub-judice; Ex-officio (adv.); Bona-fide (adv.); Ex-parte

adv.); Ex-post-facto; Felo-de-se; at m pees; In ee:

anyrate; Above-ground; pto-date (adv.); Ill-served.

Finally, for readers who may ‘like

+ to play at addition & subtraction of hyphens, or who doubt whether so simple a matter is worth an intelligent person’s attention, here are some unsorted specimens:—We shall place our orders with your good-selves. /The price of fixed intcrest bearing sccurities./To declare martial-law in Constantinople./A small minority of mechanically propelled vehicle uscrs./The middleclass began to find that .. ./The publication is an ill-service to the cause./One good age from that ill-wind. / Language of this kind comes with specially ill-grace from . ../We have not made use enough of labour economizing appliances./ With the dying off of the older non- English educated generation. /He saw the prisoner in Oxford & Cambridge-terrace./With regard to the Chancellor of the Exchequership./ The Dardanelles-Sea of Marmora- Bosphorus line is more important./ The ill-effects of the kinema upon child-life.

hypocorisma.Scc TECUNICALTERMS.

hypothecate. 1. Ji. makes -cable, -tor; see -ABLE 1,-oR. 2. 17, means only to mortgage or pledge. In the following extract—The Nahua racc, which, by tradition, served the Aztecs in much the same way as to origin as the hypothecated Aryans serve ourselucs—it is used as a verb corresponding to hypothesis; if an allied verb is eat necessary, hypothesize (or -fize) is the right form, though it is to be hoped that we may generally content oursclves with assume.

hypothesis. Pl. -theses, pron. -€z.

hypothetic(al). The longer is much commoner; otherwise there seems to be no distinction of meaning or usage; see -IC(AL).

hysteric(al). The short form has almost gone out of use as an adjective, surviving, perhaps, only for reasons of eupbony, as in with @ hysteric laugh; see -1C(AL).

hysteron proteron. See TECHNICAL TERMS.
