page: 249

I

I. 1. Between you & 1 is a piece of

false grammar not sanctioned, like

the contrary lapse It is me, even by

colloquial usage; a similar lapse is

seen in It was a tragedy of this kind

which brought home to my partner &

I the necessity for...

2 Jd, like we, is liable to be used in

successive sentences with different

meanings. In the extract below, the

first two Js mean the average moral-

ist, while the third means the

reviewer of Dr Westermarck’s book.

It is an insidious trap, but more

often baited with we, which fre-

quently means in one sentence the

editor of his paper, & in the next

the country or the Party or an

other of the many bodies of whic

he is a member: In this respect Dr

Westermarck has given a less adequate

account of the moral sentiment than

Adam Smith, who declares that our

thtn he does justice to sympathy with the direct motives or impulses from which action arises, Dr Westermarck overlooks them in favour of retributive sympathy with the recipient.

-i. The plurals with this ending need care in three points. See also LATIN PLURALS, 1. As plural of Italian words in -o or -e (confetti, délettanti, conoscenti, &c.) -i is pronouneed é, but as plural of Latin & Greek words in -us or -os (bacilli, syllabi) it is pronounced 1; those to whom Latin & Italian words are indistinguishable are apt to say basilé &c.; safety lies in -uses, which is now permissible in nearly all words, & better in most. 2. Many classical words in -us are given impossible plurals in -i by those who

+ know little or no Latin. Such are hiatus, meatus, afflatus, octopus, corpus, virus, & callus, the Latin plurals of which end variously or do not exist; safety for the non- Latinist again lies in -uses. 3. Ignoramus, mandamus, & mittimus, though now English nouns, are in Latin not nouns at all, but verbs, = we do not know, we command, we send; having become nouns only in English, they can have only the English plurals ignoramuses, mandamuses, mittimuses.

jambics, fambus.

See TECHNICAL TERMS.

ilamb(us). The long form (pl. -buses or -bi) is recommended as both more usual & handier.

ibidem. Pronounce ibi’dém.

See -ABLE, -IBLE, &c.

-IBLE.

“IC. For -ic & -ics, see -1Cs.

-IC(AL). A great many adjectives appear with alternative forms in -ic & -ical. Often the choice between them on any particular occasion is indifferent, so far as the writer’s immediate object is concerned. To those who can afford time to think also of the interests of the English language it may be suggested that there are two desirable tendencies to be assisted.

The first of these is DIFFERENTIA- TION. There are many pairs in -ic & -ical, each form well established & in constant use, but with a difference of meaning either complete or incipient. The final stage of differentiation is seen in politic & political, which are not even content, as usual, to share an adverb in -ically, but make politicly by the side of politically. Between economic & economical the distinction is nearly as clear, though the seal has not been set upon it by a double provision of adverbs; most writers are now aware that the two words mean different things, & have no difficulty in choosing the one required. This can hardly be said of eomic(al), the short form of which is often made
