page: 250

+ to do the other's work. And so the differentiations tail off into mere incipiency. Every well established differentiation adds to the precision & power of the language; every observance of an incipient one helps it on the way to establishment, & every disregard of it checks it severely; it is therefore clear that writers have a responsibility in the matter.

The second laudable tendency is that of clearing away the unnecessary. When two forms coexist, & there are not two senses for them to be assigned to, it is clear gain that one should be got rid of. The scrapping process goes on slowly by natural selection; sometimes the determining cause is apparent, as when hysteric, cynic, & fanatic, give way tohysterical, cynical, & fanatical, because they have themselves acquired a new function as nouns; sometimes the reasons are obscure, as when electric & dynamic supersede the longcr forms while hypothetic & botanic are themsclves superseded. But that one or other should prevail is a gain; & it is a further gain if the process can be quickened. With this end in view, it is stated in this dictionary, about many -tc(al) words, which appears to be the winnin side, that writers may be cncourage to espouse it.

Some words bearing on these points are (omitting -ic, -tcal):—botan-, casuist-, com-, con-, eub-, cyn-, diabol-, dynam-, econom-, elcctr-, fanat-, geograph-, gcometr-, hypothet-, hyster-, mag-, philosoph-, polit-, ident-, lyr-, sto-, period-, trag-, typ-.

ice, n. Ice cream, ice pudding, should not be hyphened; see HYPHENS.

ice, v., makes iceable; see MUTE E.

eics. 1. -ics) (-ic. Among the names of sciences, arts, or branches of study, are a few words in -ic that rank as real English; the chief are logic, magic, music, & rhetoric; but the normal form is -ics, as in

250

+ acoustics, classics, dynamics, ethics, mathematics, physics, politics, tactics. The substitution of -tc for -ics (dialectic, cthic, gymnastic, linguistic, metaphysic, &c.) in compliance with French & German usage has the effect, whether it is intended or not, of a display of exotic learning, & repels the possibly insular reader who thinks that * English is food enough for him’. It should be added, however, that the -ic & -ics forms can sometimes be usefully kept for separate senses; _ thus, dialectic meaning the art of logical disputation, dialectics would mean rather a particular person’s exhibition of skill in it; but it is not with many words, nor on many occasions, that this need arises, & it is not usually with this end in view that the -ic words are made.

2. Grammatical number of -ics. This is not so simple a matter as it is sometimes thought. The natural tendency is to start with a fallacy: We say Mathematics is (& not are) a science; therefore mathematics is singular. But the number of is there is at least influenced, if not (whether legitimatcly or otherwise) determined, by that of a science. The testing should be donc with sentences in which there is not a noun complement to confuse the issue:—Classics are, or ts, now taking a back scat; Conics is, or are, easier than I expecied; What arc, or is, his mathematics like?; Politics are, or ts, most fascinating; Your heroics are, or is, wastcd on me; Athletics are, or is, rampant in the big schools; Tactics are, or is, subordinate to straitczy. The rules that seem tp emerge are: (1) Singular for the name of a science strictly so used; Metaphysics, or Acoustics, deals with abstractions, or sound. (2) Plural for those same names more looscly used, e.g. for a manifestation of qualitics; often recognizable by the presence of his, the, &c.: His mathematics arc weak; Such ethics are abominable; The acoustics of the
