page: 251

+ hall are faulty. (3) Plural for names denoting courses of action or the like: Heroics are out of place; Hysterics leave me cold. (4) The presence of a singular noun com-

lement often makes the verb singu-

r: Mathematics, or even Athletics, is his strong point.

fctus. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

idea. 1. Humperdinck had_ the happy idea one day to write a little fairy opera. The question between to write & of writing is discussed under GERUND 3.

2. Idea’d is prefcrable to ideaed; see -ED & ’D.

idealogue, idealogy, idealogical, arc ‘erroneous forms ’ (OED) for 1DEo- LOGUE &c.; cf. MINERALOGY.

idée fixe. See FRENCH WORDS.

identic(al). The short form has been so far ousted by the long as to be now a mere archaism except in the language of diplomacy (identic note, declaration, action, &c.). Cf. -1C(AL).

identify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

id est. See 1.5.

ideologue, -logist, -logy, &c. So spelt, not ideal-. The words are formed from Gk idea, & the Greek combining vowel is -o- fer substantives of all declensions.

idiocy, -tcy. The -f- is wrong.

idiom. This dictionary being much concerned with idiom & the idiomatic, some slight explanation of the terms may perhaps be expected. For some synonyms, see JARGON. *A manifestation of the peculiar ’ is the closest ible translation of the Greek word. In the realm of speech this may be applied to a whole language as peculiar to a people, to a dialect as getvere to a district, to a technical vocabulary as peculiar to a profession, & so forth. In this book, ‘an idiom’ is any form of expression that, as compared with other forms in which the principles of abstract grammar, if there is such a thing, would have allowed the 251

+ idea in question to be clothed, has established itself as the particular way preferred by Englishmen & therefore presumably charactcristic of them. ‘Idiom’ is the sum total of such forms of expression, & is consequently the same as natural or racy or unaffected English; that is idiomatic which it is natural for a normal Englishman to say or write; to suppose that grammatical English is either all idiomatic or all unidiomatic would be as far from the truth as that idiomatic English is either all grammatical or all ungrammatical; grammar & idiom are independent categories; being applicable to the same material, they sometimes agrec & sometimes disagree about particular specimens of it; the most that can be said is that what is idiomatic is far more often grammatical than ungrammatical; but that is worth saying, because grammar & idiom are sometimes treated as incompatibles; the fact is that they are distinct, but usually in alliance. To give a few illustrations: You would not go for to do it is neither grammatical nor idiomatic English; I doubt that they really mean it, The distinction leaps to the eyes, & A hardly earned inceme, are all grammatical, but all for different reasons unidiomatic; Jt was not me, Who do you take me sha fy There is heaps of material, are idiomatic but ungrammatical; He was promoted captain, She all but capsized, Were it true, are both grammatical & idiomatic. For examples of special idioms see CAST-IRON IDIOM,

idiosyncrasy, -cratic. The right spelling (-sy, not -cy) is of some importance, since the wrong distorts the meaning, for all who have a tincture of Greek & so might otherwise grasp it, by suggesting a falsc connexion with autocracy & the many words in -cracy. Those words are from Greek krdtos power; this is from Greek krdsis mixture, Its meaning is peculiar mixture, & the point
