page: 253

+ what it means may be expected to attach to it; that false sense is vulgar errors or popular fallacies, ene of which names should be used instead of it, since it in fact has a much more limited meaning than they, & one not obvious without explanation. See PopuLaRiZED TECHNICALITIES.

Kt is the third of Bacon’s four divisions of fallacies, more often mentioned than the other three because its meaning seems, though it is not in fact, plainer. There are the idols (i.e. the fallacies) of the tribe, the cave, the market, & the theatre, which are picturesque names for (1) the errors men are exposed to by the limitations of the human understanding (as members of the tribe of man); (2) those a person is liable to owing to his idiosyncrasy (as enclosed in the cave of self); (3) those due to the unstable relation between words & their meanings (which fluctuate as the words are bandied to & fro in the conversational exchange or word-market); & (4) those due to false philosophical or logical systems (which hold the stage successively like plays). The tribe is the human mind, the eave is idiosyncrasy, the market is talk, & the theatre is philosophy; who would guess all that unaided? who, on the contrary, would not

that an idol of the marketplace was just any belief to which the man in the street yields a mistaken deference? The odd thing is that no better instance could be found of an idol of the market than the phrase itself, oscillating between its real meaning & the modern misuse, so that the very person who pours scorn on idola fori is often propagating one in the very act of ridiculing the rest; well, ‘tis sport to see enginer hoist with his own petard. The mistake is common enough, but is not easily exhibited except in passages of some length, so that one must here suffice; the tendency to exalt the man of action above the man of theory may be 258

I.E. ill-advised, but it has nothing to do with shifting acceptations of words, & is not an idolum fori:—With us the active characters, the practical men, the individuals who, whether in public or in prwate affairs, * get on with the job’, have always held the first place in esteem; the theorists & philosophers a place very secondary by comparison. It is not easy to account for this common estimate. For one thing, as soon as inquiry is made into it, the belief proves to be without foundation—just one of the idols of the market place.

tdolatress. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS.

idyl(1). The OED gives precedence to the form with i It also recognizes only one pronunciation, i-, not I-; on this, however, there is room for difference of opinion. (1) It is certain that many people say [dil; (2) with idol & idle, both commoner words, ready to confuse the hearer, a separate pronunciation is all to the good, if there is ene against it; & (3) it has been pointed out in the article FALSE QUANTITY that the length of the first syllable in the Greek is nothing against its being shortened in the English word.

L.e., id est. 1. To write, or even to say, this in the full instead of in the abbreviated form is now so unusual as to convict one of affectation.

2. t.e. means that is to say, & introduces another way (more comprehensible to the hearer, driving home the speaker’s point better, or otherwise preferable) of putting what has been already said; it does

not introduce an example, & when substituted for e. 8. in that function, as in the following extract, is a blunder:—Let your principal stops be the full stop & comma, with a judicious use of the semicolon & of

the other stops where they are abso-

lutely necessary (i.e. you could not

dispense with the note of interroga-

tion in asking questions).

8. It is invariable in form; the
