page: 255

+ & when the Unionist Party win a General Election we are to have at once a general tariff on foreign manufactured goods./It is true that if & when an amendment giving women the vote is carried this amendment is thenceforward to become part ¢& parcel of the Bill.

When or if is not so purposcless as if & when; or if does serve to express that the writer, though he expects his condition to be realized, has his doubts:—4n official pronouncement as to what particular items of Lloyd George legislation tt is proposed to repeal, when, or if, the opportunity arrives.

Unless & until is open to the same objections as if & when, but is much less common.

ignite makes ged see MUTE E.

ignoramus. Pl. -uses, not -1; see -1 8, & LATIN PLURALS.

ignoratio elenchi. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

+ Sag makes ignorable; see MUTE E.

Pl. tlezes; see -EX, -1x, 3.

ilk means same; it does not mean family or kind or set or name. Of that ik is a form constructed for the case in which proprietor & property have the same name; Knockwinnocks of that ilk means the Knockwinnocks of Knockwinnock. See POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES. The common maltreatments of the

hrase, some of which are illustrated

low, are partly unconscious & due to ignorance of the meaning of tlk, & ahr facetious; indulgence in such WorN-ouT HUMOUR Is much less forgivable than for an Englishman not to know what a Scotch word means:—The Walkers are a numerous race... one of the ilk has sugsested that an ancestor ly walked to the Crusades./Printed the year after the death of Thomas Elzevir & in the reign of Daniel of that ilk./Robert Elsmere, the forerunner of so many books ‘of that tlk ’./Thts publication was undertaken by John Murray, the first of that uk./* Mystified’ & others of his

255

+ tlk do not seem to understand that the money that farmers & other producers make is...

illegible)(unreadable. Thc i. is not plain enough to be deciphered; the u. is not interesting enough to be perused.

ILLITERACIES. There is a kind of offence against the literary idiom that is not easily named. The usual dictionary label for some specimens of it at least is vulg.; but the word vulgar is now so imbued on the one hand with social prejudices & on the other with moral condemnation as to be unsuitable; the property common to these lapses seems to be that

ople accustomed to reading good

iterature do not commit them & are repelled by them, while those not so accustomed neither refrain from nor condemn them; they may perna be more accurately as well as politely called illiteracies than vulgarisms; their chief habitat is in the correspondence columns of the press. A few familiar types may be here collected for comparison, with just enough in the way of illustration to enable each usage to be recognized; actual quotations will be found under many of the words mentioned in their dictionary places:—

Like as conjunction (if I could think like you do).

Hlowever, whatever, whoever, &c., intcrrogative (IJowever did you find out?; Whatever can this mean?).

Same, such, & various, as pronouns (Will submit same, or the same, for approval; Have no dealings with such; Various have stated).

Frequent use of split infinitives (Am ready to categorically affirnt).

Re in unsuitable contexts (The author's arguments re predestination).

Write with personal object only (Though she had promised to vorite him soon).

Think to=remember to (I did not think to tell them when I was there).

Negative after should not wonder (I shouldn’t wonder if it didn’t come true yet).
