page: 256

Present &c. after as if & as though (It looks as if we are winning or shall

Mo &c. for my &c. in gerund conwin). struction (Insiead of me being dismissed).

Between... or for between... & (The choice is between glorious death or shameful hfe).

Almost quite, rather unique, more preferable.

Agegravating for annoying.

Individual for person.

Any very bad hyphening § (the ruling-class, my wooden-leg).

Rev. Jones; the hon. Smith.

ILLOGICALITIES. The spread of education adds to the writer’s burdens by multiplying that pestilent fellow the critical reader. No longer can we depend on an audience that will be satisfied with catching the general drift & obvious intention of a sentence & not trouble itself to pick holes in our wording; the words used must nowadays actually yield on scrutiny the desired sense; to plead that anyone could see what you meant, or so to write as to need that plea, is not now permissible; all our pet illogicalitics will have to be cleared away by degrees.

If Milton might be excused or even commended for calling Eve fairest of her daughters, the modern newspuper man must not expect pardon for similar conduct. Sir Ernest Cassel’s Christmas gift to the hospitals of £50,000 is only the latest of many acts of splendid munificence by which he has benefited his fellows before now. If it is the latest of them, says the pestilent one, it is one of them; if one of them, it was given before now; but it is in fact given now, not before now; which Js absurd.

Take, again, the following comment on a quotation the commentator thinks unjustified: Were ever finer lines perverted to a meaner use? We know well enough what he Js trying to do—to emphasize the meanness of the use— ; it is in expressing the emphasis that he has gone wrong;

+ it has escaped him that Never were lines perverted to a meaner use is made weaker, not stronger, if changed to never were fine lines &c., & that again is further weakened, not strengthened, by a change of fine to finer; everything that narrows the field of rivals for the distinction of meanest perversion, as fine & finer do progressively, has an effect contrary to what was intended; it may be worth while to insert fine in spite of that, since it adds a qualification of importance; but the change to finer weakens the force without adding to the accuracy. Richard III says Was ever woman in this humour won? ; to have said Princess, or prouder Princess, instead of woman would have made the marvel less & not greater.

Another common, & more conspicuous, illogicality is the unintended anticlimax. Masters, it is already proved that you are little better than false lnaves, & tt will go near to be thought so shortly. Dogberry felt no uneasiness about putting it that way, & some writers seem to agree with him:—A_ scepticism about the result of military operations which must have had & probably has had a damping effect upon the soldier (If it must have had, it certainly, not probably, has had)./Jt will, I think, delight the reader as if it were something told by Meadows Taylor; indeed the mysterious *‘ sadhu’ who figures in ut, & the account of the fight with the yellow leopard, are not unworthy of the suggested comparison (Not unworthy, quotha? but indeed led us to expect more than worthy, a climax instead of an anticlimax).

The abandonment of blind confidence in much less is another compliment that will have to be paid to the modern reader’s logic. It is still usual to give no hearing to much more before deciding for its more popular rival; sometimes a loose but illogical excuse is to be found in the general effect of the context, sometimes even that is wanting; these two varieties appear
