page: 258

imbroglio. Pronounce -dlyé; pl. -0s, see -O(E)s 4. .

imbrue, imbrute, em-.

The imforms are better; see 1M-.

imbue makes imbuable; see MuTE E. For construction, see INFUSE.

imitate makes imitable, imittator; see -ABLE l, -OR

immanent. The word is somethi of astumbling-block; the unlearne hearer or reader is not sure whether it & imminent are the same or different; the Latin scholar feels that he does not recall immaneo in his Cicero, & wonders whether (-ant & -ent often playing hide-&-seek with each other) mdno may be the source instcad of mdneo. Under these circumstances it is thought by some that the divines & philosophers who chiefly affect the word should be asked whether they would not gain in intelligibility what they might lose in precision by choosing according to context between tndwelling, peroading, pervastve, permeating, inherent, & other words that do not mystify us. ‘ All which though I most powerfully & potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down’, & shall not venture to label immanent & immanence SUPERFLUOUS WworRDs. The OED’s note on the use of immanent may be useful to those who, not reading philosophic & religious books, find it an enigma when it makes one of its occasional appearances in the newspaper: ‘ In recent philosophy applied to the Deity regarded as permanently pervading & sustaining the universe, as distinguished from the notion of an external transcendent creator or ruler’, See POPULARIZED TECH- NICALITIES.

immense. Both the common slang use in the senses excellent or amusing, & the odd freak illustrated in the extract below, are instances of NOVELTY-HUNTING, though the first has lost its freshness & grown stale, as such perversions do whereas the second has not yet got beyond the 258

+ circles in which the detection of generally unappreciated infinities

es one a luminary:—These memoirs yield what ts probably an immensely true account of Nelson’s career.

immerse makes tmmersable; see MUTE E.

immesh. Use en-; see EM- & IM-,

immobilize has -zable; see MUTE E,

immortal, as a compliment to an author or one of his productions or personages, requires to be used with caution. Its real use is to make sure that a reader who may or may not be an ignoramus shall realize that the person or book referred to is well known in the literary world, & that without telling him the fact in too patronizing a manner. But, delicate as the device may originally have been, it is now too well known to escape notice; & whether the reader will be offended or not de-

nds on the exact depth of his ignorance. There are few who will not be angry if they are reckoned to require ‘the immortal Shakspere’, or ‘Don Quixote’, or * Pickwick Papers’; those who can put up with ‘the immortal Panurge’, or * Dobbin ’, or ‘ Mrs Poyser ’, will be rather more numerous; & so on in many gradations. The author of the following was probably ill inspired in immortalizing Cervantes; but not so ill as if he had done the same—& he might have—for Don Quixote:—Lovers of Don Quixote will remember that the immortal Cervantes fought with great courage tn this battle.

immortalize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

immovable, not -veable; see MUTE E. Though the differentiation between immov- & irremov- is fully established, blunders sometimes occur; The President, save for successful impeachment, is immovable by Congress./By suspending conscréption & restoring the immovability of the judges.

immunize has -zable; sec MUTE E.
