page: 259

impale, em-. Jm- better; see Im-.

impanel, em-. Em- is better; see

em- & Im-. Past &c., -led, -liling;

se€ -LL-, -L-.

imparadise, impark, em-. IJm- is

better; see IM-.

imparisyliabic. See TECHNICAL

TERMS.

bie, im ble. The two

are different in derivation, spelling, pronunciation, & meaning. The first is ultimately from Latin do stretch, the second from vratin patior feel; in the first the second syllable is (at least in Southern use) pronounced pahs, while in the other it is always pds; the first means that cannot be passed, the second that cannot feel.

impasse. See FRENCH worpDs. The word is now becoming very common, but is still so little really at home with us that it is often printed impassé in newspapers.

impawn,em-. Im- better; sec IM-.

impayable. There is perhaps no other word that is so indisputably an undesirable alien in English as this. It has a false air, since it is a not impossible English formation, of being intelligible at first hearing to an Englishman; but if we did make the word, we should sagas not mean by it what the Frenc word means; & in point of fact the vast majority of people who hear it are completely puzzled by it. Incredible as, under these circumstances, it seems, we have the precise notion ready to our hands in plain current English; when someone does a thing absurd enough to enlarge our idea of what humanity is capable of in perverse or obstinate or capricious folly, we express our gratitude for this enlightenment by saying that he or his action is * priceless’, The sentiment may be cvnical, & the idiom may be, after all, a translation of impayable; the OED does not illustrate or give the sense. so that it is hard to tell whether it is native or not; but at any rate everyone has heard it, &

+ understands it without assistance from the French. It may be worth while to give the synonyms used in French dictionaries to convey the gebegdearas sense of impayable that is

ere referred to; Littré has eziraordinatre, trés-plaisani, trés-bizarre, & Larousse ridicule ou comique. A newspaper example is:—The resulis were discouraging in each case, but the Tariff-reformers are tmpayable, & have still a thousand arguments to ghee that if the Tariff dose had only been stronger, disaster would have been turned into victory on either or each of these occasions.

im ent. For own the soft i., see IRRELEVANT ALLUSION.

impedance. For the formation, see Hysrip DERIVATIVES. In the interests of both Electricity & English, the word should be strictly confined to the former.

impede makes

impedable; see MUTE E.

impel makes -iled, -llable, -lling; se€ -LL-, -L-.

impenitence, -cy. There is no perceptible difference of meaning; -ce is recommended; see -CE, -CyY.

im » not em-; see 1m-. Past &c. -lled, -lling; see -LL-, -L-.

impersonate makes -nable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

impetigo. Pronounce impiti’g6. Pl, -gines, pronounce -jinéz.

impetus. PI. -tuses, not -ti; see -vus.

impinge makes -ging; see MUTE E.

implement, n. & v. See Noun & VERB ACCENT. The verb, meaning to carry out (a contract &c.), is chiefly Scotch. Newspaper uses like the following cannot be acquitted of the charge of pedantry: But it comes after long & disastrous delays which have greatly lowered the prestige of the Allies & diminished thetr chance of getting their peace terms implemented by any authority that can speak for Russia. /Increased taxation will be inevitable if Labour’s promises to the electorate are to be implemented.

A correspondent has favoured me with the following quotation: (David
