page: 262

+ this dictionary. But in certain words, e.g. gelatine, glycerine, margarine, the -ine of popular use violates that distinction. Nevertheless, the correct spellings gelatin &c. should be left to technical writers or kept for scientific moments, & the -ine forms used without hesitation when we are not thinking in terms of Chemistry—unless, indeed, the word pedantry has no terrors for us.

IN- & UN-. There is often a teasing uncertainty—or incertitude— whether the negative form of a word should be made with in- (including il, im-, tr-), or with tun-. The general principle that un- is English & belongs to English words, & inis Latin & belongs to Latin words, does not take us far. The second part of it, indeed, forbids inwholesome (since wholesome has certainly no Latin about it) & thousands of similar offences; but then no-one is tempted to go astray in this direction. And the first part, which is asked to solve real problems— whether, for instance, unsanitary or insanitary is right—seldom gives a clear answer; it forbids undubitable, uneffable, unevitable, & other such words of which the positive form does not exist as an English word; but about sanitary & the rest it says you may consider them English words & use un-, or Latin words & use in-. Fortunately the number of words about which doubts exist is not large; for the great majority usage has by this time decided one way or the other. Fashion has varied: ‘ The practice in the 16th & 17th ec.’ says the OED ‘ was to prefer the form with in-, e.g. tnaidable, inarguable, inavailable, but the modern tendency is to restrict in- to words obviously answering to Latin types, & to prefer un- in other cases, aS in unavailing, uncertain, undevout’. A few extracts follow exhibiting the more common or important of the doubtful words, each in what is here considered the Iss desirable fourm; the number

262 -IN & -UN

+ printed after some of these is that of the times that I happen to have seen the form in newspapers while attending to the point:— The amount must be determined not by impractical discussions over resttution (7)./He has selected five of Gissing’s novels for generous, but by no means indiscriminating, B ite (4)./We agree with Mr Balfour in thinking it inadvisable to set up any form of Second Chamber which ...(2)./ Your modern diplomatist works this supposed incontrollable popular feeling for all tt is worth (2)./Whose faded stare silenced his son-in-law by tts inexpressive fizity./Complaints that the present Finance Bills are inacceptable./We can only regret that his ideas are indigested./Every place at which war-ships, completed or incompleted, are lying./Her letters, still extant although inedited.

Before a fuller list of doubtful pairs, with recommendations, is attempted, some suggestive contrasts may serve to show the conflicting tendencies that are at work:—unjust but injustice, unable but inability, unqutet but inquietude, uncivil but tincivility, show the influence of markedl tin as opposed to nondescript endings in producing in-. Undigesied but indigestible, unanimated but inanimate, undistinguished but indistinguishable, unlettered but illiterate, unlimited but illimitable, unredeemed but trredeem- able, unreconciled but irreconcilable,—illustrate the aversion of -ed to in-; unceasing but tncessant, undiscriminating but indiscriminate, do the same for -tng. Unapproachable but inaccessible, undestroyable but indestructible, undissolvable but indissoluble, unbelievable but tnconcetvable, unprovable but improbable, bring out well the tendency for in- to be restricted to the forms that are closest to Latin even in the very openminded -dle group (on which more will be found under -ABLE 3); & uncertainty but incertitude docs the same for nouns. Lastly, unaccountable but insurmountable, &
