page: 263

+ unmelodious but tnharmonious, are examples of apparent caprice fixed by usage.

A list is now given of the words about which doubt is most likely, with a statement of the prefix recommended for each; the recommendations are sometimes supported by special reasons, but sometimes merely based on a general impression that one form is more likely than the other to prevail:— acceptable un- Jn- form labelled rare

in OED advisable un- As acceptable alterable unappeasable un- Delatinized by -easapt un- ZJneptis the Latin artificial fun- in sense natural

{in- in sense unskilful communicative uncompleted un- The only indisputable

in——ed word is in-

experienced consolahle in-

Established controllable un-

Much delatinized decipherable undigested un-

As completed

Wordsin -ing abhorindiscriminating un-

Established distinguishable in-

See completed; French edi un-

inédiut has kept the

in- form in being effaceable in- Established escapable un- Much delatinized essential unexpressive un- Danger of confusion

with enerpressible frequent in- Most -ent words so navigable uns practical un- As acceptable; & con-

fusion w. tmpractic-

able recognizable —sun- Tespunsive un- Danger of confusion

with trresponsible retentive ir- Most words in re- so substantial unsupportable in- Established susceptible in- Most -ible words so

oie sete Un- is better; see IN- & UN-.

inapt{iQude). Unapi is better (but

inaptitude); see 1N- & UN-.

inartificial, un-. See 1n- & UN-.

inasmuch as has two meanings:

one the original, now rarely met

with, i.e. to the same extent as or to

263

+ whatever degree or so far as (God is only God inasmuch as he is the Moral Governor of the world); & the other worn down, with the notion of a correspondence between two scales gone, & nothing left but a foursyllable substitute for since (I am unable to reply that I am much the better for seeing you, inasmuch as I see nothing of you); this is the ordinary modern use, & its onl recommendation as compared with since is its pomposity. On the other hand the old sense has been supplanted by so far as & in so far as, & is now unfamiliar enough to be misleading when a literary-minded person reverts to it. Aft any rate, Mr Chamberlain’s proposals, inasmuch as they were intended to secure continued loyalty & union amongst the Australian people, were considered altogether unnecessary. Do we gather that the proposals were in fact rejected, & the reason for this was that their intention was so-&-so? or that, whether rejected or accepted on other grounds, that intention was not held to justify them? in other words, does inasmuch as mean since, or so far as? we cannot tell, without extraneous information. A word that in one sense is pompous, & in another obscure or ambiguous, & in both has satisfactory substitutes, is better left alone.

inaugurate makes -ator; see -or.

incage, en-. The second is better; see EM- & IM-.

incapacitate, incarcerate, make -tlable, -rable, -ator; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

incarnate. Pronounce the verb I’nkarnat, & the adjective Inkar‘nit. For adj. in -able, see -ATABLE.

incarnation. This unfortunately is not the prisoner's first lapse from honesty, for when the Chief Constable of Peterborough ara * he ard ited

intessence of cunni e incantation ofa beok-thief®, he was not speaking without knowledge. Either the C.C. has been misreported or he was playfully suggesting that a book-thief is not a human being,
