page: 267

him with his own horrible ideas about

murdering women. / An admirable

training-place wherein to inculcate

of pi ry, which con-

personal safety./The Germans

are chiefly busy tn inculcating Ameri-

cans with the idea that British

Marinismus ts more erous than German Militarismus. Whether the explanation is that inculcate is one of the words liable to the maltreatment called OBJECT-SHUFFLING (i. one with a doctrine being substituted for %. @ doctrine upon one), or whether the compositor has each time found inoculate & printed incuicaie, is impossible to determine; if the latter, writers should take warning that inoculate is a word to keep an eye on (or inoculate in a new sense) in proofs. See MISPRINTS.

inculpate. See -ATABLE.

incur makes -rred, -rring; see -R-, -Rg-. For incurring see PRONUN- CIATION s.f.

indecipherable. Un- is better; see In- & UN-.

indecorous. Accent the third syllable (indikor’us).

indefeasible) (indefectible. The distinction between the two, not always very carefully observed, may perhaps best be kept in mind b associating them respectively wit defeat & deficit. That is indefeasible which is not liable to defeat, i.e. to being impaired or annulled by attack m outside; the word is therefore applied to rights, titles, possessions, & the like. That is indefectible which is not liable to deficit, i.e. to failing for want of internal power; the word is therefore applied to qualities such as holiness, grace, vigour, resolution, affection, or abundance; the sense faultless, suggesting the noun defect rather than deficit, & not quoted for in the OED from before the 19th c., seems to be a modern change of meaning, & one not to be countenanced. Neither word lends itself to the sort of everyday use seen in:

267

+ And yet Mr. Barnstaple had the most subile & indefeasible doubt whether indeed Serpentine was speaking.

indent. See NoUN & VERB ACCENT.

independence, -cy. The -cy form retains only some special senses— Congregationalism, an independent State, & an independent income— ; & in these, though still preferred to -ce, is now usually displaced by Congregationalism, sovereign or independent State, & competency.

indescribable. So spelt; see MUTE E.

index. For pl. see -Ex, -1x. 4. & LaTIN PLURALS. For synonymy see SIGN.

Indian. For the I. weed see SosRi- QUETS.

indicate makes -cable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

indication. Forsynonymy see SIGN.

indicative. The grammatical term is pronounced indi’kativ; in other uses I’ndikativ is not uncommon.

indict, -able, -ment. Pronounce -it-. Indict means accuse, & indite com or write.

erence, -cy. Though the -cy form tends to disappear in all senses, its slower disappearance in one sug- — a distinction that might use;

y be maintained. That sense is the one corresponding to the objective sense of indifferent; a person is indifferent (subjectively) who feels no preference for either of a pair of things overthe other; things are indifferent (objectively) for neither of which a preference is felt; the relation of the person to the things is indifference; the relation of the things to the person is still often, & might well be always, called indifferency. The following quotations from the OED show the word so used, & readers will perhaps agree that it is better in these contexts than indifference:—You have arrived at an equivalence & indifferency of all actions./Ceremonies . . . how indifferent soever they are in themselves, when they are once commanded, the indifferency ceases./I still believe in the indiffer-
