page: 272

inferable, -rible, -rrable, -rrible. The first (with stress on in-, not -er-) is recommended, on the pattern of preferable, referable, transferable; -rrible, the chief rival of -rable, is described by the OED as a ‘ mongrel’ between inferible & inferrable, neither of which has found favour. See also CONFER(R)ABLE.

inferno. Pl. -os; see -0(E)S$ 38.

inferrable. See INFERABLE.

infinite(ly). There are naughty people who will say 7. when they only mean great or much or far. Their offence is here dealt with by a triple bench; the first member is @ correspondent of a well-known journal; the second is its editor, a meek man, it should seem; the third is he who should have shared the writing of this book with me, among whose papers I find the cutting with his comment appended:—

1. Sir,—May I appeal to your love of accurate English against the common use in writing, as in speaking, of the word ‘infinitely’ as equivalent to ‘considerably’ or ‘ indefinitely ’ ?—-you write that ‘ oil is infinitely less bulky than coal in proportion to the energy derived ‘from it’. You write that ‘the habitual loafer does infinite mischief’. In the first case you intend * considerably ’ & in the second case

ou can only mean that the mischief is indefinite, sometimes great, sometimes no worse than this letter from your obedient servant, AN HABI- TUAL LOAFER OF NECESSITY.

2 We stand corrected. Our use was a vulgarism. And yet we must not run into a taboo of this noble word. Swinburne uses it finely, accurately, & therefore without vulgarity, inthe line ‘In the infinite spirit is room for the pulse of an infinite pain’. There the use is exact, because it does not imply mere magnitude.—Ed.

8. Rot. Infinite is no more a vulgarism than any other dcliberate exaggeration. And indefinitely is a totally wrong substitute; I have

+ known at least one person habitually use it, with ludicrous effect.

It was naughty of that Editor, though, to say infinite & then take his punishment lying down.

INFINITIVE. 1. For unidiomatic infinitives after nouns that prefer the

erund, as in the extract, see

ERUND. The habit of mapmail:crs to place lands & not seas in the forefront has obscured the oneness of the Pacific. 2. See SPLIT INFINITIVE.

infinitude does not appear to be now entitled to any higher rank than that of a NEEDLESS VARIANT of infinity. It might well have been, but can hardly now be, differentiated with the sense quality of being infinite. Milton & Sterne, however, will keep it in being for poets to fly to & stylists to play with when infinity palls on them. An escape from -ity is sometimes welcome: It is just this infinitude of possibilities that necessitates unity & continuity of command.

infirmity. ‘The last i. of noble minds ” is a MIsQuOTATION.

inflame. JInflam(e)able, formed from the English verb, & used in 16th-17th centuries, has been dis-

laced by inflammable adapted from

rench or Latin. Inflammable & inflammatory must not be confused (see Pairs & SNARES) as in Sir Edward Carson dcclares before an pe ede audience that in the event of the Parliament of these realms doing certain things that are distasteful to him he will call out his Volunteers.

inflate makes -atable; see -ABLE 1.

inflection, -xion. The second is better; see -xION. See also TEct- NICAL TERMS.

inflict is, owing especially to confusion with afflict, ey liable to the misuse explained in the article OBJECT-SHUFFLING. The right constructions are: he inflicted plagues on them, he afflicted them with plagues, plagues were inflicted on them, they were afflicted with plagues. Examples of the blun-
