page: 274

+ while admitting the modernity, the proofs offered by him as to the recent date are not very convincing./We regret to announce that Mr died at today, following an operation for appendicitis. For liberties of this kind taken with the participle, see UNATTACHED.

2. For the difference between participles in -ing & the gerund, see GERUND.

8. On the Press Association’s Oldham representative informing a leading Liberal of ..., he replied... For such mixtures of participle & gerund, see FUSED PARTICIPLE.

4. In all probability he suffers somerhat, like the proverbial dog, from his having received a bad name. For the need or no need of his & other possessives in such contexts, see GERUND 4.

5. Dying at their posts rather than surrender(ing)./But America ts doing more than furnishing us with loans. / We are bound to suspect that Italy is doing something more than raise a diplomatic question./The wearing down phase by phase has been an integral part of the plan, & tt has enabled the attack to be kept up as well as insuring against hitches./As well as closing the railway, it should make the Danube impracticable for traffic.

Tender grammatical consciences are apt to vex themselves, sometimes with reason & sometimes without, over the comparative correctness of the -ing form of a verb & some other part, especially the infinitive without fo, in certain constructions; specimens are printed above. It is well, on the one hand, not to fly in the face of grammar, but eschew what is manifestly indefensible; &, on the other hand, not to give up what one feels is idiomatic in favour of an alternative that is more obviously defensible. We can surely all condemn the last two examples without a regret. As well as is not a preposition, but a conjunction; it therefore cannot govern the gerunds insuring & closing, as besides would have done; if as well

274

+ as is to be kept, insuring must become insured to match enabdled, & closing close to match make; that the latter change is not possible with the sentence in its present order is irrelevant; so much the worse (unless besides is written) for the present order. The grammatical conscience was there asleep; in the America & Italy examples we see it awake once for certain, for furnishing represents second thoughts; raise may represent first thoughts, if conscience slept, or third thoughts if conscience let raising have its say & then went deliberately back to the idiomatic raise. Everyone’s first idea in these sentences would be raise, furntsk; ‘But why infinitive?’ says Conscience ‘we must write out the sentence at length, clearing away doubts of the exact sense of do, the part of speech of more, &c.; & we get—America is ana (doing) an achievement that is wi (more) than furnish us is wide; obviously furnish is impossible; go to! write down furnishing, which works out ’. So far second thoughts. Third thoughts succeed in constructing a defence for raise or furnish, thus: I will raise the question; I will domore-than-raise-the-question; in this the hyphened group is one verb, & the part of it that takes inficxions (as Court Martial has pl. Courts Martial) is do: I am-doing-morethan-ratse-the-question. The summing-up is: ratsing is easily defensible but unidiomatic; ratse is less easily defensible, but idiomatic; & ratse has it.

Some confirmation of the defence set up for raise may be extracted from the first specimen propounded above: dying rather than surrender- (ing). There are misguided persons who would actually write surrendering there; but they are few, the rest of us feeling that we must either find a justification for surrender or else write it without justification; this feeling is strengthened if we happen to remember that we should
