page: 279

+ for public use, should be given another chance?

intensive. Just as definitive & alternative are ignorantly confused with definite & alternate, & apparently liked the better for their mere length, so intensive is becoming a fashionable word where the meaning wanted is simply intense. It must be admitted t there was a time before differentiation had taken place when Burton, e.g., could write A very intensive pleasure follows the

ion; it there means intense, put the OED labels the use obsolete, & its latest quotation for it is from over two centuries ago; the modern relapse had not come under its notice in 1901, when it issued letter I. Intensive perished as a mere variant of intense, but remained with a philosophic or scientific meaning, as an antithesis to eztensive; where extensive means with regard to extent, infensive means with regard to force or degree: The record of an intensive as well as extensive development./Its intensive, like tts extensive, nitude is small. This is the kind of word that we ordinary mortals do well to leave alone; see POPULARIZED TECHNIcALITIEs, Unfortunately, a particular technical application of the philosophic use emerged into general notice, & was misinterpreted—intensive method especially of cultivation. To increase the supply of wheat you may sow two acres instead of one—increase the extent —, or you may use more fertilizcrs & care on your one acre—increase the intensity— ; the second plan is intensive cultivation, the essence of it being concentration on a limited area. Familiarized by the newspapers with intensive cultivation, which most of us took to be a fine name for very hard or intense work

by the farmers, we all became eager to show off our new word, & took

to saying tniensive where. tatense used to be good enough for us. The ‘war gave this a great fillip by finding

279

+ the correspondents another peg to hang intensive on—bombardment. There is a kind of bombardment that may be accurately called intensive; it is what in earlier wars we called concentrated fire, a phrase that has the advantage of being open to no misunderstanding;_ the fire converges upon a much narrower front than that from which it is discharged; but as often as not the intensive bombardment of the newspapers was not concentrated, but was intense, as the context would sometimes prove; a bombardment may be intense without being intensive, or intensive without being intense, or it may be both.

It may now interest the reader to decide in each of the following extracts whether intensive is the necess word, or the barely defensible but ill chosen word, or the altogether wrong one:—A work which in tis historic unity, intensive vision, & practical points of seamanship, recalls the immenseness of Hakluyt./The period would be one of intensive preparation, tn which the energics of all the populations would be devoted to the one end of ensuring that when the day of trial came they should have the few hours’ advantage that might decide the fate the world./With the departure of Mr Idoyd George & President Wilson a period of intensive work will begin tn Commissions with a view to having as much material as possible ready./ A small party rigidly selected from men who think furiously & intensively may have an effectiveness in propaganda out of all proportion to tts direct influence./There are severai allusions to ‘ dashing about in a car’ as an intensive form of domestic bliss./The audience joined in the chorus & sang it over & over again amid the most intensive excitement.

intensive, gram. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

intent, a. The case has its moral for librarians al? over the country; all hoods make not monks, nor are all
