page: 280

+ visitors to libraries on serious studies intent. When 7. in its inverted construction (on mischief i., instead of i. upon mischief) is mixed up with words so pedestrian & far from archaic as visitors to libraries, a tepid half-hearted jocularity results; see INCONGRUOUS VOCABULARY.

intention. 1. Ordinary use. 2. First, second, tt. 1. A_ defining phrase is so often appended to i. that the question between gerund & infinitive, treated generally under GERUND 8, is worth raising specially here. Choice between the two is freer for 7. than for most such nouns, & it can hardly be said with confidence that either construction is ever impossible for it. It will perhaps be agreed, on the evidence of the illustrations below, offered as idiomatic, that when 7. is used in the singular & without the, his, an, any, or other such word, to do is better, but otherwise of doing:—Intention to kill is the essential point./You never open your mouth but with i. to give pain./He denicd the i. of killing./He concealed his i. of escaping./Some i. of evading it there may have been./I have no i. of allowing it./Have you any i. of trying again?/I have every i. of returning./He renounced all i. of retaliating./Not without ii. of finding a loophole.

2. First, second, 1. These phrases have special senses in medicine & in logic, apt to puzzle the layman & to be confused with each other. In medicine, first i. denotes (OED) ‘the healing of a lesion or fracture by the immediate re-union of the severed parts, without granulation ’; & second i. ‘ the healing of a wound by granulation after suppuration’. In logic, first 72. are (OED) * primary conceptions of things, formed by the first or direct application of the mind to the things themselves; e.g. the concepts of a tree, an oak’; & second ti. ‘secondary conceptions formed by the application of thought to first intentions in their relations 280

+ to each other; e.g. the concepts of genus, species, variely, property, accident, difference, identity ’.

inter, v., makes -rred, -rring; see °R-, -RR-.

inter alia is Latin for amongst others when ‘others’ are things. If the others are persons, alia must be changed to alios or rarely alias (the OED quotes, from 1670, The Lords produce inter alios John Duke of Lancaster); but when persons are meant, it is much better nowadays to use English. The writer of the following sentence was either ignorant both of inter alia & of Latin, or else pedantic enough to expect us to know that the Latin for costs is the masculine sumptus:—She will pay twenty thousand million marks within two years (covering, inter alios, the costs of the armies of occupation & of food & raw material allowed by the Allies).

intercalary. Pron. inter’kalari.

intercalate makes -calable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

intercept makes -ior.

interchange. See Noun & VERB ACCENT. The verb makes -geable; see MUTE E.

interdependence, -cy. No difference in sense; -ce is recommended; see -CE, -CY.

interdict. See Noun & VERB AC- CENT; 7%. makes -tlor.

interest, vb. On interesting, the OED, after giving the sound as I’nteristing, adds ‘formerly, & still dialectally, Interé’sting’. All the longer inflexions—inierestedly, disinterested, &c.—& even the simple verb, are often said by more or less illiterate speakers with the accent on -ést-.

interfuse makes -sible.

interior, internal, intrinsic.

See EXTERIOR.

interlocutor. See COLLOCUTOR.

naga Gb In the noun as well as the verb, the OED stresses -lo- & not in-. But in the noun at least, commoner than the verb, RECESSIVE ACCENT seems to have brought us to
