page: 281

+ I’nterléper by this timc; this was the more likely to happen because lope is not a recognized verb.

interlude. See -Lv-.

intermediary, n., is, even in its concrete sense of a go-between or middleman or mediator, a word that should be viewed with suspicion & resorted to only when it is clear that every more iat word comes short of the need. In its abstract sense of medium or agency or means, it is worthy only of the PotysyL- LABIC HUMOURist; & the OED’s only two quotations for it (representing, alas! a much larger body than would be guessed by anyone whose business it was not to observe such things) are clearly in that spirit:—Mysteriously transmitting them through the intermediary of glib Jew boys with curly heads./We are the only European people who teach practical geometry through the recondite intermediary of Euclid’s Elements. :

intermezzo. Pronounce -dz5. PI. -O3 OF -i; see -O(E)s 6.

intermit makes -tted, -tting, -ssible; SCC -T-, -TT-.

internal. See INTERIOR,

internecine has suffered an odd fate; being mainly a literary or educated man’s word, it is yet neither pronounced in the scholarly way nor allowed its Latin meaning. It should be called Inter’nisin, & is called Interné’sin; see FALSE QUAN- TiTy. And the sense has had the Kilkenny-cat notion imported into it because mutuality is the idea conveyed by inter- in English; the Latin word meant merely of or to extermination (cf. intereo perish, intercido slay, interimo destroy) without implying that of both parties. The imported notion, however, is what gives the word its only value, since there are plenty of substitutes for it in its true sense—destructive, slaughterous, murderous, bloody, sangutnary, mortal, & so forth. The scholar may therefore use or abstain from the word as he chooses, but it

+ will be vain for him to attempt correcting other people’s conception of the meaning. See PopuLarizep TECHNICALITIES,.

interpellate, -ation. The two words are little used now except in the technical sense proper to parliamentary proceedings, & especially those of the French Chamber. They are therefore felt to be half French words, & so the unnatural pronunciation given by the OED (interpélat, Interpéla’shn) is pereps accounted for. Normal nglish would be Inter’pelat, Interpela’shn. The OED renderings, whether really current or not, have the advantage of distinguishing the sound from that of tnterpolate, -ation—a necd illustrated by: M. Barthou intimated that, on the return of M. Millerand from London, he would interpolate him on the question.

interpellate, interpolate, make -lable, -lor; see -ABLE I], -OR.

interpose makes -sable; sec -ABLE 1. For interposal see -AL NOUNS.

interpretative, not interpretive, is the right form, -ive adjectives being normally formed on the Latin p.p. stem, i.e. here interpretat- ; coercive is similarly irregular, but established. Read -ativein:—They should be at the same time illustrative & interpretive./The literal & the interpretive are difficult to reconcile in a single statement.

interregnum. Pl. -uwms or -a@3 see -uM. For the facetious use, = gap, see PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

interrogate makes -gable, -tor; see -ABLE lI, -OR.

interstice. Pronounce Inter’stIs.

intestinal. The OED pronounces Inté’stinal, not iIntésti’nal; the Latin i is long, but on this point see FALSE QUANTITY 8.f.

in that is a conjunction that has gone a little out of fashion & does not slip from our tongues nowadays. It is still serviceable in writing of a formal cast, but, like other obsolescent idioms, is liable to ill
