page: 283

+ coalesced stems, a collapsed eds f we are agreed, a couched kon, an eloped pair, an expired lease.

Secondly, when a verb is both transitive & intransitive, it is often difficult to say whether in some particular phrase the p.p. is active or passive, & the answer may affect the sense; e.g., a deserted sailor, if deserted is passive, is one who has been marooned, but, if it is active, is one who has run from his ship; an angel dropped from heaven has possibly been passive, but more likely active, in the descent; a capsized boat may have capsized or have been capsized; my declared enemy is more often one who has declared enmity than one I have declared an enemy; a flooded meadow shows & passive p.p., @ flooded river perhaps an active one; a well grown tree means one thing in the virgin forest, & another in a nursery garden.

Thirdly, to realize the frequency of the intransitive p.p. will sometimes throw light on expressions whose

origin is otherwise not quite obvious:

a aeiermined or decided man is per-

haps one who has determined or

decided, not been determined; a

person is ill advised who has advised,

le. taken thought, badly, not one

who has had bad advice given him;

he is well-read who has read well;

he is drunk who has drunk; -spoken

in soft-spoken &c. is more intelligible

if it is regarded as active, & cf. well-

d; mistaken clemency seems

to be clemency that has erred; an

aged man may be one who has aged,

since the verb age, = grow old, dates

from before 1400; the dissipated

may be those who have wasted their

substance, & the experienced those

having experienced things rather

than those possessed of experience.

intrench. En- is better; see EM-

IM-,

intrigue, v.t. The meaning ‘ puz-

zle, perplex’ is given by the OED,

but illustrated by only a_ single

recent quotation, & Jabclled ‘ now 283

+ rare’. Would that were still true! the one quotation (19th-century) is from a newspaper from which I have before me _ sixteen 20th-century cuttings with the word & sense. The other chief dictionaries either ignore the sense or treat it contemptuously—English dictionaries, that is, for it is naturally well enough known to the French; but it is one of the Gauuicisms, & LITERARY CRITICS’ WORDS, that have no merit whatever except that of unfamiliarity to the English reader, & at the same time the great demerit of being identical with & therefore confusin the sense of a food English word. Besides puzzle erplex, there are fascinate, mystify, wnterest, & pique, to choose from. Will the reader decide for himself whether the Gallicism is called for in any of the following places?—A abot which has intrigued the imagination of the romanticists./ The problem, however, if it intrigues him at all, is hardly opened in the presen’ work./Nor is this the only problem raised this intriguing exhibition./Thus it is we read of Viper—that delightful dog—mouthing

hogy much intrigued with his spines./Mr Phillpotts, besides imposing these negative discomforts upon minds content that he should be content with Dartmoor, intrigues them with speculations as to what will follow this conclusion./But her personality did not freatly intrigue our interest./When ologian, scientist, & philosopher have intrigued our minds with the subtlety of their arguments./The many whose imaginations have been intrigued by the fascinating personality of Borrow./ The latter appointment would have intrigued us more in normal times than at this moment./Roumania ts not allogether intrigued with the conception of herself as the vassal of France.

intrinsic. See EXTERIOR.

introduce makes -cible; see -ABLE 2,

introit. Pronounce fatrd‘It.

intromit makes -tted, -tting, -missible;

SCC -T-, -TT-.
