page: 287

+ drag with it the verb or auxiliary, so that the subject has to wait; tends, but with different degrees of force, that exercised by a negative being the strongest. e can if we like, instead of inverting, write On this the whole course of argument depends, or By strategy something wider ts meant, but not Never a decision was more abundanily justified; & Not a word he said is a very outof-the-way version of Not a word did he say.

If we now add Metrical Inversion, our catalogue of the various kinds may perhaps suffice. Where the Bible gives us As the hart after the water brooks, & the Prayer Book Ltke as the hart desireth the water-brooks, both without inversion, the hymn-books have 4s pants the hart for cooling streams. That is metri gratia, & it must not be forgotten that inversion is far more often appropriate in verse than out of it for two reasons—one this of helping the versifier out of metrical difficulties, & the other that inversion off the beaten track is an archaic & therefore poetic habit. A very large class of bad inversions will be seen p to be those in subordinate claus inning with as; they arise from failure to realize that inversion is archaic & poetic under such circumstances, & noninversion normal; it is therefore worth while to stress this contrast between As pants the hart & both the prose versions of the same clause.

To summarize these results:

Interrogative Inversion: What went ye out for to see?/Dotk Job fear God for nought?

Imperative Inversion: Hear thou from heaven thy dwelling-place.

Excla Inversion: How dreadful ie this place!/What a piece of work is a man!/O bonnie was the rosy brier!/Few & evil have the days of the years of my life been./Bitterly did he rue tt./Bang went saxpence f

Hypothetical Inversion: Were Z Brutus, & Brutus Antony.

Balance Inversion: There ts no

287

+ God./Through a gap came [an elaborately described ray]./dmong the guests were (long list].

Link Inversion: On this depends the whole argument./Nezt comes the question of pay.

Signpost Inversion: By strategy is meant something wider.

Negative Inversion: Never was a decision more abundantly justified./ Not a word did he say.

Metrical Inversion: As pants the hart for cooling streams.

We may now proceed to consider with the aid of grouped specimens some of the temptations to illadvised inversion. it may conciliate anyone who suspects that the object of this article is to deprive him altogether of a favourite construction, if it is at once admitted that, though bad inversion is extremely common, non-inversion also can be bad. It is so rare as to call for little attention, but here are two examples:—But in neither case Mr Galsworthy tells very much of the intervening years./Least of all it is to their interest to have a new Sick Man of Europe. In negative sentences there is the choice whether the negative shall be brought to the beginning or not, but when it is so placed inversion is necessary; read does Mr G., & is it. INVERSION AFTER’ RELA-

TIVES & COMPARATIVES

The problems offered are interesting, but most difficult to grapple with by way of argument. The line here taken is that the sort of inversion now being dealt with, however devoutly one may believe it to be mistaken, can hardly be proved illegitimate, at any rate without discussion of more tedious length than could be tolerated. On the other hand, it is hardly credible, after a look through the collection shortly to follow, that the writers can have chosen these inversions either as the natural way of expressing themselves or as graceful decora-
