page: 291

+ body, could weather the storm which was about to burst; yet was he a person to whom the court, even in that extremity, was unwilling to have recourse (yet he was)./The set epistolary pieces, one might say, were discharged before the day of Elia; yet is there certainly no general diminution of sparkle or interest (yet there is)./. . . springs of mineralized water, famous from Roman times onward for their curalive properties; especially did they come into renown during the nineteenth century (they came into renown especially)./Mr Campbell does not recognize a change of opinion, but admits a change of emphasis; especially is he anxious at the present time to advance the cause of Liberal Evangelism (he is especially anxious)./It ts to be hoped that some supervision will be exercised in the reproductions; especially will care be needed in the painting process (care will be needed especially in)./ His love of romantic literature was as fer as possible from that of a mind which ee de Gags on romantic excitements; rather was it that of one who ras so moulded ... (it was rather that)./There is nothing to show that the Asclepiads took any prominent share in the work of founding anatomy, phystology, zoology, & botany; rather do these seem to have sprung from the early philosophers (these seem rather)./llis book is not a bioeraphy in the ordinary sense; rather as tt a series of recollections culled from ... (it is rather)./An undefeated Prussia is ultimately the end of England, &, in particular, ts it the end of fortune & security for ...(& it is the end in particuler).

INVERSION IN INDIRECT

QUESTIONS

This point will be found fully discussed under INDIRECT QUESTION. Examples of the wrong use are: How bold is this attack may be judged by .. ./Why should we be so penalized must ever remain a mystery. How bold this attack is, & Why we should be so penalized, would be the right order.

291

——. SUBORDINATED INVERSIONS

Certain kinds of these have been discussed in the section on relatives & comparatives. A more general point is to be made here—that it is often well, when a sentence that standing by itself would properly be in the inverted form is subordinated as a clause to another, to cancel the inversion as no longer needed. The special effect that inversion is intended to secure is an emphasis of some sort, & naturally emphasis is more often suitable to a simple independent sentence than to a dependent clause. Examples are grouped under A, B, & C, according to the kind of inversion that has been subordinated, & comment on each group follows:—

A. Negative Inversion. The amount involved is no less a sum than £300,000 annum, to not a penny of which have the drivers a shadow of claim./To give to all the scholars that firm grounding upon which alone can we hope to build an educated nation./He laid down four principles on which alone could America & Austria go further in exchanging views. /Now that not only are public executions long extinct in this country, but the Press not admitted to the majority of private ones, the hangman has lost his vogue./But it had only been established that on eighteen of those days did he vote.

B. Exclamatory Inversion. Suffice it to say that in almost one half of the rural district areas is thereanadmitted dearth of cottage homes. / Though once, at any rate, does that benign mistily golden irony of his weave itself in./While for the first time, he believed, did naval & military history appear as a distinctive feature.

C. Link Inversion. When, three years later, came the offer of a nomination, it was doubtless a welcome solution./Whilst equally necessary is it to press forward to that unity of thought without which...

A. In the first three it will be admitted that, while Upon this alone
