page: 292

+ &c. (the independent forms) would require the inversion, upon which alone &c. (the subordinate forms) are at least as good, if not better, without it. The fourth example (executions) will on the other hand be upheld by many who have no inordinate liking for inversion; not only is so little used except in main sentences, & therefore so associated with inversion, that not only public executions are long cxtinct, though legitimate, has an unfamiliar sound even after Now that. The subordinate inversion in the last A example is not quite what it seems, being due to irresolution between an inverted & an uninverted form; the former would be, But only on eighteen of those days had it been established that he voted; & the latter, But it had only been established that he voted on 18 of those days.

B. The subordination in two of these only makes more conspicuous the badly chosen pegs on which the inversion is hung. In almost one half of the rural district areas, & once at any rate, are not good exclematory material; Many a time have I seen him! shows the sort of phrase that willdo. Even if main sentences had been used with these beginnings, they should have been put as statements, i.e. without inversion, & still more when they depend on Though & Suffice it to say that. In the third example for the first time is not incapable of beginning an exclamation; it would pass in a sentence, but becomes frigid in a clause.

C. About these there can hardly be a difference of opinion. If the when & whilst constructions were absent, it would have been very natural to draw Three years later, Equally necessary, to the beginning to connect the sentences with what preceded, & inversion might or might not result. But with the interposition of when & whilst they lose their linking effect, & the natural order should be kept— When the offer came three years later, Whilst it is equally necessary.

INVERSION IN PARALLEL

CLAUSES

As with combinations of a negative & a positive statement into one (see NEGATIVE & AFFIRMATIVE PARAL- LELS), 80 with inverted & uninverted members of a sentence care is very necessary.

Not only is it so necessarily bounded by that moving vetl which ever hides the future, but also is it unable to penetrate ...into... the past (but also is it is an impossible inversion, brought about by the correct one that precedes)./Not only in equipment but in the personnel of the Air Battalion are we suffering from maladministration (Not only in equipment requires are we suffering; wn the personnel requires we are suffering. To mix the two is slovenly; the right form would be We are suffering not only in &c.)./Even were this tract of country level plain & the roads lent themselves to the mancuvre, tt would be so perilous to...

were this tract is inverted; the roads

nt themselves is not, & yet, since there is no if it absolutely requires it. Begin Even if this tract were; for the only ways to invert the second clause are the fantastic ¢& lent themselves the roads & the clumsy d& did the roads lend)./Had we desired twenty-seven amendments, got seven accepted, & were in anticipa2tion of favourable decisions in the other twenty cases we should thinl: ... (Mend like the previous one. To read d& were we would disguise the fact that the whole is one hypothetical clause & not several). For othcr examples see ELuipsis 6.

INVERSION IN DIALOGUE

MACHINERY

Novelists & others who have to use dialogue as an ingredient in narrative are some of them unduly worried by the machinery problem. Tired of writing down he said & said he & she replied as often as they must, they mistakenly suppose the good old forms to be as tiring to their
