page: 293

+ readers as to themselves, & seek relief in whimsical variations. The fact is that readers care what is said, but the frame into which a remark or a speech is fitted is indifferent to them; or rather, the virtue of frames is not that they should be various, but that they should be inconspicuous. It is true that an absolutely unrelieved monotony will itself become conspicuous; but the variety necessary to obviate that should be strictly limited to forms inconspicuous in themselves. Amon those that are not inconspicuous, & are therefore bad, are many developments of the blameless & inconspicuous said he, especially the substitution of verbs that are only by much stretching qualified for verbs of saying, & again the use of those parts of verbs of saying that include auxiliaries. A few examples will make these points clear; the are not of the more e ious kind, but most of them exhibit a writer trying not to bore his reader, & nothing bores so fatally as an open consciousness that one is in danger of boring:—‘* Yes’, moodily consented Jokn, * I suppose we must ’./ ‘Oh?’ questioned he./* Nossignore ’, disavowed Don Ambrogio./* Oh, what a sigh!’, marvelled Annunziata./ * But then’, puzzled John, ‘ what is it that people mean when they talk about death?’/* The sordid sort of existence’, augmented John./* You misunderstand your instructions’, murmured rapidly Mr Travers./‘ 1 couldn't help liking the chap’, would shout Lingard when telling the story./ *I won't plot anything extra against Tom’, had said Isaac./* At any rate, then’, may rejoin our critic, ‘ it is clearly useless . . ./* I am the lover of a Queen’, had often sung the steward in his pantry below.

The ordinary ‘ said he’ &c. (Thou art right, Trim, in both cases, said my uncle Toby) was described above as blameless & inconspicuous. Its place among inversions is in the

signpost ’ class. The reader is to be given the theme (i.e., here, the

+ speech) at the earliest possible moment; the speech, being grammatically the object of ‘ said’, yet placed first, draws ‘ said’ to it, &

he’, or my uncle Toby, has to wait. But only such insignificant verbs as said, replied, continued, will submit to being dragged about like this; verbs that introduce a more complicated notion, or that are weighted with auxiliaries or adverbs (compare * went on my uncle Toby ’ with ‘ continued my uncle Toby ’), or that cannot rightly take a speech as object, stand on their dignity & insist on their proper place.

INVERTED COMMAS. See Stops. For the use as apology for slang, see SUPERIORITY.

invest makes investor.

investigate, invigorate, make -gable, -lor; see -ABLE Il, -OR.

invite, n. The OED compares command & request for the formation, but describes the noun use as colloquial; & it has never, even as a colloquialism, attained to respectability; after 250 years of life, it is less recognized as an English word. than bike.

invite, v., makes -table; see MUTE FE.

invoke uses invocable (i’nvokabl) rather than tnvokable (inv6’kabl).

involution. See -Lvu-.

involve makes -vable; see MUTE E.

involvedly. Four syllables, if used; see -EDLY.

inwardness. The 1., the real i., the true i., of something has a meaning that it would not occur to us to give it out of our own heads, but that we some time or other discover to be attached to it by other people, especially such as write books; that meaning is, as defined by the OED, * the inward or intrinsic character or quality of a thing; the inner nature, essence, or meaning’. Itisa literary phrase fit for a literary man to use when he is writing for or talking to literary people, but otherwise pretentious; true wisdom is to abstain from it till it seems the really natural phrase; & any inclination
