page: 294

+ to put inverted commas round it is a fair proof that onc has not reached, or that one doubts whether one’s readers have reached, that stage. There is a certain intrusiveness about the word in these quotations; omission, or a simpler substitute, would have done no harm:—When_ the First Lord gets to understand (the real 1. of) the present situation, I have ecery confidence that he will do full justice to the Thames./In this connezion I would warn readers who are unacquainted with (the i. of) South African affairs not to attach undue importance to a recent declaration./ Will you allow me to send a few lines on the true i. of the situation? (realitics)./We have always contended that the true ‘inwardness’ of the Land Bill was not the wish to stop evictions, but the wish to slop the scandal of evictions (motive).

inweave. Not en-; see EM- & IM-.

inwrap. En- better; sec eM- & IM-.

lodine. For this, as well as for the three parallel elemcnt-names bromine, chlorine, & fluorine, the OED prefers the sound -in, with -in allowed as alternative. Popular use is almost universally for -in in zodine, but varies in the other three.

“ION & -MENT. Many verbs have associated with them nouns of both forms, as commit, commission & commitment $ require, requisition Tequirement; eacile, excitement & excttalion, When both are well established, as in these cases, the two nouns usually co-exist because they have come by differentiation to divide the possible meanings between them & so tend to lucidity. How little the essential difference of meaning is may be scen by comparing emendation with amendment (where the first means rather correction made, & the second rather correcting), & requisition with requirement (where the first means rather requiring, & the second rather thing required), & then noticing that the two comparisons give more or less contrary results. Further,

294

+ when there is only one established form, it is not apparent to the layman, though the philologist sometimes knows, why one form exists & the other does not—why e.g. we say infliction & not inflictment, but punishment & not punition. The conclusion is that usage should be respected, & words that have been rarely used or may easily be coined, such as abolishment, admonishment, pollutement, incitation, & punition, should not be lightly resorted to when abolition, admonition, pollution, incitement, & punishment, are to hand. To illustrate what is meant by ‘lightly’: if a writer suddenly realizes or suspects that he cannot say ‘by chastisement of actual & admonition of prospective offenders ’, & changes to admonishment as fitter for the construction wanted, without taking the trouble to think eitherof chastising & admonishing or chastisement & dissuasion, he is treating the language with levity.

-ION & -NESS. The question between variants in -ion & -ness differs from that discussed in the previous article in several respects. First, -ness words can be made from any adjective or participle, whereas the formation of -ment words from verbs is by no means unrestricted; by the side of persuasion you can make persuasiveness, but not persuadement. Secondly, there is more possibility of a clear distinction in meaning; -ion & -ment are both attached to verbs, so that neither has any more claim than the other to represent the verbal idea of action; but between -ion & -ness that line does exist; though -ton & -ness are often appended to exactly the same form, as in abjectness & abjection, one is made from the Knglish adjective abject, & the other from the Latin verbal stem abject-, with the consequence that abjectness necessarily represents a state or quality, & abjection naturally at least a process or action. pelt A while both -ion & -ment pass easily
