page: 301

+ been a better word. The omission of an essential syllable by what is called syncope (as in idolatry, syncopated from idololatria) belongs in English to the primitive stages of the language, & is not now practised; symbology, for symbolology, is an unprepossessin exception; to change pacificist to pacifist is no better than to change deteriorate & authoritative, as is often done by the uneducated, to deteriate & authorifive, & to acquiesce in such corruptions at a time when general education is equal to realizing their nature is to introduce a principle of swift decay into the language. Pacifist has n defended on the formula pacifist: pacific:: philanthropist: philanthropic; philanthropist, however, is formed not from philanthropic, but from philanthropia, the Greek for philanthropy; & actual or possible Greek & Latin nouns in -la are among the commonest bases for -ist nouns; there is no possible Latin pacifia nor English noun pa‘cify¥ to account similarly for pacifist. Another plea, that pacifist is from French pacifiste, is equally unsound; the word, which is not in a popular French dictionary dated 1911, is one of the international kind to which each language gives its own normal form; the responsibility cannot be deported across the Channel.

ego(t)ist. The -t- is abnormal; but both forms are established, & a useful differentiation is possible if both are retained; see EGO(T)ISM.

B

analyst, ironist, separatist, & tobacconist, are open to objection, though they are all, except perhaps the least offending of them, tronist, firmly established.

analyst results from the mistaking of analyse for one of those -ize verbs from which so many nouns in -ist are formed; analyse, derived from analysis, should itself have been analysize, & then analysist would have been correct; given analyse, 301

+ analyser should have been the noun,

tronist supplies the need of a word to match satirist & humourist. The choice, if it was to end in -is#, lay between tronicalist, ironicist, ironytst, & ironist, of which the last is technically the least justifiable. If regarded as made on the English noun trony, the -y ought not to be omitted; if Greek is to be called in, the Greek verb & noun ought to have been eironizo & eironia, whereas they are etroneuo & ecironeia; philanthropist & telegraphist do not obviate the objection, because they are made not on philanthropy & telegraphy, but on Greek philanthropia & a ae telegraph.

separatist, like all -ist words made on other verbs than those in -ize (conformist, computist, controvertist, speculatist, are the best of the few quoted by the OED), is at once felt to be an uncomfortable & questionable word; but it & (non)conformist, having attained to real currency, may unfortunately be imitated. Separationist would have been the right form.

tobacconist, like egotist, has no right to the consonant inserted before -ist.

isthmus. PI. -uses; see -US.

it. 1. Omission of anticipatory if owing to confused analysis. 2. Other mistakes with anticipatory 7. 8. Obscure or wrong pronoun reference. 4. Its) (it’s.

The pronoun is so much used in various idiomatic constructions that considerable knowledge, instinctive or acquired, of the ins & outs of syntax is needed to secure one against lapses. The collecting of a few specimens, & comments on them, may put writers on their guard.

1. First, there is a present tendency to omit in relative clauses the anticipatory it, i.e. the i that heralds a deferred subject as in It is useless to complain. An example is: The House of Commons is always ready to extend the indulgence which Ais a sort of precedent that the mover & seconder of the Address should ask for.

IT
