page: 302

+ If we build up this sentence from its elements, the necessity of ié will appear, & the reader can then apply the method to the other examples. Ghat the mover should ask for indulgence is a precedent; that, rearranged idiomatically, becomes Jt ts a precedent that the mover should ask for indulgence; observe that it there does not mean indulgence, but means that the mover should ask for indulgence, it being placed before the

redicate (is a precedent) as a harbingee announcing that the real subject, which it temporarily represents, is coming along later. J¢ is a precedent that the mover should ask for indulgence; the House extends the indulgence; there are the two elements; to combine them we substitute which for indulgence in the clause that is to be subordinate, & place this which at the beginning instead of at the end of that clause: the HFouse eatends the indulgence which ...3 now, if i had meant indulgence, i.e. the same as which now means, it would have become superfluous; but, as has been mentioned, it means something quite different, & is just as much wanted in the compound sentence as in the simple one. A parailel will make the point clear: A mecting was held, & itwas my duty to attend this; whether which or & this is placcd at the beginning of the sccond member instead of the present arrangement, no-one would dream of dropping tw & writing which was my duty to attend, or & this was my duty to attend. After this rather laboured exposition it will suffice to add to the more or Icss similar examples that follow mere hints of the essential construction:—The debate on the Bill produced a tangle of arguments which A required all Mr Chamberlain’s skill to untie. Which means tangle; the missing if means to untie which. Here, however, if an it had been inserted after untie, which would have been subject to required instead of object to untie, so that the sentence as it stands is perhaps a

+ muddle between two possibilities./ It has already cost the 100 millions which A was originally estimated woould be the whole cost. ‘The missing it means that which would be the whole cost (that the conjunction, not the

Wages a hades in drugs has no

nger any monetary motive such as A has been asserted was formerly the case. Without té, this implies as one of the elements 4 monetary motive has been asserted was the case./The great bulk of the work done in the world is work that A ts vital should be done. Elements: (a) That certain work should be done is vital, or It is vital that certain work should be done; (b) Most work done is that work. The missing t# means not work, as that does, but thal whi'ch work should be done./What A was realized might happen has happened. Elements: It was realized that a thing might happen; that thing has happened.

At the end of the article nore the common omission of i with is hoped is illustrated.

2. Secondly, certain points have to be remembered about the anticipatory tt besides the fact that it may be wrongly omitted:—Jn connexion with the article by , tt may be worth recalling the naive explanation given to Dickens by one of his contributors. Anticipatory it heralds a deferred subject; it cannot be used when there is no subject to herald; where is the subject here? erplanation is engaged as object of recalling; recalling is governed by worth; worth is complement to may be; t neither has any meaning of its own nor represents anything else. The author might possibly claim that the construction was a true apposition like that in ‘ He’s d@ good fellow, that ’, & that a comma after recalling

would put all to rights; but anyone

who can read aloud can hear that

that is not true. The real way to

correct it is to write worth while

instead of worth, which releases

recalling to serve as the true subject;

see wortTnH for other such mistakes./

It is such wild statements as that Mr
