page: 304

+ The letters or letter-groups with which mistakes may be made are: c, ce, ch, ci; g, gg, gh, gi, gli, gn, gu; sc, sch, sci; z, zz Ifa few words, most of them to be met in English writing, are taken as types, the sounds may easily be remembered:— cicerone (chiche-); c, & cc, before

e & 1,=ch Chianti (kI-); ch always=k cioccolata (chdk-); ct before a, o, u,

often=ch, the 4 merely showing

that c is soft Gest (ji-); g, & gg, before e or i=j ghetto (gt-); gh always=g Giotto (j6-); gi before a, o, u, often =

j, cf. ci above. intaglio (-ahly5); gli often=ly bagni (bah’nyé); gn=ny Guelfo (gwe-); gu always=gw fascista (-shis-); sc before e or i=sh scherzo (sk-); sch always=sk sciolto (shol-); sci before a, o, t,

often=sh, cf. ci above scherzo (-ts6); z=ts pizzicato (pitsi-); 2z usually=ts mezzo (mé’dz6); 2z rarely= dz

ITALICS. During the war many persons less conversant with the art of writing than with strategy or artillery or surgery or acronautics or blockade law or food supply have, to our great advantage, occupied much space, instructively, in the magazines & newspapers. But a regrettable by-product of their activities has been a relapse into primitive methods of soliciting attention. Newspaper columns filled with a mosaic of roman & italic type that would havc horrified the prewar editor have grown familiar. The practised writer is aware that his business is to secure prominence for what he regards as the essence of his communication by so marshalling his sentences that they shall lead up to a climax, or group themselves round a centre, or be worded with different degrees of impressive-

ness as the need of emphasis varies;

he knows too that it is an insult

to the reader’s intelligence to ad-

monish him periodically by a change

+ of type, like a bad teacher imploring his boys to attend for a moment, that he cannot safely go to sleep just now. But to those who, however competent on their special subject, have not had enough experience of writing to have learnt these rudiments it comes as natural to italicize every tenth sentence or so as it comes to the letter-writing schoolgirl to underline whatever she enjoys recording. These mosaics have on discreet readers exactly the repellent cffect that interjections had on Landor: ‘I read warily; & whenever I find the writings of a lady, the first thing I do is to cast my cyes along her pages to see whether I am likely to be annoyed by the traps & spring-guns of interjections, & if I happen to espy them I do not leap the paling ’.

Space cannot be afforded for what would be the only adequate illustration, the reproduction of a whole mosaic article; a few short extracts must suffice; but it should be borne in mind that these are mostly taken from long articles that contain several other examples of the same trick. The right uses of italics will be afterwards classified & illustrated.

EXAMPLES OF ILL-ADVISED

ITALICS

In comparison with this welding of valour with justice, the so-called ideal of total disarmament is shallow. There is a way of peace that is at once manly & sure. By fur the deeper change lies in turning milineh institutions to nobler & sancr ends./All human effort that creates values is Labour, & the highest values are not created by muscle. The highest values are created, akicays have been created, & always will be, by Mind. And working men as well as others ize that fact./It is not merely that the Allied Powers are pledged to the reconstitution of Serbia because of her signal services to their cause & the sufferings of her intrepid people; their interest emphatically demands that past amor-
