page: 306

+ miserable confession that the rest is negligible.

italicize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

its, not it’s; see 1T 4.

-IZE, -ISE, IN VERBS. In the vast majority of the verbs that end in -ize or -ise & are pronounced -iz, the ultimate source of the ending is the Greek -iz0, whether the particular verb was an actual Greek one or was a Latin or French or English imitation, & whether such imitation was made by adding the termination to a Greek or another stem. Most English printers follow the French practice of changing -ize to -ise; but the OED of the Oxford University Press, the Encyclopaedia Britannica of the Cambridge University Press, The Times, & American usage, in all of which -zze is the accepted form, carry authority enough to outweigh superior numbers. The OED’s judgement may be quoted:—‘ In modern French the suffix has become -iser, alike in words from Greek, as_ bapftiser, évangéliser, organiser, & those formed after them from Latin, as civiliser, cicalriser, humaniser. Hence, some have used the spelling -ise in English, as in French, for all these words, & some prefer -ise in words formed in French or English from Latin elements, retaining -ize for those of Greek composition. But the suffix itsclf, whatever the clement to which it is added, is in its origin the Greek -tzein, Latin -izare; &, as the pronunciation is also with z, there is no reason why in English the special French spelling should be followed, in opposition to that Which is at once etymological & phonetic’.

It must be noticed, however, that a small number of verbs, some of them in very frequent use, like advertise, devise, & surprise, do not get their -ise even remotely from the Greek -izo, & must be spelt with -s-;. the more important of these are given in a list in the article -1sz, The difficulty of re-

806

+ membering which these -ise verbs are is in fact the only reason for making -ise universal, & the sacrifice of significance to ease does not seem justified.

jab, job, vv. & nn.= prod &c. The OED calls the first a_ variant, originally Scotch, of the second. Jab is usually preferred for a thrust with a weapon, & especially in army use for a particular bayonet thrust, & job for a rough jerk at a horse’s bit; of other blows the two are used indifferently. ‘ Forcible but abruptly arrested action ’ (OED) is the characteristic of the blow or jerk or thrust to which the words apply.

jabber makes -ering, -ered; sec -R-, -RR-.

jabot. Pronounce zhia’bd.

jacket makes -eted, -eting; see -T-, -TT-.

Jacky. So spelt; see -EY, -1E, -y.

jacquerie. See FRENCH WORDS,

Jaggedly. Three syllables;

see -EDLY.

jail, jailer, jailor. See Gaou.

all-like. For the hyphen, see -LIKE.

jalousie(s). For pronunciation see FRENCH WORDS.

jamb. Pronounce jim.

Jamy, -le. See -EY, -IE, -Y.

9 ° The OED gives precedence to -zary; but in its 19th-c. quotations the -ss- occurs three times as often as the -z-.

Jansenism & Erastianism are liable to be confused under the general notion of resistance to ecclesiastical authority. It may be said roughly that those who hold that the State should be supreme in ecclesiastical affairs are Erastians, while Jansenists are (for the purpose of this comparison) those who hold that a national branch of the Church is entitled to a certain independence of, or share in, the authority of the Pope. Erastus was author of a treatise against the tyrannical use of
