page: 307

+ excommunication by the Calvinistic Churches. Jansen was author of an exposition of St Augustine’s doctrines, designed to reform the Church of Rome, condemned by the Pope, & long prominent in the struggle between Gallicanism & Ultramontanism. B aphopinghis For pronunciation see

ENCH WORDS.

jargon is perhaps the most variously applied of a large number of words that are in different senses interchangeable, & under it the distinctions between them may be pointed out. The words are: argot, cant, dialect, gibberish, idiom, jargon, ingo, parlance, patois, shop, slang, vernacular. The etymologies, which are indeed several of them unknown, do not throw much light, but may be given for what they are worth:

lalect, idiom, & | aed are Greek (dialegomai I talk; idios private or proper or peculiar; paraballo compare); cant & vernacular are Latin (cantus song, chant, whine; verna homeborn slave); lingo is Italian (lingua franca Frankish tongue); argot, jargon, & patois, are French, but otherwise of unknown origin; gibberish & shop & slang are English, the first probably an imitation of the’ sound meant, the second a particular application of the common word, & the third of unknown origin.

argot is primarily the vocabulary of thieves & tramps serving to veil their meaning, & is applicd secondarily to the special vocabulary of any set of persons. There is in these senses no justification for its use instead of whichever English word may be most appropriate, except in writing concerned with France; for it is not a naturalized word.

cant in current English means the insincere or parrotlike appeal to principles, religious, moral, political,

or scientific, that the speaker does

not believe in or act upon, or does

not understand. It is best to

restrict it to this definite use; but

07 JARGON

+ its earlier sensc—special vocabulary of the disreputable—is still used by philologists & in etymological discussions; & it means sometimes what is now more often expressed by jargon or slang, the special vocabulary of an art, profession, &c.

dialect is essentially local; a d. is the variety of a language that prevails in a district, with local peculiaritics of vocabulary, pronunciation, & phrase.

gibberish is the name for unintelligible stuff: applied by exaggeration to a Janguage unknown to the hearer (for which, as a familiar term, lingo is better), & to anything either too learnedly worded, or on the other hand too rudely expressed, for him to make out its meaning.

idiom is the method of expression characteristic of or peculiar to the native speakers of a language; i.e., it is racy or unaffected or natural English (or French &c.), especially so far as that happens not to coincide with the method of expression prevalent in other languages; & @n 1. is a particular example of such speech. An earlier sense, the same as that of dialect, still occurs sometimes. See also IDIOM.

jargon is talk that is considered both ugly-sounding & hard to understand: applied especially to (1) the sectional vocabulary of a science, art, class, sect, trade, or profession, full of technical terms (cf. cant, slang); (2) hybrid speech of different languages; (3) the use of long words, circumlocution, & other clumsiness.

lingo is a contemptuous name for any forcign language. It is somctimes used instead of jargon (1) & (2).

parlance, which means manner of speaking, has the peculiarity of possessing no significance of its own & being never used by itself; you can say That is dialect, That is slang, &c., but not That is parlance; parlance is always accompanied by an adjective or defining word or

hrase, & that adjective, not par-

nce, gives the point: in golfing or
