page: 309

satisfied./We can now look forward

hopefully to further steps forward./

Market stability is a necessary

condition of industry under modern

conditions./Vhe figures I have obtain-

ed put a very different complexion

on the subject than that generally

obtaining./Most of them get rid of

them more or less complctely./The

observation of the facts of the

logical succession of the forms of

life./He served his apprenticeship

to statesmanship./I awaited a be-

lated train./Their invalidity was

caused by a technicality./In such

a@ union there is no probability of

stability./The earliest lists, still so

sadly & probably irretrievably im-

perfect (for this commonest form of

the jingle, see under -ty)./Hard-

working folk should participate in

the pleasures of leisure in goodly

measure.

Jingo. PI. -oes, see -o(E)s 1.

Jinn(ee). See GENIE.

jiu-jitsu. See su-sursvu.

b, v..= prod &c. See Jab.

obation, jawb-. The first is the right form; from Job came the verb jobe to reprove, common in the 17th & 18th centuries, & from that jobation.

ey, n. Pl. -eys.,

ey,v. Forinflexions see VErss

-08, see

» fjocular, &c. These & several other words—arch, facetious, flippant, jesting, merry, pleasant (in the archaic sense), & waggish—are difficult to separate from each other; the dictionaries establish no very clear or serviceable distinctions, cag to explain each by a selection of the rest. They are marked off from funny, droll, & others, by the fact that in the latter the effect, but in these the intent, is the main point; that is funny &c. which amuses, but that is jocular &c. which is meant (or, if a rson, means) to amuse. In the fo lowing

309 :

JOCOSE re a ee remarks no definition of the whole

meaning of any word is attempted 3

attention is drawn merely to the

ints of difference between the one

In question & some or all of the

others. All of them are usable in

contrast with serious, but for some

an opposite may be found more

appropriate than that for the pre-

sent purpose, & that word is given

in brackets.

arch (opp. severe) implies the impu-

tation of roguery of some sort; the

imputation is ironical, or the offence

is to be condoned; the meaning is

conveyed chiefly by look, tone, or

expression. An arch look, girl, in-

sinuation.

facetious (opp. glum) implies a de-

sire to amusing; formerly a laudatory word, but now suggesting ill-timed levity or intrusiveness or the wish to shine. A facetious remark, fellow, interruption.

flippant (opp. earnest) implies mockery of what should be taken seriously, & want of consideration for others’ feelings. A flippant sug- &estion, young man; f. treatment.

esting (opp. serious) differs from the rest in having perhaps no distinctive implication. 4 jesting mood, parson, proposal.

eae (opp. rave) implies something ponderous, as of Adam & Eve’s elephant wreathing his lithe proboscis to make them mirth, jocose manner, old boy, description.

jocular (opp. literal) very commonly implies the evasion of an issue by a joke, or the flying of a kite to test a chances, A jocular reply, writer, offer.

merry (opp. melancholy) implies good spirits & the disposition to take things lightly. 4 merry laugh, child, tale pleasant (arch. ; opp. stiff) implies rallying, especially addressed by superiors to inferiors, as a means of establishing genial relations. Now rare, except in pleasantry.

tsk implies on the one hand willingness to make a fool of oneself & on the other fondness for making
