page: 312

+ to our peace; can thcy not leave us our caliphute 2? See DIDACTICISM.

kiddy. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -¥.

kidnap makes -pped, -pping; see -P-, -PP-,

kidney. PI. -eys.

Kiln. The OLD puts first the pronunciation without -n.

kilo-, milli-. In the metric system, kilo- means multiplied, & millidivided, by 1000; kilometer 1000 metres, millimeter 1/1000 of a metre; cf. DECA-, CENTI-.

kilty, Highlander.

So spelt; see 312 ~EY, -IE, -Y.

kind, n. The irregular uses—Those k. of people, k. of startled, a k. of a shock—are easy to avoid when they are worth avoiding, i.e. in print; & nearly as easy to forgive when they deserve forgiveness, i.e. in hasty talk. Those k. of is a sort of inchoate compound, = those-like (cf. such,=so-like); k. of startled= startled, like, or startied-like. Ak.o a shock is both the least criticized the least excusable of the three.

kindly. Authors are kindly requested to note that Messrs only accept MSS. on the understandi that... Messrs may be kin in making the request, but did they really mean to boast of it? This misplacement is very common; for the ludicrous effect, compare the confusion between Jt 18 our PLEA- SURE & We have the pleasure.

kindly, -lily. See -LILy.

kinema(tograph). See CINEMA,

king. Under King-of-Arms, the OED says ‘less correctly King-at- Arms’; but, as both phrases are shown by its quotations to have been in use at all periods, & as the at form is certainly the one familiar to people without special knowledge, insistence on the other seems pedantic. For the King of Beasts, Terrors, see SOBRIQUETS.

kinglily. See -LILy.

kinsfolk is plural without the addition of -8; cf. FOLK.

kirsch(wasser), Pronounce ker’sh-

)-

Vv

Kitty. So spelt; see -EY, -IF, -Y.

knee. The adjective from knockknees, broken knees, &c., is best written with an apostrophe— Knockknee’d &c.; see -ED & ’D.

kneel. For kneeled & knelt, see -T & -ED.

knick-knack, nick-nack. The k. form is better, as preserving the Seen with knack, the parent word.

knife. For the verb &c., see -vE(D).

knight. For k. of industry, see Gautuicisms; for k. of the rueful countenance, SOBRIQUETS.

knit(ted). Both forms are still in use for both the past tense & the

participle, but the short form is now unusual in the special sense of making with knitting-needles. She knit(ted), or had knit(ted), her brows, but she knitted or had knitted a pair of socks; a well-knit frame, but knitted goods in ordinary use, though knit goods survives in the trade. Knitten is a pseudo-archaism.

knock-knee’d. See KNEE.

knoll. Pronounce ndl. The word being chiefly literary, so that most of us have to guess its sound from its spelling, & the sound of final -olf being very variable (doll, 1611, Moll, Noll, Péll, against drdll, rdil, stroll, toll, & trdll, among clear cases), it is regrettable that the rival 7 pol knole has not prevailed, but -U seems now established.

knout. The dictionaries give only nowt or ndoot; but the k- is sometimes sounded.

knowledge. Pronounce ndl-. The OED says that ndl- * used by some, is merely a recent analytical pronunciation after know’; it is on the same level as often with the t sounded; see PRONUNCIATION.

knowledgeable. So spelt.

kopje. Pronounce k6’pi.

koran. The OED gives korah’n precedence over kor’an, & has no
