page: 313

+ doubt chosen the winner. It quotes from Byron, however, And less to conquest than to Korans trust.

kosher. Pronounce ké-.

kotow, ko-tow, kowtow. The dictionaries pronounce this kiétow’, & it is often printed ko-tow by way of showing that the first syllable is not to be weakened in the normal way, which would give kotow’. The

choice lies between both writing & pronouncing kowtow, & allowing the weakening to kotow’; for the word is now fairly common, & cannot possibly maintain under popular wear & tear the full vowel sound in the unaccented syllable; kotow (kotow’) is recommended.

kraal. Pronounce krahl.

kukri. Pronounce koo’kri.

kyrie eleison. Of many competing gar aa the OED prefers

érll la’lson (seven syllables).

L

r. Pronounce lah’ger.

label makcs -lled &c.; see -LL-, -L-.

labial. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

labium. PI. -dia.

laboratory. The orthodox pronunciation is Ja’boratorI; those who find four successive unaccented syllables trying do better to say labd’rator! than to cut down the orthodox to la’bratri.

labo(u)r. Kcep the -u-; but see -our &-or. L. makes labouriic; sec -ouR- & -OR-.

labouredly. Three syllables; sec -EDLY.

lac, lakh. In its 15 quotations the OED shows 9 different spellings, but choice now lics between thesc two; & of the two it treats lac as prefcrable.

lace. The noun makes lacy, the verb laceable, but lacing; see MUTE E.

lacerate makes -rable, -tor; sec “ABLE 1, -OR.

is a singular noun, pronounced la’chiz, meaning negligence of certain kinds, rarely used with $13

+ a but often with the & no, & not requiring italics. Its formation is

imilar to that of riches (formerly

achesse, richesse), but not having become a popular word it has escaped being taken for a plural.

lachrym-. The true apelling for all the words would be lacrim-, & it would be at Ieast allowable to adopt it; but the k & the y are still usual.

lackey, lacquey. Pl. of noun, -eys; for inflexions of verb, see VERBS IN eIE, -Y, -YE, 2. The -key form is recommended.

lacquer, lacker. The first is established.

lacrim-. See LACHRYM-.

lacteal. See PoLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

lacuna. Pl. -nae; see LATIN PLURALS.

laddie. So spelt; see -EY, -1E, -Y.

lade, apart from the passive use of the PP; is now almost restricted to the loading of ships. Even laden, though still in use, tends to be displaced by loaded & to sound archaic except in particular phrases & com-

ound words: heavy-laden buses,

ut loaded rather than laden buses; sin-laden, sorrow-laden; a hay-laden rather than a hay-loaded cart, but loaded, rathcr than laden, with hay; on the other hand a soul laden, rathcr than loaded, with sin, because the dignity attaching to slight archaism is in place.

ladleful. Pl. ladlefuls; see -FUL.

lady. 1. LZ. Jones, L. Mary Jones, L. Henry Jones. The first form is proper only for a peeress or a baronet’s or knight’s wife or widow; the second for one called L. because she is a peer’s daughter; the third for a courtesy lord’s wife or widow.

2. L. by itself in the vocative is a wrong substitute, now common among the uneducated, for madam.

8. L. prefixed to names indicating vocation as a mark of sex (1. doctor, author, clerk, &c.) is a cumbrous substitute for a FEMININE DESIGNA- TION, which should be preferred when it exists or can be madc; in
