page: 315

+ loomed so largely in all discussions upon .../A phase of the Irish question which has bulked largely in the speeches of the Unionist leaders.

largess(e). Pronounce lar’jls, & omit the final -e. If the word had remained in common use, it would doubtless have come to be spelt, as it often formerly was, larges; cf. riches & laches.

larva. PI. -vac.

laryngitis. See GREEK G.

Lascar is very commonly accented on the second syllable; but the OED puts 1a’skar first, & Longfellow rhymes it with Madagascar.

lassie. So spelt; see -FY, -I£E, -y.

lasso is pronounced las60’ by those who use it; but the English pronunciation is ]a’sd, & the OED gives that only. PI. -oes, see -0(E)s 1.

last. 1. The l. two &c.) (the two l. &e. For this see First 4,

2. Last) (lasily. In enumerations lastly is recommended on the same grounds as firstly, for which see FIRST 5.

8. At (the) long tl. is an idiom labelled ‘now rare” by the OED; but it has experienced a revival, due more perhaps to its odd sound than to any superior significance over at last, & is now often heard & seen; *in the end, long as it has taken or may take to reach it ’ is the sense.

4 Last) (latest. In this now favourite antithesis (Dr Marshall's latest, but we hope not his last, contribution) we are reminded that latest means last up to now only, whereas last does not exclude the future. The distinction is a convenient one, & the use of latest for last is described by the OED as * now archaic & poetical’. But no corresponding agreement has yet been reached for abstaining from last when latest would be the more precise word, & many idioms militate against it (last Tuesday; last

r; for the last fortnight; on the

occasion; as I said in my last).

Latakia. Pronounce litaké’a.

late makes lalish; see MUTE E.

late, erstwhile, ex-, former(ly), quondam, sometime, whilom. With all these words to choose from, we are yet badly off: erstwhile & whilom smack of WARDOUR STREET; ex-, which tends to swallow up the rest, is ill fitted for use with compound words such as Lord Mayor (see HyPpHENS), which nevertheless constantly need the qualification; late is avoided because of the doubt whether it means that the person’s life, or his tenure of office, is over; quondam & sometime have become, partly owing to the encroachments of ez-, unusual enough to sound pedantic except in special contexts (my quondam friend; sometime rector of this parish). The best advice is to refrain from ez- except with single words (ezx-Mayor, but not ezx-Lord-Mayor, & still less ex- Lord Mayor), & from late except either in the sense of no longer living or when the person described is in fact dead, & to give former(ly), & perhaps quondam & sometime, more work to do.

lath is pronounced in the sing. lahth, but in the pl. lahdhz. See -TH & -DH.

lathe. Pronounce ladh.

lather. The OED gives only 18- (rhyming with gather, not father); & an obsolete spelling ladder shows the old vowel sound. Though lah’dher is often heard, !. apparently does not belong to the class of words in which ah & & are merely southern & northern variants (pass &c.).

latifundia is a plural.

latine, =in Latin, is a Latin adverb, pronounced in English lati’ne; similar adverbs are db ae (-sé) in English, celtice (-sé) in Celtic, gallice (-sé) in French, graece (-sé) in Greek, hibernice (-sé) in Irish, scot(t)ice (-sé) in Scots, teutonice (-sé) in Teutonic. All these are sometimes printed with - to show that the -e is sounded.

latinism)(latinity. The first is a disposition to adopt Latin dis be especially of speech. or a particular 5 LATINISM
