page: 316

+ LATINIZE idiom that imitates a Latin one; the second is the quality of Latin (classical, debased, &c.) that charactcrizes a person’s or a period's style. See -1SM & -ITY.

latinize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

LATIN PLURALS (or _latinizcd- Greek). Of most words in fairl common use that have a Latin as we as or instead of an English plural the correct Latin form is given in the word’s alphabetical place. A few general remarks may be made here.

1. No rule can be given for preferring or avoiding the Latin form. Some words invariably use it; nobody says specieses, thesises, opuses, or basises, instead of the Latin species, theses, opera, & bases (bii’séz). Others nearly always have the Latin form, but occasionally the English; bacilluses, lacunas, i genuses, are used at least by anti-Latin fanatics instead of bacilli, lacunae, & gencra. More often the Latin & English forms are on fairly equal terms, context or individual taste deciding for one or the other; dogmas, formulas, indexes, hiatuses, & gladioluses, are fitter for popular writing, while scientific treatises tend to dogmata, formulae, indices, hiatus (hiatus), & gladioli. Sometimes the two forms ure utilized for real differentiation, aus when gentt means spirits, & ous men. All that can safely

e suid is that there is a tendency to abandon the Latin plurals, & that when one is really in doubt which to use the English form should be given the preference.

2. Latin plurals in -i should be pronounced distinctly -i, & not -é or -I like the Italian dilettanti, pococuranti, &c.; the reformed pronunciation of Latin does not obtain in naturalized Latin words, & to say gla‘diolé reveals that one is ignorant cither that the word is Latin or how Latin words are pronounced. Latin plurals of words in -is (theses, metamorphoses, neuroses) should be plainly pronounced -éz, not -Iz like Iinglish plurals.

S16

3. In Latin plurals there are naturally some traps for non- Latinists; the termination of the singular is no sure guide to that of the plural. Most Latin words in -us have plural in -i, but not all, & so zeal not according to knowledge issues in such oddities as hiati, octopi, omnibi, & ignorami; as a caution the following list of variations may be useful: gladiolus, -li; hiatus, -ttis; Venus, -neres; octopus, -podes; corpus, -pora; genus, -nera; ignoramus, no Latin plural. Similarly most Latin nouns in -a have plural in -ae, but not all: lacuna, -nae; dogma, -mata; Saturnalia, not singular but plural. And, though -us & -a are much the commonest Anglo-Latin endings, the same danger attends some others (-ez, -er, -0, &c.).

4. The treatment of a Latin noun as an English plural because it ends in -s is, when of modern introduction, surprising. The Latin plural of forceps is forcipes, & the English plural should be forcepses; a forceps, a set of forcipes or forcepses; & both these were formerly in use. But Shears & scissors & pincers & pliers have so convinced us that no such word can have a singular that instead of a forceps we usually say a pair of forceps, & forceps has to serve for both singular & plural.

elatry. For words like lordolatry & babyolatry, see FACETIOUS FORMA- TIONS, & HyuRID DERIVATIVES.

latter survives almost solely in the l., which provides with the former a pair of pronouns obviating disagreeable repetition of one or both of a pair of previously mentioned names or nouns. Such avoidance of repetition is often desirable; for the principles, see ELEGANT VARIA- TION, and RepretTiTion. But the l. is liable to certain special misuscs:-— (1) Zhe l. should not be uscd when more than a pair are in question, as in: The difficult problems involved in the early association of Thomas Girtin, Rooker, Dayes, & Turner are
