page: 317

well illustrated by a set of drawings

that ...; & what was undoubtedly

the best period of the latter artist

ts splendidly demonstrated by...

(2) Neither should it be used when

Jess than two are in question; the

public & its shillings cannot be

reasonably regarded as a pair of

things on the same footing in: The

mass of the picture-loving public,

however, may be assured of good value

for the shillings—whatever be the

ultimate destination of the latter.

(3) The true elegant-variationist,

who of course works the l. very hard,

should observe that a mere pronoun will not do for the antecedent of

the l., even though there may be a name in the background; a writer

who varies Gordon with the hero of

Khartoum & his relative naturally does not shrink from picking up him with the l.; it is all of a Piece, & a bad piece: Mr Hake was a cousin of the late General Gordon, of whom he entertained a most affectionate remembrance. On one occasion, when the hero of Khartoum was dining with him, the latter invited his relative to take wine with him, but Gordon imperiously declined. (4) The true use of it is not to mystify, asin: Lhe only people to gain will be the Tories & the principal losers will be the working-class voters whose interests the Labour Party is supposed to have at heart. It is avery poor compliment to the intelligence of the latter which, in heaven’s name?] to beteve, as many Labour members seem to do, that their support of the Labour cause will be all the more ardent if their interests are thus disregarded. laudable means praiseworthy; the

uotation shows it confused with

ud: see Parrs & SNARES:— He sp tn the most laudable terms of the work carried out by Captain Thompson in the Anglo-Egyptian Soudan. laudanum. Pronounce 13’dnum. laugh. For the laughing philosopher, see SOBRIQUETS. laughable. For the peculiar forma-

317

tion, see -ABLE 4. For ‘would be

laughable if it were not tragic’ &c., see HACKNEYED PHRASES,

laughter. Homeric l. is a now

common phrase whose meaning

must be vague to many readers.

It is especially the laugh that runs

round a circle of spectators when a

ludicrous or otherwise leasing inci-

dent surprises them. In Olympus,

when Zeus & Hera have had words,

the limping Hephaestus counsels his

mother to deal in soft answers;

when he, in that former uarrel, had

tried to protect her, had he not been

flung forth & fallen nine days

through air till he landed in Lemnos?

& were not nectar & ambrosia in

Olympian halls better than such

doings? And therewith he hastened

round & filled the cups of all the

ods; ‘ & inextinguishable was the

aughter of the blessed gods as they watched Hephaestus bustling about the hall ’.

And again, when Penelope’s suitors set the beggar-bully Irus to box with the seeming beggar Odysseus, * then the twain put up their hands, & Irus struck at the right shoulder, but the other smote him on his neck beneath the ear, & crushed in the bones, & straightway the red blood gushed up through his mouth, & with a moan he fell in the dust, & drave together his teeth as he kicked the ground. But the proud wooers threw up their hands, & died outright for laughter ’.

Such is Homeric 1.; but whether the frequent use of the phrase is justified by present-day familiarity with Homer is doubtful. See Poru- LARIZED TECHNICALITIES, launch. The OED prefers the prehnunciation law- to lah-. laurel makcs -lled; see -L1-, -L-. laurustinus. So spelt; tinus, a Latin plant-name, not a suffix, was used in apposition to laurus; lauresis @ corruption. lavabo. Pl. -os; see -o(r)s 6. lavatory. The euphemistic use,
