page: 318

+ which will end in driving the word out of currency, is to be deprecated.

laver, basin. Pronounce la-.

law Latin, law-Latin. The first is best, except in attributive use (law- Latin terms &c.); see HYPHENS.

lawn tennis. No hyphen except in attributive use (lawn-tennis court &c.); see HYPHENS.

lay & Hie. 1. Verbs. To lay is transitive only (=put to rest), & makes laid; to lie is intransitive only (=be at or come to rest), & makes lay, lain, never latd. But confusion even between the words lay & lie themselves is very common in uneducated talk; & still commoner, sometimes making its wa into print, is the use of laid, which belongs to the verb to lay only, for lay the past tense, & lain the p.p., of lie (we laid out on the grass, & could have laid there all day). 2. Nouns. Lie & lay are beth used in the senses configuration of ground, direction or position in which something lies. Neither has a long established history behind it; the OED has only one quotation earlier than the nineteenth century, & that is for lie (the proper lye of the land, 1692); he seems also the more reasonable form, lay having issued perhaps from sailors’ & rustic talk, in which the verbs are not kept distinct.

layer makes layered; see -R-, -RR-.

lay figure has no connexion with any of the English words lay, but is from Dutch led joint, & means literally jointed figure.

lazzarone. Pronounce l&4zard’né (or lats-); pl. -ni pronounce -né,

leaded, & double-leaded, in printing, mean sct with more than the ordinary space between the lines, as is done with matter in the newspapers for which special attention or a special status is desired; the space is made by inserting strips of lead.

leaden. See -EN ADJECTIVES. Leaden, however, is less disused in the literal sense than most of the words among which it is there

318 LEARNEDLY

+ placed; lead roof or pipe is commoner than leaden, but a leaden pipe

a ee a ee ke ae ee ea ee ee is not as unidiomatic as a golden watch.

leading question is often misused for a poser or a pointed question or one that goes to the heart of the matter (as though leading meant principal); its real meaning is quite different; ai. q.is not hostile, but friendly, & is so phrased as to guide or lead the person questioned to the answer that it is desirable for him to make, but that he might not think of making or be able to make without help: used especially of counsel examining one of his own witnesses & unfairly prompting him. To object, as people do when they are challenged to deny or confirm an imputation, ‘ That is a Icading question ’ is meaningless. See Po- PULARIZED TECHNICALITIES,

(-) leafed, (-) leaved. See -ve(p).

lean. For leant & leaned, see -T & -ED.

leap. For leapt & leaped, see -t & -ED. Of J. to the cyes, as wearisome a GALLICISM as exists, some examples must be given to suggest its staleness; others will be found under Jump. Bath, it may be admitted, does not I. t. t. eyes as an obvious or tnevitable meeting-place for the Congress./This, however, does not l. t. t. eye, & for the moment I am concerned only with the impressions

a oa i a= which strike a new-comer./I won't weary you with rehearsing all the possible consequences of the Bulgarian surrender; they |. t. t. eye./We have not the smallest doubt that there is a perfectly satisfactory explanation of these widely differing totals, but certainly it does not |. t. t. eyes.

learn. For learnt & learned, see -T & -ED. The existence of the disyllabic learned as an adjective is

i et an additional reason for preferring i inthe verb; & so with unlearned

cnt.

learnedly.

Three syllables; see “EDLY.
