page: 321

+ it would have passed; coming before it, it is wrong; you can understand must out of a previous must not, but not out of a must not that is yet to come./Perhaps Charles’s most fatal move was the attempted arrest of the five members, undertaken on the Queen’s advice, & without the knowledge, & still less without the consent of his three new advisers. The writer of this has curiously chosen, by needlessly inserting that second without, to deprive himself of the usual excuse for using less instead of more, i.e. the fact that some ellipsis of a word prevents the illogicality from being instantly visible & permits a writer to lose sight of what the full phrase would require while he attends to the broad effect.

8. L., lesser, smaller, lower, fewer, &c. The letters & memoirs could have been published, we should imagine, af a less price./While Colonel Seely adheres to the determination to keep open the competition for the best acroplane, a lesser prize will probably be offered which will be confined to British manufacturers. ‘These extracts suggest ignorance of, or indifference to, modern idiomatic restrictions on the use of less & lesser, The grammar of both is eorrect; but, when the context— unemotional statement of everyday facts—is taken into account, at @ less price ought to be at a lower price, & a lesser prize ought to be a smaller prize. It is true that less & lesser were once ordinary comparatives of little (lesser differing from less in being used only as an adjective & only before a noun), & that therefore they were roughly equivalent in sense to our smaller; & further, this piece of archaism, like many others, is permissible in emotional passages or such as demand exceptionally dignified expression; but the extracts have no such qualification.

The modern tendency is so to restrict less that it means not smaller, but a smaller amount of, is

1351

+ the comparative rather of a little than of little, & is consequently applied only to things that are Measured by amount & not by size or quality or number, nouns with which much & little, not great & small, nor high & low, nor many & few, are the appropriate contrasted epithets: less butter, coufage; but a smaller army, table; a lower price, degree; fewer opportunities, people. Plurals, & singulars with a or an, will naturally not take less; less tonnage, but fewer ships; less manpower, but fewer men; less opportunity, but @ worse opportunity, & inferior opportunities; though a few plurals like clothes & troops, really equivalent to singulars of indefinite amount, are exceptions: could do with less troops or clothes. Of less’s antipathy to a, examples are: J want to pay less rent, but a lower rent ts what I want./That is of less value, but a lower value attaches to this./ Less noise, please, but a slighter noise would have waked me./ Less size means less weight, but I want a smaller size. Such is the general tendency: to substitute smaller, lower, fewer, or other appropes word, for less except where it means ‘a smaller amount of ’, & for lesser, & to regard the now slightly archaic less in other senses as an affectation. There are no doubt special phrases keeping it alive even in quite natural speech, e.g. inor to a less degree, where lower is hardly yet as common as less; but the general tendency is unmistakable, & is moreover, since it makes for precision, one that should be complied with.

-LESS. Bare reference of any word in -less to this article means that the use of it in ordinary prose is deprecated.

The original & normal use of this suffix is to append it to nouns, producing adjectives meaning without the thing, e.g. headless, tuneless; to this use there are no limits whatever. Words made from verbs, with the sense not able to do or not
