page: 322

+ liable to suffer the action or process, as tireless, fadeless, & describeless, are much fewer, are mostly of a poetical cast, & when new-minted strike the reader of prose at least as base metal. They have an undeniable advantage in their shortness; compare resistless, describeless, & weariless, with irresistible, indescribable, & unweariable; but this is outweighed for all except fully established ones by the uneasy feeling that there is something queer about them. Apart from a few so familiar that no thought of their elements & formation occurs to us, such as dauntless, -less words made from verbs are much better left to the poets; this does not apply to the many in which, as in numberless, formation from the noun gives the sense as well, if not as obviously, as formation from the verb (without number? or not able to be numbered?); dauntless itself may perhaps have been made from the noun daunt, which in the 15th & 16th centuries was current in the sense discouragement.

To those who have any regard for the interests of the language as distinguished from its pliability to their immediate purposes, it will seem of some importance that it should not become necessary, with every word in which -less is appended to what can be either a noun or a verb, to decide which is this time intended. If the verb-compounds become much more frequent, we shall never know that pitiless & harmless may not mean * that cannot be pitied’ & ‘secure against being harmed’ as well as ‘* without the instinct of pity’ & * without harmfulness’; we ought to be able to reckon that, with a few well-known exceptions, -/ess words mean simply without what is signified by the noun they contain; & the way to keep that assumption valid is to abstain from reckless compounding of -less with verbs.

lessee, lessor. The Icssee is the

822

+ person who takes, the lessor the person who lets, on lease.

lesser. See LESS.

lest. The idiomatic construction after 1. is should, or in exalted style the pure subjunctive (/. we forget; l. he be angry). Instead of should, good writers rarely use shall, may, & might. The variations in the quotations below are entirely against modern idiom; will & would after lL. are merely a special form of the inability to distinguish between SHALL & will, Mistakes corresponding to those after J. are still more frequent after IN ORDER THAT. We do not think Mr Lloyd George need be apprehensive lest the newspaper reader will interpret his little homily in Wales yesterday as .../There must be loyal cooperation, lest the last state of the party becomes worse than the jirst./The German force now lost no time in retreat, lest they would be cut off & surrounded by General Mackenzte.

let. Mistakes in case are very rare in English; forgetfulness of the construction, when /. is used in exhortations, is responsible for a wrong subjective now & then:—And nox, my dear, let you & I say a few words about this unfortunate affair./Our work is to inform & permeate the party, not to leave it; if anybod must leave it, let it not be we. Read me, US.

lethargy. Mr , discussing the l. of the dental profession to the shocking condition of the teeth of the working classes, said... L. to is unidiomatic, made on the ANAaLocy “ts indifference to, but not justified

y it.

let(t).

For spelling cf. sE1(T).

LETTER FORMS. Of the usual forms goegaign: the signature some are

tter suited than others to certain correspondents or occasions. The distinctions here offered are tentative, but may be useful. ‘I am, Sir’ &c., or * Believe me (to be)’,
