page: 324

+ actions of others, calculated to injure their reputation.

Defamation: The action of defaming, or attacking any one’s good fame.

Libel: (Law) any published statement damaging to the reputation of a person (* The judge answered ... that it was clearly possible to publish a libel for the public good ’); (Pop.) any false & defamatory statement in conversation or otherwise.

Scandal: (Law) any injurious report published concerning another which may be the foundation of legal action; (Pop.) the utterance of disgraceful imputations (The word differs from the etymologically identical slander in not implying the falsity of the imputations made).

Slander: The utterance or dissemination of false statements or reports concerning a person, or malicious misrepresentation of his actions, in order to defame or injure him (* Falsehood & malice, express or implied, are of the essence of the action for slander °).

liberal. In [. education the adjective retains a sense that is almost obsolete, & yet is near enough to some extant senses to make misunderstanding possible. A Il. e. is neither one in which expense is not spared, nor one in which enlightened methods of teaching prevail, nor even one that instils broadmindedness; or rather it is not so called because it is any of these. It is the education designed for a gentleman (Latin liber a free man), & is opposed on the one hand to technical or professional or any special training, & on the other to education that stops short before manhood is reached.

liberate makes -rable, -tor; see -ABLE I, -OR.

libertine. For chartered I1., see HACKNEYED PHRASES,

libretto. Pl. -etti (pronounce -é; see -1) or -08, see -0(E)S 6.

feo So spelt, not Lybian. See Y &1. licence, -se. The first is better for |

+ the noun, the second for the verb. Compare, for this convenient distinction, advice, -se, device, -se, practice, -se, prophecy, -sy, in all of which the c marks the noun.

lich-gate, -house. So spelt; the OED gives lych- only as a variant; see Y & I.

lichen. Gk

Pronounce li’kn;

e? leikhén is the source.

lickerish, liquorish. The first is the right form, & the second, being wrongly associated with liquor, inevitably alters & narrows the meaning. The word means fond of dainties, sweet-toothed, greedy, lustful, & is connected with the verb lick & with lecher, not with liquor. See TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY.

licorice. See LIQUORICE,

lie, be prostrate. See Lay & LIE,

lie, position. See Lay & LIE,

lie, speak falsely. For inflexions, see VEBBS IN -lE, -Y, -YE, 3.

lien, n. ‘ The usual pronunciation in England is 1lé’en.’—OED.

elier. For comparative-adverb forms, see -ER & -EST 8.

lieutenant. Pronounce left- or léft-, & in nautical & naval use leté’nant; lut- prevails in U.S. For hyphen in l. general, see MAJOR GENERAL.

life. 1. For come into one’s l., see HACKNEYED PHRASES, We sense the tragedy of Anna Wolsky as she steps light-heartedly into Sylvia Bayley’s life. 2. For pl. &c., see -vE(D).

light, n. For dim religious l., see IRRELEVANT ALLUSION. In l. of will not do for in the l. of, as in That it should have been so, in light of all the facts, will ahcays be a nine-days wonder to the student of history; see CAST-IRON IDIOM.

light, v. Both verbs (kindle. descend) make lighted or lit for past tense & p.p.; but lighted is commoner for the p.p., especially that of the first verb used attributively: Is the fire lighted or lit?, but Holding a lighted candle.

lightning. So spelt, not -iening.
