page: 325

like, adj. For ¢& the l., see FORTH 1.

like in questionable constructions. 1. It will be best to dispose first of what is, if it is a misuse at all, the most flagrant & easily recognizable misuse of like. A sentence from Darwin quoted in the OED contains it in a short & unmistakable form: Unfortunately few have observed like you have done Every illiterate

rson uses this construction daily; it is the established way of putting the thing among all who have not been taught to avoid it;. the substitution of as for like in their sentences would sound artificial. But in good writing this particular like is very rare, & even those writers with whom sound English is a matter of care & acquirement rather than of right instinct, & to whom like was once the natural word, deliberately weed it out. The OED’s judgement is as follows: * Used as conjunction, =“ like as ”’, as. Now generally condemned as vulgar or slovenly, though examples may be found in many recent writers of standing’. Besides the Darwin quoted above, the OED gives indisputable examples from Shakspere, Southey, Newman, Morris, & other ‘ writers of standing’. The reader who has no instinctive objection to the construction can now decide for. himself whether he shall consent to. use it in talk, in print, in both, or in neither; he knows that he will be able to defend himself if he is condemned for it, but also that, until he has done so, he will be condemned. It remains to give a few newspaper examples so that there may be no mistake about what the ‘ vulgar or slovenly ’ use in its simplest form is:—Or can these tickets be kept (like the sugar cards were) by the retailer?/The retail price can never reach a prohibitive figure like petrol has done./Wasub’s words sank into Lingard’s heart like lead sinks into water./They studied the rules of a

ame like a lawyer would study an tmperfectly-drawn-up will./Our great patron saint ‘ St George ’ was a Greek, 825

+ like a good many of the saints are./ The idea that you can learn the technique of an art like you can learn the multiplication table or the use of logarithms.

2. The rest of this article is intended for those who decide against the conjunctional use that has been already discussed, & ere prepared to avoid also some misuses of a less easily recognizable kind. All the examples in 1 were of the undisguised conjunctional use, & contained a subordinate clause with its verb; most of those now to come

ave no subordinate verb, & in all of them like may be regarded as an adjective or adverb having the

dditional power (cf. worth) of directly governing nouns as if it were a preposition.

The first type is perhaps not really different from that discussed in I. Ixxamples are:—Or should he have a palace some distance away, like the Bishop of Winchester has at Farnham?/But in an industrialized county like so great a part of Lancashire is, the architecture can hardly fail to. . ./ The club doctor was the friend & adviser of its members, something like-thé country parson has to be to his labour parishioners in the present day. The peculiarity of

= or ‘ the one that ’ may be supposed. ~ these is that in each there is a previous noun, palace, county, something, with which like may agree as an adjective, & an ellipsis of ‘ what’ ) Such a defence is neither plausible nor satisfactory, & the sentences are no better than others containing a verb.

Of sentences in which like is not followed by a verb, certain forms are unexceptionable, but are liable to extensions that are not so. The unquestioned forms are Ile talks like

: an expert & ‘You are treating me like a fool, in Which like is equivalent to a prepositional adverb = similarly to; & You, like me, are disappointed, in which like is equivalent either to an adverb as before, or perhaps rather to a prepositional adjective

{
