page: 326

+ rn 2 ‘— resembling in this respect. The “second, third, & fourth faulty types represent neglect of various limitations observed in the correct forms.

Second type:—The Commutee was today, like yesterday, composed of the Following gentlemen./The Turks would appreciate the change, as, unlike Koweit, their political title is here beyond dispute./It is certain that now, unlike the closing ycars of last century, quotation from his poetry 1s singularly rare./We may have 110, like last year, when Paignion...& Jersey all enjoyed a sun-bath of nearly 200 hours. The limitation here disregarded is that the word governed by like must be a noun, not an adverb or an adverbial phrase. Yesterday & last year are not nouns, but an adverb & a adverbial phrase; & Kowewt & the closing years, meaning at Koweit & in the closing years, havé also only a deceitful appearance of being nouns.

Third type:—People get alarmed on each occasion on which (like the present case) dying children suddenl appear./He has completed a new work in which, like its author’s recent books, no failing in sparkle or vigour will be traceable./And then came the war; like many another English village, it filtered slowly, very slowly, through to his. The limitation (suggested with diffidence) that has ata been disregarded is that the preceding noun to which like is attached must be not one governed by a preposition, but subject or object of the main verb. The preceding nouns ure which (i.e. occasion), which (i.e. work), & his (i.e. village), governed by on, in, & to; instead of like, read as tin the present case, as in its author’s recent books, & as to many another.

Fourth type:—Like his Roman predecessor, his private life tas projligate; like Antony, he was an insatiate gambler./When the raging tearing propaganda was started, it was thought that, like Mr Balfour, his convictions on the fiscal question were unsettled. The limitation is that the

+ word governed by like must be in

ari materia with the one to which it is compared. The predecessor & Mr Balfour are not so related to life & convictions; but Antony is to he, & that sentence alone will pass muster. This mistake, however, of comparing unlike things is not, like the others, peculiar to like, but is a slovenly parsimony of words that may occur in many other constructions,

-like. ‘In formations intended as nonce-words, or not gencrally current, the hyphen is ordinarily used ” —OED. To which it may be added that nouns in -l require the hyphen; the OED prints, e. g., cowl-like, eellike, flail-like, jail-like, owl-like, pearl-like, rebel-like, sentinel-like, veil-like.

like, v. 1. L. makes likable; see MUTE E.

2. I would |. Even on those who use should & would idiomatically under all ordinary temptations the verb l. seems to exercise a corrupting influence; a couple of examples follow pro formd, but anyone can find as many as he pleases with very little search:—We would |. to ask one or two tions on our own account./There is one paragraph in it that I would l. to refer to. There is indeed no mystery about why people go wrong; it is because, if the thing had to be said without the use of the verb like, would & not should is the form to use: We would ask, that I would refer to; but that has nothing to do with what is right when the verb like is used. Putting aside one idiom that with this particular verb is negligible (When the post came I would like to be allowed to carry it in,=I used to like), J would l. is no better than any of the wills & woulds that are well recognized as Scotch, Irish, American, & other kinds of English, but not English English. If the sHaLt & WILL idiom is worth preserving at all, J would i. is wrong, & J d. right.
