page: 327

likely, adv.

Yet it was not easy to WPi7ie the

ht behind that intentness of gaze; likely it was far from the actual scene apparently holding tis attention. In educated speech & writing the adverb is never used without very, mosi, or more, except by way of poetic archaism or, as presumably in the extract, of stylistic NOVELTY-HUNTING. American usage, however, may be different:-—The climate in America is so severe in winter that stocks will |. die out./It will l. be financed largely by capital raised in the United States. For likelily, see -uity; for likelier adv., -ER & -EST 38.

likewise. The use as a conjunction (Its tendency to wobble & its uniformtty of tone colour, I. its restricted poroers of execution) is, like the similar use of ALSO, an ILLITERACY; the OED quotes no example.

likin. Pronounce léké’n.

-LILY. Avoidance of the adverbs in -lily, i.e. adverbs made regularly from adjectives in -ly, is merely a matter of taste, but is very, & increasingly, general. Neither the difficulty of saying the words nor the sound of them when said is a serious objection so long as the three syllables are not passed; holily & statelily & lovelily are not hard to say or harsh to hear; but with heavenlily & ruffianlily hesitation is natural; & the result has been that adverbs in -lily, however short, are now with a few special exceptions seldom heard & seldomer seen. Methods of avoidance are various:—

1. It is always possible to say in a masterly manner, at a timely moment, & the like, instead of masterlily, timelily; or again to be content with decorously &c. instead of mannerlily; the method of periphrasis or synonym.

2. A large number of adjectives in -ly are established as adverbs also. So early, (most or ) LIKELY, & the adjectives of periodical recurrence like daily & hourly. A single quotation will show the consequences of

+ making one’s own adverbs of this kind: Ezternal evidence, however, is rare; & its rarity gives value to such work as Mr here masterly does.

3. Before adjectives & adverbs the -ly adjective often stands instead of the -lily adverb, mening a kind of informal compound. hough we should say horribly pale not horrible pale, we allow ourselves ghastly pale rather than use ghast-

ily 5 so heavenly bright, beasily cold, {° ly soon, &c.—all without the

yphen that would mark regular compounds.

4. In sentences where it is just possible, though not natural, for a predicative adjcctive to stand instead of an adverb, that way is sometimes taken with an adjective in -ly though it would not be taken with. another: if happened timely enough, though not opporiune enough; she nodded queenly, though not she nodded significant.

5. Perhaps any adjective formed by appending -ly either to an adjeetive (kind, kindly; dead, deadly) or to a noun of the kind that is easily used in apposition like an adjectival epithet (cowardly, cf. the coward king; soldierly, cf. a soldier colonist) is sometimes, though always consciously & noticeably, allowed to pass as an adverb: tt was ruffianl: done; a kindly thought, @ kindly uttered.

On the other hand, avoidance is not always called for; some -lily words are current, though not many. Those that naturally present themselves (he laughed jollily; sillily complacent; live holily; dodged it wilily) seem to be all from adjectives in which -ly is not the usual adjectival ending, but the / is part of the word-stem; & though we are most of us not conscious of that fact nowadays, it may have had its effect in separating these from the others.

limb. When we first come across an eclipse in the newspapers & read of the sun’s lower limb, we suspect
