page: 328

+ LIMBER the writer of making jokes or waxing poetical, so odd is the association of limbs with that globular form. It is a relief to learn that limb does mean edge without a metaphor; the i. in Astronomy &c. is from Latin limbus hem, & the l. of ordinary speech is a separate & native word. See TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY.

limber, v., makes -ercd &c.; see -R-, -RR-.

limbo. PI. -os; see -o(E)s 8.

lime makes limy; see -EY & -y,

limit, n. For some synonyms in sense tether &c., see FIELD.

limit, v., makes -ifed &c.; see -T-, -TT-.

limited. ZL. company is an clliptical phrase for l.-liability company, & implies not that the number of members is ]., but that their liability for its debts is so.

limn. In 0. & limned n is silent, in limner sounded, & in limning cither; cf. DAMNING.

limpid often has (-er) -est; see -ER & -EST, 2, 4.

linage, number of lines. Spell thus; the other spelling, lineage, though often seen in the newspapers, is, owing to the existence of lineage descent, still less desirable than other spellings with intrusive MuTE E. An example of the wrong form is: ... at the rate of 15s. per inch (set in display type) or 9d. per line (set in the lineage style).

line, n. For some synonyms in sense depariment &c., see FIELD.

line, v., makes -nable; see MUTE E.

lin(e)age. See LINAGE.

lingerie. See FRENCH WORDS.

lingo. Pl. -0s; see -o(E)s 6. For some synonyms, see JARGON.

links, golf-course. Sometimes used as a singular (there is a good links here); cf. an ironworks.

Linnaean,-nean. The first is usual, ‘ though the Linnean Society adopts the other form’ (OED). See a, a. Against -nean is the invariable spelling of Linnaeus.

$28

lintel makes -lled; see -LL-, -L-.

liny, not -ney; see -EY & -y.

lionize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

liquate makes -atable; see -aBLE 1.

liquefy. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

liqueur. Pronounce Ilikur’; cf. AMATEUR.

liquid. See FLurp for fluid, gas, & 1. For the phonetic sense, see TECHNICAL TERMS.

liquidize, liquidate, make -dizable, -dable; see MUTE E, -ABLE l,

liquorice, lico-, The first is treated by the OED as the established form.

quorish. See LICKERISH.

lira, Italian franc, has pl. lire (pronounce lér’a) or anglicized liras. To use lira as pl. (A meal in a secondclass restaurant costs from eight to ten lira) is absurd.

lissom(e). The OED form is -om.

list, please. The third sing. pres. is list or listeth, the past tense list or listed. The verb being in any form archaic, it is of no great importance whether the more obviously archaic impersonal construction (as him list &«.) or the now commoner personal one (as he list &c.) is used.

listen(er). Pronounce If’sn(er). See PRONUNCIATION, Silent t.

litany, liturgy. The two words have come so close to each other in use that it is a surprise when one first finds that the initial syllables are not the same in origin, nor even connected. For those who know the Greck words, a litany is a serics of prayers, a liturgy is a canon of public service; the latter in practice includes prayer, but does not say s0.

literally. We have come to such a pass with this emphasizer that where the truth would require us to insert with a strong expression ‘ not literally, of course, but in a manner of speaking ’, we do not hesitate to insert the very word that we ought to be at pains to repudiate; cf. VERITABLE; such false coin makes honest traffic in words impossible. If the Home Rule Bill is passed, the
