page: 329

+ 300,000 Unionists of the South & West of Ireland will be literally thrown to the wolves./The strong téte-de-pont fortifications were rushed by our troops, & a battalion crossed the bridge literally on the enemy’s shoulders. In both, practically or virtually, opposites of literally, would have stood. (At election time) M telephone wires have been kept l. redhot./H. B. Stallard in the half-mile l. ‘flew’ round the track./ Americans are |. fed up with these foreign conspirators./He[aclimber]came through safely, but he had 1. to cling on with his eyebrows.

LITERARY CRITICS’ WORDS. The literary critics here meant are not the writers of books or treatises or essays of which the substance is criticism; readers of that form of literature are a class apart, between which & its writers if a special lingo exists, the rest of us are not concerned to take exception to it. Anything said in this book about literary critics is aimed only at the newspaper reviewers of books & other works of art. Those reviewers, as anyone knows who examines them critically in their turn, give us work that anes from the very highest literary skill (if the power of original creation is set aside as here irrelevant) to the merest hack-work; but the point is that whether they are highly accomplished writers, or tiros employed on the theory that anyone is good enough to pass an opinion on a book, their audience is not the special class that buys critical works because its tastes are literary, but the general public, which buys its criticism as part of its pared te ial & does not know the critics’ lingo. It follows that, the better the critic, the fewer literary critics’ words he uses. The good critic is aware that his public wants to understand, & he has no need to convince it that he knows what he is talking about by parading words that it does not understand. With the inferior critic the establishment

829

M3

+ of his status is the first consideration, & he effects it by so using, let us say, actuality, inevitable, & sympathetic, that the reader shall become aware of a mysterious difference between the sense attaching to the words in ordinary life & the sense now presented to him. He has taken actuality to mean actualness or reality; the critic perplexes him by giving it another sense, which it has a right to in French, where actuel means present, but not in English, i.e. up-to-dateness, or resemblance not to truth in general but to present-day conditions; & he does this without mentioning that he is gallicizing. And so with the other words; the reader is to have it borne in upon him that a more instructed person than himself is talking to him. One mark of the good literary critic is that he is both able to explain his meaning without resort to these lingo words, & under no necessity to use them as adver tisements.

Specimens of literary critics’ words, under some of which (printed in capitals) further remarks will be found, are:—actuality, BANAL{ITY), CACHET, charm, CONCISION, DIS- TINCTION, IMMENSE, INEVITABLE, INTRIGUE, METICULOUS, MOT JUSTE, SYMPATHETIC,

LITERARY WORDS. AI. w., when the description is used in this book, is one that cannot be called archaic, inasmuch as it is perfectly comprehensible still to all who hear it, but that has dropped out of use & had its place taken by some other word except in writing of a poetical or a definitely literary cast. To use literary words instead of the current substitutes in an unsuitable context challenges attention & gives_ the impression that the writer is a foreigner who has learnt the language only from books. See also what is said of FoRMAL WORDS. Chill for chilly, eve for evening, gainsay for deny &c., loathly for hsome, visage for face &c., may be
