page: 330

+ instanced; but literary words are reckoned by thousands.

lithesome is, between lithe & lissom, a SUPERFLUOUS WORD.

lithontriptic. See BARBaRISMS.

litotes. See TECHNICAL TERMS. Pronounce II’totéz.

litre, -ter. See -RE & -ER.

litter, brood. See FARRow.

littérateur. See FRENCH WORDS.

little. See sMALL. Comparison less(er) (for limitations of sense see LESS 8), least, or more usually smaller, -est.

littoral, n., has a technical sense in which it is doubtless of value; marine life being distributed into abyssal, pelagic, & littoral, the l. (sc. zone or region) is the shallow waters near the shore. But that is not the sense in which most of us know it; it mects us as a name for the land region bordering & including the shore; in that sense it may important in treaties & the like to have a word that does not mean strictly the mere line of coast or shore; but in ordinary contexts it should never be prcfcrred to coast, & its present popularity is due to pretentiousness. Why not coast in The towns along the Mediterranean littoral, The Russian settlements on the Eastern Caspian littoral? See FORMAL WORDS.

liturgy. See LITANY.

livable. So spelt; see MuTE E.

elived. In long-l. &c. the right pronunciation is livd, the words bcing from life (cf. -leaved from leaf &c.) & not from live; but lIivd is often heard,

liven. See -EN VERBS.

llama. See LAMA.

eLL-, -L-. Final / is treated differently in British, but not American, usage from most final consonants, the rule being to double it, if single, in inflexions & in some derivatives irrespective of the position of the accent.

1. When verbs in -1 (except those in which a compound vowel sound, as

+ ai, ea, ce, ot, ow, ur, precedes the -2) make inflected or derived words in -able, -ed, -en, -er, or -ing, -ll- is written—controllable, caroiled, befallen, traveller, equalling; but fatled, botling, curled, &c., & before -ment | is not doubled; see also PARAL- LELED, WOOL.

2. When nouns or adjectives in -l (with exceptions as in 1) make adjectives by addition of -ed, -er, or -y, the J is doubled: flannelled, jeweller, gravelly; but see UNPARAL- LELED. Before -ish & -ism & -ist, lisnot doubled: devilish, liberalism, naturalist. Irregular superlatives vary, most using one J, but words in -ful always two: brutalest, loyalest, civil(lest, joyfullest.

8. The simple form of a good man verbs vacillates between -l & -ll, 4 no rule is possible that will secure the best form for all words & not conflict with strong usage for some; but it is perhaps safe to say that where such vacillation exists -U is better if a@ precedes (appall, befall, enthrall, install), & -l if another vowel, especially « (distil, instil, enrol, annul); verbs in -ll, however, take single t before -ment (enrolment, enthralment, instalment).

4. Derivatives & compounds of words in -ll sometimes drop one 0; so almighty, almost, already, alto- Bether, always, but not alright; chilblain; uff; skilful; thraldom; wilful. This is perhaps helped by some apparent but not real examples such as belfry, bulrush, bulwark, & walnut, which are not from bell, dull, & wall, Dul(l)ness & ful(l)ness are debatable; the older & much commoner spelling, but (according to the OED) the one less ‘in accordance with general analogies’ has only one l,

Lloyd’s, underwriters. So written, not -ds or ds’,

load, lode. In the compounds with stone & star it is usual to spell loadstone, but lodestar. The first element is the same, & is the ordinary load, of which the original sense was way,
