page: 333

+ totled to our prudence through a forest of delusions./Their behaviour in church was anything but reverential./ The matter is of transcendental importance, especially in the present disastrous state of the world.

It only remains to say that nothing in this article must be taken to countenance the shortening of such words as pacificist & quantitative. Examples of pacifist are needless; but it is worth while to record quantitive & authoritive; & see INTERPRE(TA)TIVE. Jt is as if the quantitive the of naval strategy held the field./ Her finely finished ee performance was of great value.

longways, -wise. See -ways.

looby. So spelt; see -Ey, -IE, -Y.

loom, v. For li. large(ly) see LARGE(LY).

loony, lunatic. So spelt; see eEY, -IE, -Y.

loose, loosen, vv. For the distinction, see -EN VERBS.

tur. Pronounce ld‘kwiter. L. is singular = speaks; cf. Exit for danger to non-latinists.

lord. Younger sons of Dukes & Marquises are spoken of by the title of Lord followed by Christian & family name, as Lord Arthur Smith. Omission of the Christian name is wrong; the permissible shortening is not Lord Smith, but Lord Arthur. For /. as an undress substitute for marquis, earl, viscount, see TITLES.

Lord Bacon is a mixture; the possible correct styles are Bacon, Francis Bacon, Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam, Lord or Viscount St Albans, of which the first is usually the best.

Lord Justice. Pl. Lords Justices.

lo - See -LiLy.

lordolatry. See -LATRY.

lorgnette. See FRENCH WorDs.

lose. L. no time in is a notoriously ambiguous phrase: No time should be lost in exploring the question. L. makes losable; see MUTE E.

lot. <A lot of peopte say so, Lots of paper is oanlcd, he. s see NUMBER. 883

loth. See LOATH.

Lothario. Pl. -03, see -o(E)s 8.

lotto. Pl. -03; see -O(E)s 3.

lotus. PI. “USES.

louden. See -EN VERBS.

lough. The Irish t. & the Scotch loch are pronounced alike, i.e. either anglicized as 16k, or with the breathed guttural instead of the -k. For l cf. HOUGH.

Louis, k. See FRENCH worRDs.

lour, lower. The meaning is frown. Spell lour & pronounce lowr. word is not connected with low & the other verb lower (l6’er), & it is a pity that it should be confused with that verb by the second spelling (the oldest forms are lour & lure) & so have its meaning narrowed & its oe altered. The con-

ion is due chiefly to the word’s being often applied to clouds.

louse, lousy. Pronounce lows, low’zi.

love. 1. Z. makes lovable; see Murs x. 2. For the scenes he loved so well &c., see HACKNEYED PHRASES, & STOCK PATHOS.

lovelily. See -LILy.

LOVE OF THE LONG WORD. It need hardly be said that shortness is @ merit in words; there are often reasons why shortness is not possible; much leas often there arc occasions when length, not shortness, is desirable; but it is a general truth that the short words are not only handier to use, but more powerful in effect; extra syllables reduce, not increase, vigour. This is particularly so in English, where the native words are short, & the long words are foreign. I open Paradise Lost & The Idylls of the King, & at each first opening there face me:— ‘Know ye not, then’ said Satan, fill’d with scorn; ‘ Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate For you, there sitting where ye durst not soar.’/ And in those days she made a little me call’d her song ‘ The Song of & Death’, And sang ut; sweetly could she make & sing. Fifty-six words, of which fifty-two
