page: 334

+ are monosyllables. Slightly selected passages, indeed, but such as occur on nearly every page; & these are not exercises in one-syllable words for teaching children to read; they are the natural as well as the best ways of saying what was to be said. Nor is it in verse only that good English runs to monosyllables; I open a new religious book, & find at once this passage about the Kingdom of Heaven:—IHis effort was, not to tell mankind about tt, but to show it to them; c& He said that those who saw it would be convinced, not Him, but by tt. ‘ To this end was 4 born, & for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.’ There for once he spoke in general & abstract terms. Those who are of the truth, those who seck truth for its own sake, will listen to Him & know that what he says ts true. Twelve words that are not monosyllables in 101 words; and there is no taint whatever of affected simplicity in it. Good English does consist in the main of short words. There are many good reasons, however, against any attempt to avoid, because it is a polysyllable, the word that will

ive our meaning best; what is here

eprecated is the tendency among the ignorant to choose, because it is a polysyllable, the word that gives their meaning no better or even worse. In the article Lonc vani- ANTS, examples are given of long forms chosen in place of shorter ones of the same word or stem. Attention is here confined to certain words frequently used where unrelated shorter ones would be better; they are doubtless chosen primarily not for their length, but because they are in vogue; but their vogue is in turn due to the pompous effect conferred by length. They are: mentality, meti » percentage, proportion, proposition, protagonist; there are many similar words, under which bare references to this article may be made; but these will serve

884

+ as types. A quotation or two will be given under each, & a fitter word offered. Mentality:—A twenty-foot

utt by Herreshoff at the twenty-fourth

ole did not help WHilton’s golfing mentality (nerve)./As regards the present treatment of prisoners, although there has doubtless been an improvement in some of the German camps, the general mentality towards prisoners is ingrained (mood)./No one has so wide a knowledge of Afghan politics & of the mentality of the Pathan (mind).

Meticulous:—These meticulous calculations of votes which have not yet been given rather disgust us (exact)./ Owing to a meticulous regard for the spirit of the party truce, their views have not been adequately voiced by their leaders (strict)./Most of the British & American proposals have been too vague & sentimental on the one hand & too elaborate & meticulous on the other (detailed).

Percentage:—Our tar revenue is now fully one hundred & sixty millions sterling, & the Single Land Taz would not yield more than a percentage of this (part; see also PERCENTAGE).

Proportion:—The greater proportion of these old hands have by this time already dropped out (part; see also PROPORTION).

Proposition:—F. Ouimet, who played so brilliantly yesterday, was the proposition the holder had to face (opponent)./The agriculturist asks that ‘corn-growing shall become a paying proposition ’ (job)./The future of the taximeter-cab proposition in

Metropolis presents a very interesting problem (trade).

Protagonist:—~The two great Western Powers whg have acted as protagonists the Allies in this war (leaders)./But most of the protagonists of this demand have since shifted their ground (champions).

A few lines of the long-word style we know so well are added: Vigorous c nation is passed on the foreign policy of the Prime Minister, * whose temperamental inaptitude for
