page: 335

+ diplomacy c& preoccupation with domestic issues have rendered his

icipation in external negotiations gravely detrimental to the public welfare’. Vigorousindecd; a charging hippopotamus hardly more so.

lovey. So spelt; see -ry, -I£, -yY.

lower, adj. 1. L. case, upper case, are printers’ names for small letters, capitals.

2. L. Empire is a name for the Roman Empire from the time of Constantine (A.D. 828-337), when the seat of empire was shifted from Rome to Constantinople, & Christianity became the State religion. Also called Later, Greek, Byzantine, & Eastern, Empire.

lower, lour. See LourR.

lowlily. See -.ILy.

loyal. For loyalest see -Er & -EST 4, “-LL-, -L- 2.

LU (pronunciation). There is clearly a movement going on in the pronunciation of this as li (ly06)) or 166. It was formerly de rigueur to put in the y sound; a lute, & even a flute, had to be called lat (i.e. lyoot) & flit (i.e. flyd6t), not loot &

6ot, or the speaker was damned in polite circles. And great numbers of good people count the victorious progress of 106 one of the vulgarities of modern speech; among these must be the OED, which goes so far as to prefer gifi or glydo to gloo for the pronunciation of glue, though it reverses this order for blue (b100, bla); for most of us anything but bl66 & gl60 is surely now impossible, however refined we like to be where the trials of articulation are less severe. ;

On a question of this sort anyone who is not entirely illiterate is sure to think that the line he is accustomed to draw between antic refinement & acceptance o i erro tendencies is the right line; & the individual view here given is subject to that discount; a view, however, must be given, for what it is worth;

& it is that 166 is slowly but surely

885

+ displacing li. It forces its way especially into accented syllables, as may seen by comparing ludicrous, voluminous, lubricate, salute, & dilute vb, in which 166 now

pila with interlude, volume,

criterias salutation, & dilute adj., in which Ila is either the only possible sound (as in volume, salutation) or the usual one. And again into common words more than into less used ones; compare salute (usually -00t) with volute (usually -ait); it is noticeable how the great currency of absolutely (& the emphasis on -ute-) due to its adoption as a colloquial counter has hastened the change to 106. The corresponding fastnesses of li are the unaccented syllable & the less used word. Points of a more special kind are: when a consonant precedes the I, 160 is almost universal (blue, fluent, &c.); when fr follows, it helps to preserve la (lure, lurid); a following syllabic with a din it naturally produces 160 by dissimilation even in the unaccented syllable of a not very common word (lugubrious, lucubration).

Some specimen lists follow, going from undisputed la to undisputed 160. 1 ara lai). Volume, salutary, cellulose, pilule. 2 (usually la). Lure, lurid, aluminium, interlude, lubricity, volute, dilute adj. 3 ea oag 166). Voluminous, lute, lupin, lunatic, illumine, lunar, Lucifer, collusion, delude, dissolute, evolution, lubricate, luminous, Lucy, absolute, salute, ludicrous, dilute vb, Lucian, Luke, lucre, lucubration, lugubrious, lukewarm, Lutheran. 4 (always 156). Blue, clue, glue, fluent, Pluvius, exclude, sluice.

Readers will differ about the assignment of these to the various groups; but, whether that is right or wrong, a glance at the words collected may help them to clear their minds on the point, & even possibly persuade some of them that the change to 160 has gone too far to be now stemmed. The advice offered is to accept 166 for all words in list 8 at least, & (these being
