page: 338

madness. For method tn m., see IRRELEVANT ALLUSION.

maelstrom. Pronounce ma’lstrom.

maenad. See 2, &.

maestoso, maestro. Pronounce mah-ést0’z6, maé’stré.

Magdalen(e). The spellings & pronunciations are tabulated at the end.

1. In the names of the Oxford (-en) & Cambridge (-ene) Colleges, pronounce maudlin.

2. In the use as a noun meaning reformed harlot &c., use magdalen.

3. When used with the instead of the name Mary M., the Magdalene (-én) & the Magdalen (-én) are equally correct.

4. In the full name Mary Magdalene the four-syllable pronunciation (magdalé’‘n!) is the best, though if it were Mary the Magdalene -lén would be right, as it is in the Magdalene, i.e. the famous person of Magdala. Magdalene may be regarded either as an English word = of Magdala, like Lampsacene, Cyzicene, Tyrrhene, &c., in which case the could not be omitted, or as the actual Greek feminine of Magdalenos become part of her name, in which case the final -e cannot be silent. Mary Magdalen, however, is also possible.

Magdalen (mau’dlin) Coll., Ozford

Magdalene (mau’dlin) Coll., Cambridge

A Home for magdalens (m&’gdalénz)

The Magdalene (-€n) or the Magdalen (-én)

Mary Magdalene (mfgdalé’nl) or Magdalen.

maggoty. So spelt; see -T-, -TT-.

magic(al), adjectives. See -1c(At). Magic tends to lose those adjective uses that cannot be viewed as mere attributive uses of the noun. That is, first, it is very seldom used predicatively; the effect was magical (never magic); the ring must be magical (not magic, though must be a magic one is better than a magical one). And, secondly, the chief nonpredicative use is in assigning a thing to the domain of magic (a magic ring, carpet, spell, crystal; the

+ magic art), or in distinguishing it from others & so helping its identification (magic lantern, square), rather than in giving its characteristics descriptively (with magical speed; what a magical transformation); this second differentiation, however, is not yet strictly observed.

magma. Pl. -mata.

Magna C(h)arta. Authority seems to be for spelling charfa & pronouncing kar’ta, which is hard on the plain man. But outside of histories & lecture-rooms the spelling & pronunciation charta will take a great deal of killing yet.

magnetize has -zable; see MUTE E.

magneto is a CURTAILED worD for magneto-electric machine; pl. -os, see -O(E)8 5.

magnifical is one of the words that one should be pleased to look upon, embalmed in old books, but should not play the resurrectionist to.

magnifico. Pl. -os; see -o(r)s 6.

magnify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

magus. Pi. -gi (-jf).

Magyar. Pronounce m6d’dyar.

maharaja(h). For the form see RAJAH.

mahlstick. See MAULSTICK.

Mahomet, Mohammedan, &c. Before making any statement on these words, I asked a middle-aged lady whom she understood by the Prophet of Allah; she hesitated, suspecting some snare, but being adjured to reply said quite plainly that he was Mahomet (ma’omét), & further called his followers Mfahometans (ma-hd’mftanz)—thus fulfilling expectations. The popular forms are Mahometi(an) (m@’omét or ma-hd’mit, ma-hdé’mitn);s the prevailing printed forms are Mohammed(an).

The worst of letting the learned gentry bully us out of our traditional Mahometan & Mahomet (who ever heard of Mohammed &: the mountain?) is this: no sooner have we tried to be good & learnt to say, or at least write, Mohammed than they are fired with zeal to get us a step or
