page: 339

two further on the path of truth,

which at present seems likely to end

in Muhammad with a dot under the

hs; see DIDACTICISM, PRIDE OF

KNOWLEDGE. The literary, as dis-

tinguished from the learned, eee

do good service when they side wit

tradition & the people against

science & the dons. Muhammad

should be left to the pedants, Mo-

hammed to historians & the like,

while ordinary mortals should go on

saying, & writing in newspapers &

novels & poems & such general

reader’s matter, what their fathers

said before them.

The fact is that we owe no thanks

to those who discover, & cannot

keep silence on the discovery, that

M is further than Mohammed,

& Mohammed further than Muham-

mad, from what his own ople called him. The Romans had a hero whom they spoke of as Aeneas: we call him that too, but for the French he has become Enée; are the French any worse off than we on that account? It is a matter of like indifference in itself whether the English for the Prophet’s name is Mahomet or Mohammed; in itself, yes; but whereas the words Aeneas & Enée have the Channel between them to keep the peace, Mahomet & Mohammed are for ever at loggerheads; we want one name for the one man; & the one should have been that around which the ancient associations cling. It is too late to recover unity; the learned, & their too docile disciples, have destroyed that, & given us nothing worth having in exchange.

mahout. Pronounce -owt,

matieutic. Pronounce miii’tikk or (OED) méii’thk. The word means performing midwife’s service (to thought or ideas); Socrates figured himself as a midwife (maia) bringing others’ thoughts to birth with his questionings; educative contains the same notion, but much overlaid with different ones, & the literary critic & the pedagogue consequently find m.

839

useful enough to pass in spite of its —

touch of pedantry.

Majesty, Highness, &c. When your

Majesty her Grace, &c., has been

used, & need arises for a pronoun or

possessive adjective to represent it,

mmar would require if, tts; but

instead of these either the full title ig

repeated (Your Majesty can do as

your Majesty will with your Ma jesty’s

ships), or you, our, she, her, ke., is

ungrammatically substituted for it

or tts (Her Grace summoned her chef).

ere veneon indeed writes: Your

ighness interprets my meaning with

his usual subtlety; but this is doubt.

less a mistaken imitation of the

French son or sa; meaning its (i.e.

highness’s), not his. The English

idiom, differing from & less correct

than the French, requires either your Highness’s, or your, usual subtlety.

major means greater, & those who like Pomposities are within their rights, & remain intelligible, if they call the greater part the major portion; they can moreover plead that major part & portion have been used by good writers in the times when pomposity was less noticeable than it now is. Those who do not like pomposities will call it the greater

art, & deserve our atitude, or at

east escape our dislike. J, who had described myself as ‘ sick of patriotism’... found myself unable to read anything but a volume the major portion of which consisted of patriotic verse.

major (in logic). See Tecanica, TERMS.

majordomo. Pl.-os: see -O(E)s 6.

major general. Hyphened when used as a prefix; properly written as two words (cf. court martial) when used as an independent noun: the Major General; Major-General Jones. See Hypnens (C, & on court martial &c.); but the prefix use, being very frequent, naturally corrupts the rarer noun form, and the hyphen is used indiscriminately. majority. 1. Distinctions of mean-
