page: 340

+ ing. 2. Number after m. 3. Great &c. m.

1. Three allied senses, one abstract & two concrete, nced to be distinguished if illogicalities are to be avoided; A, m. meaning asuperiority in number, or, to revive an obsolete unambiguous word, a plurity (... was passed by a bare, small, great, m.; the m. was scanty but sufficient); B, m. meaning the one of two or more sets that has a

lurity, or the more numerous party

The m. was, or were, determined to press its, or their, victory); C, m. meaning most of a set of persons, or the greater part numerically (The m. were ly wounded; A m. of my friends advise it).

2. Number. After m. in sense A the verb will always be singular. After m. in sense B, as after other nouns of multitude, either a singular or a plural verb is possible, according as the body is, or its members are, chiefly in the speaker’s thoughts. After m. in sense C, in which the thought is not of contrasted bodies at all, but merely of the numbers required to make up more than a half, the verb is almost necessarily plural, the sense being more people than not, out of those concerned. Correct has to have in: The awful happenings at Riga, where the majority of all the bourgeois has been either shot or killed by exposure to cold & starvation, are due to...

8. Great &c. m. With m. in sense A, great, greater, greatest, &c., are freely uscd, & cause no difficulty. With m. in sense B they are not often used, & then to give the special sense of party having a great, greater, plurity as compared with that enjoyed by some other (This great m. ts helpless; having the greatest m. of modern times devoted to him). With m. in sense C, great is possible & common, the great m. meaning most by far, much more than half; but the use of greater & greatest with it, as if m. meant merely part or number, is, though frequent, an_ illiterate blunder;

340

MALAPROPS examples of it are:—By far the greatest m. of American rails, apart from gambling counters, have gone across the Atlantic./The club ts representative of several hundreds, the greater m. of whom are repatriated Britishers from Russia./By far the larger m. of the entries are not words.

majuscule. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

make. M. him repeat it, very rarely to repeat; He must be made to repeat it, very rarely made repeat.

make-believe is the true form of the noun as well as the verb, & makebelief a false correction; to make believe has meant to pretend from the 14th c.

Malagasy. See MApAGascar.

MALAPROPS. When Mrs Malaprop, in Sheridan’s Rivals, is said to ‘ deck her dull chat with hard words which she don’t understand ’, she protests ‘ Sure, if I reprehend anything in this world, it is the use of my oracular tongue, & a nice derangement of epitaphs ’—having vague memories of apprehend, vernacular, arrangement, & epithets. She is now the matron saint of all those who go wordfowling with a blunderbuss. Achievements so heroic as her own do not here concern us; they pass the bounds of ordinary experience & of the credible. Her votaries are a feebler folk; with them malaprops come single spies, not in battalions, one in an article, perhaps, instead of four in a sentence, & not marked by her bold originality, but monotonously foHowing well beaten tracks. In the article Pairs & sNARES a number of words is given with which other words of not very different sound are commonly confused, & under most of the separate words contained in that list illustrations will be found; predict & predicate, reversal & reverston, masterful & masterly, will suffice here as examples. Another kind of malaprop, in which two words are confused rather in construction than in meaning, is dealt with in OBJECT-8SHUFFLING 3; sub-
