page: 342

manducate makes -cable; see

| human race, but the first for the “ABLE 1.

manes, spirit of dead rson. Pronounce ma’néz; a plural noun, with plural construction though singular in sense.

mangel, mangold. The first is ‘in English the now prevailing form’ (OED), &, as it is not less significant to the Englishman, & nearer the pronunciation, than the original German manpold, it is as well that it should continue to prevail.

mango. Pl. -oes; see -o(F£)s 1.

mangrove. Pronounce mi’‘nggrov; neither man nor grove is an element in the word.

mangy. So spelt; see -Ey & -y.

Manichee. Pronounce -ké.

manifesto. Pl. -os; see -0(E)s 7.

manifoid. Pronounce m&n-, not mén-. Owing to this difference in pronunciation between m. & many, the word is no longer felt to be a member of the serics twofold, threefold, thirtyfold, a hundredfold, & attempts to treat it as such result in unidiomatic English; it is better to coin many-fold for the occasion (cf. BUSINESS, BUSYNESS) than to imitate the writers of the quotations below. Both the uses illustrated in them are called obsolete by the OED, & the revival of them after centuries of dormancy is perhaps accounted for by the adaptation of the ‘now literary > word to a commercial use in manifold writing, & its consequent popularization. Such elimination would recoup that expense, manifold, by the saving which it would effect of food valuable to the nation—namely, salmon./This organization in capable hands should repay in manifold the actual funds ravsed on its behalf.

manikin. So spelt by the OED.

Manil(lja. ‘The form Manila is correct, but rare except in gco-

aphical use’—OED. The estab-

ished -lla is recommended.

manipulate has -lable; see -ABLE 1.

mankind. Accent the second syllable for the ordinary sense of the

+ special sense of the males of a family &c.

MANNERISMS. Mannerism_ consists in the allowing of a form of speech that has now & again served us well to master us.

Pater has a so:— Ubiquitous, tyrannous, irresistible, as if may seem, motion, with the whole so dazzling world it covers, is—nothing./Himself so striking an instance of mobile humour in his exposure of the unreality of all movement, Zeno .. ./ Once for all, in harshest dualism, the only true yet so barren existence is opposed to the world of phenomena./ In the midst of that aesthetically so brilliant world of Greater Greece.

Macaulay has an antithesis:—In some points it has been fashioned to suit our feelings; in others, it has gradually fashioned our feelings to suit ilself./At first they were only robbers; they soon rose to the dignity of conquerors./To enjoin honesty, & to insist on having what could not be honestly got, was then the constant practice of the Company./A system which was, perhaps, skilfully contrived for the purpose of facilitating & concealing a great revolution, but which, when that revolution was complete & irrevocable, could produce nothing but inconvenience.

Carlyle has two superlatives:—A. It is ai sublime embodiment, or sublimest, of the soul of Christianitty./ A mild pale splendour here & there, as of an April that were leading to leaficst summer./Sublime sorrore, sublime reconciliation; oldest choral melody as of the heart of mankind./ B. Siz hundred irresponsible senators would make of all tyrannies the insupportablest./Z think it ws the mournfullest face that ever was painted from reality. It ts perhaps of all things the usefullest for us to do tn these loud times.

Bagehot has a_ repetition:—He gave politics not an interesting aspect, but a new aspect./All these powers were States of some magnitude, &
