page: 345

said, to the m., advantage of the

former.

materialize. 1. M. makes -zable;

see MUTE E. 2. The word has uses

enough of its own yreore who would

m. spirit. A soul materialized by

Bluttony. Virgil having materialized

a scheme of abstracted notions. Ghosts

or promises of ghosts which fail to m.)

without being forced to do the work

of happen or be fulfilled or form:—

There would seem to be some ground

for hope that the strike will not m,

after all./Year after year passed &

these promises failed to m. /Out of the

mist of notes & protocols a policy

seems gradually to be materializing).

In these latter senses m. is on the

level of transpire (happen), proposi-

tion (job), eventuate (happen), nego-

tiate (pass), unique (notable), indi-

vidual (man), & such abominations,

matériel. See FRENCH worpDs; in

antitheses with personnel, expressed

or implied, the French spelling &

pronunciation should be kept, & not

replaced by those of the English

material.

mathematics. For the grammatical number, see -1cs 2,

matinée. As morning performance has the double disadvantage of being very long & suggesting a wrong time of day, m. is likely to prevail.

matins, matt-. The OED treats matins as the standard form. For m. & morning prayer, see MORNING,

matriculate makes -lable; see “ABLE 1,

matrix. For pl. see -rx, -Ix, 4, & -TRIX.

matter. The distribution shows that, as exceptional bravery is confined to no rank in the Army, so recognition ts given to it by no matter whom tt 1s displayed. If elliptical phrases like no matter who are to be treated freely as units, care must be taken that the ellipsis can be filled in correctly. By it is no matter whom tf is displayed is wrong, & it is no matier by whom it is displayed is right; accordingly the order should

MAXILLA

be no matter by whom. The principle

is—by all means save your reader

the trouble of reading more words

than he need, but do not save your-

self the trouble of rehearsing the

full form by way of test. The real

cause of the mistake here ig the

superstition against prepositions at

the end; no matter whom it is dis-

played by would have been correct;

ut the writer was frightened at his

final preposition, made a grab at it,

& plumped it down in a wrong

place; see SUPERSTITIONS, & OUT

OF THE FRYING-PAN. The offence is

aggravated by the inevitable im-

pulse to connect by with ts given.

mattress. So spelt, not -ass.

matutinal. Chiefly in Porysyt-

LABIC HUMOUR. Here they were

found by a m. gardener.

maty, comrade. So spelt; see

-EY, -IE, -y.

maudlin. So spelt, not -ing; the

origin is the name MAGDALEN.

maugre. See WARDOUR STREET.

maulstick. The OED gives this,

not mahl-, as the standard form.

maunder, meander. Though the etymology of maunder is uncertain, it is clear that it is not a corruption of meander, its earlier sense being definitely to complain, growl, grouse, But it is also clear from the wa some people use meander that they take the two words to be merely variant pronunciations. Meander means to follow a winding course, was originally used of rivers, is stil! often so used, describes frequent but not violent change of direction rather than aimlessness, & is applied more often to actual locomotion than to vagaries of the tongue, Maunder is best confined to speech. & suggests futility rather than digression, dull discontent rather than quiet enjoyment, & failure to reach an end rather than loitering on the way to it. Mauser. Pronounce mow ‘zer. mauvals sujet, quart d’heure, mauvaise honte. See FRENCH WoORDs. 345 maxilla. Pl. -liae.
