page: 346

maximum. Pl. -ma, sometimes

| verb: My means were (never was) -mums.

maybe (=perhaps) has entered upon its third phase of existence. It was long ago normal English, as natural as perhaps, or more so. It then became a novelistic property, the recognized rustic or provincial substitute for perhaps. Having acquired, during this rustication, a certain unfamiliarity, it has now emerged stylishly archaic, so that perhaps & m. are a pair of WORKING & STYLISH woRDs. The following quotation shows this use or abuse: But no-one imagines that we are not on the eve of an exciting & maybe embittered controversy. The word has still however, a real function— to replace perhaps in a context whose tone demands a touch of primitive dignity; so Our Lord speaking quite simply to simple Syrian people, a child or two maybe at his knees.

mazedly. Threesyllables; sece-EDLY.

me is technically wrong in It wasn’t me&c: but, the phrase being of its very nature colloquial, such a lapse is of no importance; & this is perhaps the only temptation to use me instead of J. There is more danger of using J for me, especially when & me is required after another noun or pronoun that has taken responsibility for the grammar & has not a separate objective case; between you & I, let you & I try, are not uncommon (see BETWEEN, LET), &: Sir,—A rich friend of ours wrote & asked my husband & I to dine at the most expensive restaurant & go to the theatre on his birthday.

meagre makes meagrish; see MUTE E. See also -RE & -ER.

meal) (flour. See Flour.

mealies. The singular (chiefly in combinations as m.-field, m. porridge) is mealie, not -ly, the etymological connexion being not with meal & mealy, but with millet.

mean, adj., makes meanness.

meander. See MAUNDER.

means, n. (number). In the sense income &c., m. always takes a plural

+ much reduced. In the sense way to an end &c.: a means takes singular verb; means, & the means, can be treated as either singular or plural; all means (pl.) & every means (sing.) are equally correct; the means do nol, or does not, justify the end; the end is good, but the means are, or is, bad; such means are (not is) repugnant to me, because such without a is necessarily plural; cf. such a means is not to be discovered; & similarly with other adjectives, as secret means were found, but @ secret means was found.

measure. Lord Curzon’s policy has been overthrown by the present an nouncement, which to a great measure restores Bengal to her former greatness. To a great extent, but in great measure; see CAST-IRON IDIOM.

measure, v., makes -rable; see MUTE E.

measuredly. Three syllables; see -EDLY.

meatus. Pl. meatus (-is; see -us), or “Uses,

medal makes -lled, -llist; see *LL-, -L-.

medi(a)eval. The shorter spelling is recommended; see #4, @.

mediatize. 1. To m. a ruler is to reduce him to dependence on another State, but without changin his titular dignity. The word originated in the Holy Roman Empire, & meant that the prince now owed mediate (i.e. indirect) allegiance instead of immediate to the Emperor, 2, M. makes -zable; see MUTE E,

mediatrix. For pl. see -rrix.

medicate makes -cable; see -ABLE 1.

medicine. Two syllables (mé’dsn).

mediocre. Pronounce mé’didker.

meditate makes -itable, -tor; see “ABLE lI, -OR.

Mediterranean. So spelt.

medium. In the _ spiritualistic sense, the plural is always -ums. In all other senses—intervening or enveloping substance, element, liquid vehicle, means or agency, -a &
