page: 347

+ -ums are both in use, & -a seems to be the commoner. See -uM.

medlar (fruit). So spclt.

meerschaum. So spclt.

meet. For we are met together &c., see INTRANSITIVE P.P.

mein Herr. See MYNHEER.

meiosis. Pl. -oses (-éz). For the meaning, see TECHNICAL TERNS.

mélange. See FRENCH worDs.

mélée (mé18). So spelt, accented, & pronounced.

meliorate, -ation, are common in American usage; the British forms are amel-.

melodeon, -dion, -dium. The first appears to be the prevalent spelling.

melodrama is a term generally used with some contempt, because the “as saber of such plays as are acknowledged to deserve the titlc is especially to the unsophisticated & illiterate whose acquaintance with human nature is superficial, but whose admiration for goodness & detestation of wickedness is ready &

werful. The melodramatist’s task is to get his characters labelled good & wicked in his audience’s minds, & to provide striking situations that shall provoke & relieve anxieties on behalf of poetic justice. Whether a play is or is not to be called a melodrama is therefore often a doubtful question, upon which different critics will hold different opinions. The origin of the name is in a form of la intermediate

between opera, in which all is sung,

& drama, in which music has no

essential part; the early m. was

‘a form of dramatic musical com-

position in which music accom-

panied the spoken words & the

action, but in which there was no

singing. . . . This is the source of ams ——

Tomantic dramas depending on

sensational incident with exagger-

ated appeals to conventional senti-

ment rather than on play of char-

acter, & in which dramatts personae

follow conventional types—the vil-

lain, the hero wrongfully charged

With crime, the persecuted heroine, —————_——_

+ the adventuress, &c.’—Enc. Brit, What the m. now so called inherits from the early form is the appeal to emotion; the emotional effect of musical accompaniment is obvious, & it is on emotional sympathy that m. still depends for success, ,

melody) (harmony. See HARMONY.

melt. Molten as in the verbal use (will be molten &c.) is now confined to poetry; as an adjective (like molten glass &c.) it can still be used without archaism, but only in literary contexts.

membership. The scnse number of members (of a club &c.) is, thoug not a very desirable one, more or less established (The necessity of adding to the m. of the House; A large m. ts necessary). Much less desirable still is the extension from number of members to members (the Committee being chosen from the m. of the two Houses of Parliament./The employers’ proposals may be distasteful to a large section of our m.); needless substitution of the abstract for the concrete is one of the surest roads to flabby style.

membran(e)ous. There is no difference of meaning; the -nous form is recommended.

memento. Pl.-os; see-o(E)s6. The word is sometimes sounded miémé’ntS by the ignorant.

memorandum. PI. -da; see -UM.

memorize has -zable; see MUTE E.

ménage. See FRENCH WORDS.

menagerie. Pronounce min&‘jerl, & not as French.

mendacity, mendicity. The first is the conduct of a liar, the second that of a beggar.

meninx. Pl. usu. meninges.

meningitis. See GREEK G.

menstruum. PI. -wa.

ement. For differences between this & -ion, see -ION & -MENT. The stems to which -ment is normally appended are those of verbs; freaks like oddment & funniment should not be made a precedent of; they are themselves due to misconception of merriment, which is not from the
