page: 349

+ some metaphors are living, i.e., are offered & accepted with a consciousness of their nature as substitutes for their literal equivalents, while others are dead, i.e., have been so often used that speaker & hearer have ceased to be aware that the words used are not literal; but the line of distinction between the live & the dead is a shifting one, the dead being sometimes liable, under the stimulus of an affinity or a repulsion, to galvanic stirrings indistinguishable from life. Thus, in The men were sifting meal we have a literal use of sift; in Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat, sift is a live metaphor; in the sifting of evidence, the m. is 80 familiar that it is about equal chances whether sifting or examina- Hon will be used, & that a sieve is not present to the thought—unless indeed someone conjures it up by saying All the evidence must first be sifted with acid tests, or with the microscope— ; under such a stimulus our m. turns out to have been not dead but dormant; the other word, ezamine, will do well enough as an example of the real stone-dead m.; the tin examino, being from examen the tongue of a balance, meant originally to weigh; but, though weighing is not done with acid tests or microscopes any more than sifting, ezamine gives no convulsive twitches, like sift, at finding itself in their company; examine, then, is dead m., & sift only half dead, or three-quarters.

2. Some pitfalls: A. Unsustained m,; B. Overdone m.; C. Spoilt m. ; D. Battles of thedead. E. Mixed m.

2. A. Unsustained m. He was still an the middle of those 20 years of neglect which only began to lift in 1868. The plunge into m. at life, which presupposes a mist, is too sudden after the litcral 20 years of neglect; years, even gloomy years, do not lift./The means of education at the disposal of the Protestants & stunted & sterilized. The means at Presbyterians of the North were

+ disposal names something too little vegetable or animal to consort with the metaphorical verbs. Education (personified) may be stunted, but means may not./The measure of Mr Asquith’s shame does not consist in the mere fact that he has announced his intention to . . . Metaphorical measuring, like literal, requires a more accommodating instrument than a stubborn fact.

2. B. Overdone m. The days are perhaps past when a figure was deliberately chosen that could be worked out with line upon line of relentless detail, & the following well known specimen is from Richardson:—Tost to & fro by the high winds of passionate control, I behold the desired port, the single state, into which I would fain steer; but am kept off by the foaming billows of a brother’s & sister's envy, & by the raging winds of a supposed invaded authority; while I see in Lovelace, the rocks on one hand, & in Solmes, the sands on the other; & tremble, lest I should split upon the former or strike upon the latter.

The present fashion is rather to develop a metaphor only by way of burlesque. All that need be asked of those who tend to thia form of satire is to remember that, while some metaphors do seem to deserve such treatment, the number of times that the same joke can safely be made, even with variations, is limited; the limit has surely been exceeded, for instance, with ‘ the long arm of coincidence’; what proportion may this triplet of quotations bear to the number of times the thing has been done?—The long arm of coincidence throws the Slifers into Mercedes’s Cornish garden a little too heavily./The author does not strain the muscles of coincidence’s arm to bring them into relation./ Then the long arm of coincidence rolled up its sleeves & set to work with a rapidity & vigour which defy description.

Modern overdoing, apart from; burlesque, is chiefly accidental, &
