page: 350

+ results not from too much care, but from too little: The most irreconcilable of Irish landlords are beginning to recognize that we are on the eve of the dawn of a new day in Ireland. On the eve of is a dead m., for about to experience, & to complcte it with the dawn of a day is as bad as to say It cost one pound sterling, ten, for one Viger ten.

2.C. Spoilt m. The essential merit of real or live m. being to add vividness to what is to be conveyed, it need hardly be said that accuracy of detail is even more needed in metaphorical than in literal expressions; the habit of m., however, & the habit of accuracy do not always go together:— Yel Jaurés was the Samson who upheld the pillars of the Bloc./Yet what more distinguished names does the Anglican Church of the last reign boast than those of F. D. Maurice, Kingsley, Stanley, Robertson of Brighton, d& even, if we will draw our net a@ little wider, the great Arnold?/He was the very essence of cunning, & the incarnation of a book-thief. Samson’s way with pillars was not to uphold them; we draw nets closer, but cast them wider; & what is the incarnation of a thief?: too, too solid flesh indecd!

2. D. Battles of dead metaphors. In The Covenanters took up arms there is no m.; in The Covenanters flex to arms there is one only—flew to for quickly took up—; in She flew to arms in defence of her darling there are two, the arms being now metaphorical as well as the flying; moreover, the two metaphors are separate ones; but, being dead ones, & also not inconsistent with each other, they lie together quictly enough. But dead metaphors will not lie quietly together if there was repugnance between them in life; e’en in their ashes live their wonted fires, & they get up & fight:—Ji is tmpossible to crush the Government’s aim to restore the means of living & working freely. Crush for baffle, aim for purpose, are both dead metaphors so long as they are kept apart;

850

+ but the juxtaposition forces on us the thought that you cannot crush an aim./National military training ts the bedrock on which alone we can hope to carry through the great Struggles which the future may have in store for us. Bedrock & carry through are both moribund or dormant, but not stone-dead./The vogue of the motor-car seems destined to help forward the provision of good road communication, a feature whick is sadly in arrear. Good road communication may be a feature, & it may be in arrear, & yet a feature cannot be in arrear; things that are equal to the same thing may be equal to each other in geometry, but language is not geometry./They are eyphers living under the shadow of a great man.

2. IK. Mixed metaphors. For the examples given in D, tasteless wordselection is a fitter description than mixed m., since each of the words that conflict with others is not intended as a m. at all. Mized m. is more appropriate when one or both of the terms can only be consciously metaphorical. Little warning is needed against it; it is so conspicuous as scidom to get into speech or print undetected. This is not the time to throw up the sponge, when the enemy, already weakened & divided, are on the run to a new defensive position. A mixture of prize-ring & battle-field.

In the following extract from a specch it is difficult to be sure how many times metaphors are mixed; readers versed in the mysteries of oscillation may be able to decide:— No society, no community, can place ils house in such a condition that it is always on a rock, oscillating between Solvency & insolvency. What I have to do is to see that our house ts built upon a solid foundation, never allowing the possibility of the Society’s life-blood being sapped, Just in

roportion as you are careful in

oking after the condition of your income, just in proportion as you deal with them carefully, will the solidarity
