page: 351

+ of the Society’s financial condition remain intact. Immediately you begin to play fast & loose with your income the first blow at your financial stability will have been struck.

38. Self-consciousness & mixed m. The gentlemen of the Press regularly devote a small percentage of their time to accusing each other of mixing metaphors or announcing that they are themselves about to do so (What a mizture of metaphors! If we may mix our metaphors, or change the m.), the offence apparently being not to mix them, but to be unaware that you have done it. The odd thing is that, whether he is on the offensive or the defensive, the writer who ventures to talk of mixing metaphors often shows that he does not know what mixed m. is. Two typical examples of the offensive follow:—The Scotsman says: “The crowded benches of the Ministerialists contain the germs of disintegration. A more ill-assorted majority could hardly be conceived, & presently the Opposition must realize of what small account is the maneuvring of the Frec-Fooders or of any other section of the party. If the sling be only properly handled, the new Parliamentary Goliath will be overthrown eastly enough. The stone. for the sling must, however, be found on the Ministerial side of the House, & not on the Opposition side’. Apparently the stone for the sling will be a germ. But doubtless mized feelings lead to mixed metaphors./ ‘ When the Chairman of Committees —a politician of their own hue— allowed Mr Maddison to move his amendment in favour of secular education, a decision which was not quite in accordance with precedent, the

dgates of sectarian controversy were opened, & the apple of discord— the endowment of the gospel of Cowper-Temple—was thrown into the midst of the House of Commons.’ What a mixture of metaphor! One pictures this gospel-apple battling with the stream released by the opened foodgates. 351

In the first passage, we are well rid of the germs before we hear of the sling, & the mixture of metaphors is quite imaginary. Since literal benches often contain literal germs, but crowded benches & germs of disintegration are here separate metaphors for a numerous party & tendencies to disunion, our critic had ready to his hand in the first sentence, if he had but known it, something much more like a mixture of metaphors than what he mistakes for one. In the second passage, the floodgates & the apple are successive metaphors, unmixed; the mixing of them is done by the critic himself, not by the criticized; & as to gospel. apple, by which it is hinted that the mixture is triple, the original writer had merely mentioned in the gospel phrase the thing compared

y the side of what it is compared to, as when one explains the Athens of the North by adding Edinburgh.

Writers who are on the defensive apologize for change & mizture of metaphors as though one was as bad as the other; the two things are in fact entirely different; a man may change his metaphors as often as he likes; it is for him to judge whether the result will or will not be unpleasantly florid; but he should not ask our leave to do it; if the result is bad, his apology will not mend matters, & if it is not bad no apology was called for. On the other hand, to mix metaphors, if the mixture is real, is an offence that should not have been apologized for, but avoided. Whichever the phrase, the motive is the same—mortal fear of being accused of mixed m. :—

. « « Showed that Free Trade could provide the jam without recourse being had to Protective food-tuxes; neat came a period in which (to mix our metaphors) the jam was a nice slice of tariff pie for everybody; but then came the Edinburgh Compromise, by which the jam for the towns was that there were to be... When jam is used in three successive sentences in its hackneyed sense of consolation,
