page: 354

lain from the quotations below. t should have been a negative complement to punctilious, the two covering between them the positive accuracy that omits no detail & the negative accuracy that admits no error. The journalist enjoys a laugh at the man in the street with his ‘ chronic’ for serious; but his own m. for exact lays him open to the same charge of leaving out the essential meaning of a word & using it promiscuously whether it is applicable or not; had he not better consent to its being relegated to the list of SuPERFLUOUs worDs? In the long collection of examples, the first illustrates fairly the legitimate sense in which shrinking from any possible wrens element is the

int; the last is ludicrous in that it excludes not merely the idea of fear, but even that of care; & the intermediate ones are arranged roughly in a descent from the less bad to the worse:—Jt will be good for the New Englanders to contemplate Mr Joseph Southall’s quiet & m. craftsmanship, as in ‘ Tadmarton . (38)./That on the French artillery, with its plea for less m. care & more simplicity in our own batteries, should

be read & digested by . . ./Japanese

writers have not yet uired either

the methods of our art criticism or the

m. attention to detail which our habits

demand./Should any English reader

think that the question of ‘ sources’

is somewhat too meticulously studied,

let him turn to... /With the aid of the

prodigious & m. survey being made

under the famous, much-abused ‘ Fin-

ance (1909-10) Act, 1910’, an en-

tirely new method will be adopted of

treating the soil./Gone is the wealth

of m. detail with which he loved to

claborate his finely finished pictures./

More complete & satisfying, from

their breadth & directness, their superb

amplitude of handling, & from the

absence of the m. detail with which

the master might have overlaid them./

Who know how their output is affected

by minor wage disputes, by the m.

indecisive criticism of Admiralty

+ inspectors, by shortage of men & of material./We are told that in 1909-10 there were approximately 10300 (observe the m. 300) super-men./There was nothing to indicate that the actor did more than carry out admtrably the

clever ideas of the author—an author, by the way, who happens to be very m. about having his ideas carried out./With method, with meticulousness, with machinery, . . . with the terrorism of bombs, poison gases, & outrages according to programme, decadent nations were to be taught the might of the Hohenzollern ‘ kultur ’./ Mr , who has succumbed to the wounds inflicted upon him ten days previously by a pet lion, had his fate foretold with m. accuracy more than 2000 years ago by the greatest Greek dramatist.

métier. See FRENCH WORDS.

metonymy. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

ard The OED gives three syllables (mé’top!); disyllabic pronunciation (mé’tdp) as in French is perhaps equally common; _ but cf. epitome, strophe, of dpe catastrophe, as analogous Greek words.

metre, -ter. See -RE & -ER.

mews, originally a plural, but now used freely as singular with a, is best

provided with a fresh plural mewses.

mezzanine. See FLOOR.

mezzo-rilievo. Pl. -os, see -0(E)s 6.

The above is the Italian spelling, &

the corresponding pronunciation is

mé’dzé rilya’vd; if the spelling is,

as often, corrupted to rel-, pro-

nounce mé’dz6 rile’vé.

mezzotint. Pronounce médz-.

miaow, miaul. It is better to be

content with mew & caterwaul than

to multiply phonetic approxima-

tions,

miasma. Pl. usually -ata.

mickle & muckle are merely

variants of the same word, & the

not uncommon version Many a

mickle makes a muckle is a blunder;

the right forms are Many a little

(or Mony a pickle) makes a mickle

(or muckle), with other slight

variations.
