page: 355

+ SCHIZOMYCETES.

mid has superl. midmost; mid air should not hyphened, see Hy- PHENS,

middle. MM. class is hyphened as an adjective (middle-class education), but not as a noun (belongs to the middle class); see HyPuHENs. For middle (article) & middle voice see TECHNICAL TERMS,

ly). The -ly is unusual & undesirable: a middling good crop; did middling well; it went only middling. See UNIDIOMATIC -LY.

midwifery. Three syllables; mif’dwifri is perhaps usual, but both mli‘dwifr! & mi’difrI are also heard; cf, HOUSEWIFE.

mighty. In the colloquialism m. fine &c., mightily should not be substituted; see UNIDIOMATIC -LyY.

mignon, migraine. See FRENCH WORDS.

- Pl. -os3 see -o(E)s 6.

milage. So spelt; see MUTE E.

milden. See -EN VERBS.

Milesian (Irish) is now chiefly a resource of the ELEGANT VARIA- TIONIST; see also POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

millenarian, of the, believer in the, millennium. The apparent inconsistency in spelling (-n-, -nn-) results from the fact that millenarian, like millenary, does not contain the stem of the Latin annus year, which is present in millennium; if it were formed from millennium, the form would be millenniarian; millenarian strictly means thousander, not thousand-yearer. Cf. CENTENARY.

millenary. The OED pronounces mi‘linarl; but see CENTENARY.

millennium. PI. -ms, -ia; see -uM.

milli-. See KILO-.

milliard means a thousand millions;

it is chiefly a French term, though

perhaps advancing in general cur-

tency. In France it is the equi-

valent in ordinary use for the

mathematical French (which differs

from the English) BILLION.

1. Am. & a@ quarter, two millions & a half, rather than one & a quarter million(s) & two & a half millions; see HALF.

2. It is safe to say, therefore (adds the ‘ Times’), that the total is considerably less than 24 millions,

h it must be well over 14 million. This change from 2} millions to 14 million is wrong (see ONE) unless 1} million is meant merely for the printed form that is to be said as ‘a million & a half’,

8. Forty-five million people rather than forty-five millions of people (on the analogy of dozen, score, hundred, & thousand); but, with a few & many, millions of is perhaps the more usual form.

4 Amongst the eight million are a few hundred to whom this does not apply rather than millions, hundreds; but He died worth three millions rather than million; this because ‘a million’ is an established noun (as distinguished from a mere numeral) in the sense £1,000,000, but not in the sense a million people.

Milly. So spelt; see -Ey, -IE, -y.

milor(d). See FRENCH WORDS.

mimic, vb, makes -cked, -cking; see -C-, -CK-.

minacious, minatory. Both words smack of pedantry; but while the first is serviceable only for Poty- SYLLABIC HUMOUR, the second is not out of place in a formally rhetorical context.

mince, vb, makes -ceable; see MUTE E.

mine. For (my or) mine & your future depends upon u &c., see ABSOLUTE POSSESSIVES.

mine, vb, has -nable; see MUTE E.

mineralogy is a syncopated form (the syncopation done in French) for mineralology, & should not be quoted in defence of proposed wrong forms in -alogy; cf. pacifist.

minify, minimize, diminish. Minify is a badly formed & little used word; it owes its existence to the desire for 5 MINIFY a neat opposite to the correctly
