page: 357

+ min-, though the i is long in Greek & Latin; but see FALSE QUANTITY.

mint sauce should not be hyphened if the stress is on the second word, as it usually is; see HYPHENS.

minuscule. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

miocene. A typical example of the monstrosities with which scientific men in want of a labcl for something, & indifferent to all beyond their own province, defile the language. The elements of the word are Greek, but not the way they are put together, nor the meaning demanded of the compound. See HYBRID DERIVATIVES (w.f.).

misalliance, though formed after the French mésalliance, is so natural an English word that it is free of the taint of gallicism, & should always be preferred to the French spelling.

MISAPPREHENSIONS of 3 which many writers need to disabuse themselves. Discussion of each will be found under the word printed in small capitals.

That a DEVIL’s advocate, or advocatus diaboli, is a tempter or the like.

That & PERCENTAGE is asmall part.

That a LEADING QUESTION is a searching one.

That cur BONO? means What is the good or use?

That One roucH of nature makes the whole world kin means much the same as A fellow-feeling makes one wondrous kind,

That po.ity is a scholarly word for policy.

That more HoNOoURed in the breach than the observance means more often broken than kept.

That rk means clan or the like.

That arithmetical, & geometrical, PROGRESSION mean fast, & very fast, progress.

That the comity of nations means the members of a sort of league.

That any order of words that avoids a SPLIT INFINITIVE is better than any that involves it.

That PROPORTION is & sonorous im-

provement on part.

That SUBSTITUTE is an improve- 857

+ ment on replace in the sense take the place of.

That PROTAGONIST is an improvement on champion & leader.

That an EXCEPTION strcongthens a rule.

That good writers do not end a sentence with a PREPOSITION.

That FRANKENSTEIN was a@ monster.

miscegenation.

See Hysrip DE- RIVATIVES (w.f.).

miscellany. Pronounce mil’selanl! or misé‘lani; the OED puts the former first, & RECESSIVE ACCENT is in its favour.

mise-en-scéne. See FRENCH WORDS.

miserere, misericord, hinged seat. The first is labelled an incorrect form in the OED.

misogynist. See GREEK G.

MISPRINTS TO BE GUARDED AGAINST. Adverse & averse, deprecate & depreciate, inculcate & inoculate, interpellate & interpolate, principal & principle, recourse & resource & resort, risible & visible, -tion & -tive (e.g. a corrective & a correction), are common confusions worth providing against by care in writing & vigilanee in proof-correcting. Concensus (non-existent) appears perhaps more often than the real word consensus, & to signal out (non-existent in the sense meant) more often than to single out.

MISQUOTATION. The correct words of a few familiar sayings that are more often wrongly than rightly quoted may be useful. The misquoting of phrases that have survived on their own merits out of little-read authors (e.g. of Fine by degrees &c. from Prior, usually changed to Small &c.) is a very venial offence; & indeed it is almost a pedantry to use the true form instead of so established a wron one; it would be absurd to deman that no-one should ever use a trite quotation without testing its verbal accuracy. Again, the established change made in the Leave-not-a-
