page: 358

+ MISQUOTATION rack-behind quotation by shifting the baseless fabric of a vision from some lines earlier into the place of another phrase that does not suit general use so well, though most people no doubt make it without knowing what they are doing, might reasonably enough be made knowingly, & is no offence. Examples of these two kinds are placed at the end of the list. But when a quotation comes from such a source as a well-known play of Shakspere, or Lycidas, or the Bible or Prayer Book, to give it wrongly at least requires excuse, & any great prevalence of such misquotation would prove us discreditably ignorant of our own literature. Nevertheless, such words as A poor thing, but my own, are often so much more used than the true form that their accuracy is sure to be taken for granted unless occasional attempts like the present are made to draw attention to them.

In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread (not brow).

To gild refined gold, to paint the lily (not gild the lily).

Pride goeth before destruction, & an haughty spirit before a fall (not pride before a fall).

Screw your courage to the stickingplace (not potnt).

I will a round unvarnished tale deliver.

An ill-favoured thing, sir, but mine own (not poor).

Let not him that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that putteth it off (not pulteth on).

That last infirmity of noble mind (not minds).

Make assurance double sure (not doubly).

Tomorrow to fresh woods & pastures new (not ficlds).

The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose (not quote).

A goodly apple rotten at the heart (not core).

Chewing the food of sweet & bitter fancy (not cud).

I am escaped with the skin of my teeth (not by). 358

eMe 9 -MM

And, like this insubstantial pageant faded, Leave not a rack behind.

Passing rich with forty pounds a year.

He that complies against his will Is of his own opinion still.

Fine by degrees & beautifully less.

When Greeks joined Grecks, then was the tug of war.

Miss. The Misses Smith &c. is the old-fashioned plural, still used when formality is required, e.g. in printed lists of guests present &c,;_ elsewhere the Miss Smiths is now usual.

mis-shapen &c. The hyphen is usual in compounds of mis- with words pesinnng with s.

missile. Usually pronounced -il.

missis. See MISTRESS.

missy. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

mistake makes -kable; see MUTE E. For the p.p. meanings in error &c., see INTRANSITIVE P.P.

mistaken makes -nness.

mistral. See wIND, n.

mistress. The title Mrs is pronounced ml’siz; the noun missis (joc. or illit. for wife) is pronounced ml’sIs.

mite makes mity; see -EY & -y.

mitigate makes -gable, -tor; see -ABLE Il, -OR.

mitrailleuse. See FRENCH WORDS.

mitre, -ter. See -rE & -ER.

mixed metaphor. See METAPHOR.

miz(z)en. he OED treats mizen as the standard form.

-M-, -MM-. Monosyllables ending in m double it before suffixes beginning with a vowel if it is preceded by a single vowel (a, e, i, 0, u, or y), but not if it is preceded by a diphthong or a doubled vowel or a vowel & r: hammy, gemmed, dimmest, drummer; but claimant, gloomy, worm Words of more than one syllable follow the rule for monosyllables if their last syllable is a word in composition, as bedtmmed, overcramming, but otherwise do not double the m (bemadamed, bedlamite, balsamic, diademed, emblematic, pilgrimage, victimize, seldomer, venom-
