page: 860

+ is the molecule. When chemical

henomena occur the molecule may be divided into atoms; & these atoms, in the presence of electrical phenomena, may themselves be further divided into electrons or corpuscles.’

mollify. For inflexions, see Verss IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

Molly. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

molten. See MELT.

momentarily, momently. The first means for a moment (he was momentarily abashed), the second from moment to moment or every moment (am momently expecting a wire from him). The differentiation is well worth more faithful observance than it gets; & the substitution of either, which sometimes occurs, for tinstantly or immediately or at once is foolish NOVELTY-HUNTING.

momentary, momentous. The first means lasting only for a moment, or transitory; the second means of moment, i, e. of great consequence.

momentum. Pl. usually -ta.

monachal, monastic, monkish. Each has its own abstract noun—monachism, monasticism, monkery. Of the three sets monastic(ism) is the one that suits all contexts; it is useful that monkish & monkery should also exist, as serving the purpose of those who wish to adopt a certain tone. Monachal & monachism, though they would have passed well enough if monastic(ism) did not exist & were not much better known, seem as it is to have no recommendation unless it is a good thing that scholars writing for scholars should have other names for things than those generally current, even though the meaning is the same. If that is, on the contrary, a bad thing, monachal & monachism should be allowed to die.

monadism)(monism. Both terms owe their existence to the meta-

hysical problem of the relation

tween mind & matter. The view that regards mind & matter as two

+ independent constituents of which the universe is composed is called dualism. In contrast with dualism, any view that makes the universe consist of mind with matter as a form of mind, or of matter with mind as a form of matter, or of a substance that in every part of it is neither mind nor matter but both, is called monism (see also META- PHysics). Monadism is the name given to a particular form of monism, corresponding to the molecular or atomic theory of matter (see MOLE- CULE), & holding that the universal substance (according to the third variety of monism described in the previous sentence) consists of units called monads.

monarchical, -chic, -chal, -chial. The first is the current form; -chic is occasionally used for antithetic purposes (the monarchic, the aristocratic, & the democratic branches of our constitution); -chal with a slight rhetorical difference, where kingly might serve (the royal harangue has a certain monarchal tone); -ial seems superiluous.

monastic(ism). See MONACHAL.

Monday. For He ts coming M., &c., see FRIDAY.

monde. See FRENCH WORDS.

monetary, monetize. See Pro- NUNCIATION for the question between mén & min.

moneyed, moneys, not monied, monies.

mongoose. PI. -ooses.

mongrel makes -ily; see -LL-, -L-. See MULATTO 1 for synonyms.

monism. See MONADISM.

monitress. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS.

monk. For m. & friar, see FRIAR.

monkey, n. Pi. -eys.

monkey, vb. For inflexions sec VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 2.

monoecious. Pronounce -nésh-; for -noe-, -nae-, see X,

monocle. That this, a Hysrip DERIVATIVE, a GALLICISM, & a word with no obvious meaning to the Englishman who hears it for the
