page: 362

+ artificial precautions are never kept up; (3) that half of us do not know whether to call it md’ral, mor&’l, or morah’], & that it is a recognized English custom to resolve such doubts by the addition of -e or other change of spelling.

The view here taken is that the case for moral is extraordinarily weak, & that aguinst it decidedly strong, & in fact that the question is simply one between true pedantry & true English. A few remarks may be made on the points already summarized.

Here are two extracts from bookreviews in The Times: He persistently spells moral (state of mind of the troops, not their morality) with a final e, a sign of ignorance of French./The purist in language might quarrel with Mr "s title for this book on the psychology of war, for he means by morale not ‘cthics’ or ‘moral philosophy’, but ‘the temper of a people expressing itself in action’. But no doubt there is authority for the perversion of the French word. Is it either ignorance of French or a perversion of the French word? or would a truer account of the matter be that we have never had anything to do with the French word morale (ethics, morality, a moral, &c.), but that we found the French word moral (state of discipline & spirit in armies & the like) suited to our needs, & put an -e on to it to keep its sound distinct from that of our own word moral, just as we have done with the French local {English locale) & the German Choral (English chorale), & as, using contrary means for the same end of fixing a sound, we have turned French diplomate into English diplomat? Our English forte (geniality is not his forte, &c.) is altered from the French fort without even the udvantage of either keeping the French sound or distinguishing the spoken word from our fort; but who proposes to sacrifice the reader’s convenience by correcting its ‘ ignorant’ spelling? 362

The French word morale has never had any currency in English, though it is no doubt used by misguided gallicizers from time to time, & it certainly need not be taken into account as an objection to spelling the French moral as suits our convenience.

If we reinstate the once almost universal morale, we need no italics, & there is no fear of confusion; if we adopt moral, we need italics, & there is no hope of ate them; it is at present printed oftener without than with them. The following five extracts, in some of which the English adjective moral, & in some the French noun moral, is meant, have all the same type for moral as for the rest. They are printed here, except for the italicizing of the whole, exactly as they appeared, & they are enough to suggest how easy it would be for real doubts to arise about which word is being used:— An astounding decrease in the moral discipline & patriotism of German soldiers (Has, or has not, a comma dropped out after moral?)./It is indeed a new proof of the failing moral & internal troubles of the German people (Moral & internal? Ob dear no!)./A true arbitrator, a@ man really impartial between two contendants & even indifferent to their opposing morals./The Russian army will recover its moral & fighting power./The need of Poland, not only for moral, but for the material support of the Allies.

The right course is to make the English word morale, use ordinary type, call it morah’l, & ignore or abstain from the French word morale, of which we have no need. See for.other examples of pedantry with French words, A L’OUTRANCE & DOUBLE ENTENDRE; cf. also GUERILLA.

moralize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

morbid makes -est; see -ER & -EST 4.

morbidezza. Pronounce -étsa.

MORE

more. 1. For limitations on the
