page: 364

+ has largely killed scntiment for any of the factions, & the Powers mostly concerned have simply looked on with a determination to localize the fighting. The only idiomatic sense of mostly is for the most part (The goods are mostly sent abroad. /Twentyseven millions, mostly fools). But it is often wrongly used for most, as in the quotation; see UNiIbDIOMATIC “LY.

mot. See Frencw worns. The mot juste is a pet LITERARY CRITICS’ WORD, which readers would like to buy of them as one buys one’s neighbour’s bantam cock for the sake of hearing its voice no more. It has the disadvantage that you can find it, if you want to know more about it, neither in French dictionaries (at any rate, not in Littré) nor in English, & must be content to associate it vaguely with Flaubert. Yet, after mecting it in such a passage as the following, where the m. j. seems a trifle long, one does feel a curiosity about its meaning:— The epitaph which she wrote for herself at an early age contains the mot juste: ‘lere lies Sylvia Scarlett, who was always running away. If she has to live all over again & be the same girl, she accepts no responsibility for anything that may occur’.

moth. The collective use of moth in the senses of moths or the moth or the ravages of moths (furs harbour moth; moth is the most destructive of these; proof against moth; to prevent moth) is ncither defined nor illustrated in the OED, but has at least a colloquial currency. The well-known Bible passages, however, on which this use is perhaps based, cannot in fact be quoted in defence of it, since in all of them the word may be taken in the ordinary sense, if one supposes the rhetorical omission of the article that is common enough in paired or contrasted phrases (eye hath not seen, nor ear heard), which has no resemblance to the examples of moth given above. The Bible words meant are: where

+ moth & rust doth corrupt; where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt; where no thicf approacheth, neither moth corrupteih.

mother. For the M. of Parliaments, see SOBRIQUETS.

mother-of-pearl, -o’-pearl. The dictionarics favour the of form; the other gives the usual pronunciation, & perhaps is what most people would print if the compositors would let them.

moths. For pronunciation see -TH & -DH.

motif. See FRENCH WORDS.

motive. The victorious party has every motive tn claiming that it its acting not against the Constitution, but in its defence. An or every interest in doing, but a or it molive for doing. See ANALOGY, CAST-IRON IDIOM.

motley, n. Pl. -eys.

motto. For synonymy, see SIGN. Pl, -oes, see -O(E)S 1; adj. moitto’d, see -ED & ’D.

moujik, muzhik. Pronounce m60’zhik, The first is the established form, & correction to the second does no-one any good & perplexes those who have just come to know what the old word means; _ see DIDACTICISM.

mould. The three common words so spelt (shape n. & vb; earth; fungous growth) are probably all unconnected; but the identity of form has no doubt caused the second to be tinged with the meaning of the third, & the original notion of powdery earth has had associated with it the extraneous one of rottenness. See True & FALSE ETYMOLOGY.

mount, vb. For mounted men &c., see INTRANSITIVE P.P.

mouse. Pronounce the noun -s, the verb & its agent-noun -z(er). MM. makes mousy, not -sey; see -EY & -y.

mousseline. See FRENCH WORDS.

mouth. Pronounce the verb, & the pl. of the noun, with -dh, foul-
