page: 366

+ m. less to acknowledge, all the presents, the letters, & the telegrams, which arrive on these occasions. The (concealed) negative effect is: You could not open them under a day; but the expression is, more than technically, affirmative, & the words to be supplied are is it a@ full day’s work. /; The machine must crushed before any real reforms can be initiated, m. less carried. Negative effect: You cannot initiate till the machine is crushed. Expression, fully affirmative./Bué of real invention & spontaneity, m. less anything approaching what might be classed as inspiration, there is little enough. Expression technically affirmative./ It would be impossible for any ruler in these circumstances, m. less a ruler who was convinced of his own infallibility, to guide the destinies of an empire. Supply would it be im-

ible for before choosing between more & less. /I confess myself altogether unable to formulate such a principle, m. less to prove if. Supply unable.

M. less, where m. more is required, is in fact so common that it must be classed among the STuRDY INDE- FENSIBLES.

muchly. See WorN-OUT HUMOUR.

mucilage, gum. See Forman WORDS.

mucous, -cus. The first is the adjective, the second the noun; mucous membrane,

mud. Mud pie or mudpiec, not mud-pie; see HYPHENS.

mudir, muezzin. Pronounce m6odér’, mooé’zin.

Mughal. See Mocut.

mugwump, highbrow. As many of us are uncertain whether these American words mean the same or different things, the following definitions are extracted from the Standard Dictionary:—

Mugwump: A chief among the Algonkian Indians; A conceited or sclf-consequential person; A voter identified more particularly with one

party but claiming the right to vote

with another party. 866

Highbrow: A person observed or imagined to take a superior attitude toward the generality of mankind; Any person of the _ intellectual classes.

Muhammad(an). See MAnOMET.

mulatto. Pl. -0s; see -O(E)s 6.

mulatto & other words of race mixture.

1. M., halfbreed, halfcaste, Eurasian, hybrid, & mongrel, all denote individuals of mixed race, but each has a more special application from or to which it has been widened or narrowed. These are: m., white & negro; halfbreed, American-Indian & white or negro; halfcaste, Euro-

an & East-Indian; Eurasian,

uropean & East-Indian; hybrid, cross-bred plant or animal; mongrel, cross-bred dog.

2. M., quadroon, octoroon. The first is the offspring of a white & a negro (or other completely nonwhite person); the second that of a white & a mulatto, having a quarter negro (&c.) blood; the third that of a white & a quadroon, having an eighth negro (&c.) blood.

8. Creole does not imply mixture of race, but denotes a person either of European or (now rarely) of negro descent born & naturalized in certain West-Indian & American countries.

4. East-Indian, halfcasie, Eurasian, Anglo-Indian, are all sometimes used of pcrsons whose descent is partly European or British & partly Indian, That is the proper scnse of halfcaste & Eurasian, the latter being a polite substitute for the former. ast-Indian would more properly mean (as it was used in 1 above) a full native of India, in contrast with American-Indian, but is not common in that sense; it was formerly what Eurasian is now, the escape from halfcasie. Anglo- Indian, again, would properly mean a halfcaste, & is now somctimes preferred in that sense to Eurasian as a further step in politeness; but its traditional meaning, confusion
