page: 367

+ with which accounts for its being preferred, is an Englishman who has spent most of his life in India.

mule makes mulish.

muleteer. So spelt; three syllables.

mullah, moollah. The OED treats the first as the standard form.

multiply. For inflexions see VERss IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

Mumbo Jumbo. Pl. Mumbo Jumbos; see -0(E)s 3.

mummify. For inflexions see VEBBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

mummy, mother. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

mumps. Usually treated as singular; see PLURAL ANOMALIES.

Munchausen. The OED pronounces -chawzn.

murderess. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS.

murex. For pl., see -Ex, -1x.

MUSES. The nine were daughters of Zeus & Mnemosyne (-6’ziné), Memory. Their names & provinces are:—Clio, history; Melpomene (-6’mini), tragedy; Thalia (-I’a), comedy; Euterpe (-pf), music; Terpsichore (-\’kor!), dance; Erato (t’ra-), lyric; Calliope (-i’op!), epic; Urania, astronomy; Polyhymnia, rhetoric.

museum. Pl. -ms; see -UM.

muslim. See MOSLEM.

muslin makes -lined; see -N-, -NN-.

mussel, bivalve. So spelt.

mussulman. Pl. -ans, not -en, the last syllable not being the English word man. It is perhaps to impartial dislike of the incorrect -men & the queer -mans that the comparative disuse of m. is due; the plural is needed at least as often as the singular, & MAHnHOMETAN, Mohammedan, & MOSLEM, being resorted to for the plural, get the preference in the singular also.

must) (need. The following qucstions with their positive & negative answers illustrate a point of idiom — Must it be so? Yes, it must; No, it need not./Need I do it? No, you need not; Yes, you must.

367

mustachio. Pl. -0s, see -0(E)s 4. M. is now archaic for moustache, but the adjective derived from it is often preferred to the other; _ spelk mustachio’d, see -ED & ’D.

muster. Dental treatment was also kept very prominently before their consideration, se that, at the time of the Armistice, the general condition of these women’s mouths would pass a very fair muster. M. in the phrase pass m. means an inspection; & to pass an inspection very fairly is quite a different thing from passing a very fair inspection. Pass m. is one of the many idioms that must be taken as they are or left alone.

mute. For the phonetic use, see TECHNICAL TERMS,

MUTE E. Needless uncertainty prevails about the spelling of inflexions & derivatives formed from words ending in mute e. Is this -e to be retained, or omitted? It isa question that arises in thousands of words, & especially in many that are not separately recorded in the dictionaries, so that the timid speller cannot get it answered in a hurry. It is also one to which different answers are possible; every dictionary-maker probably thinks that if he were recording all words with an internal-mute-e problem he would answer the question with paternal but arbitrary wisdom for each word; but he also knows that it would be absurd for him to attempt to give even all those that are likely to be wanted. The need is not for such a gigantic undertaking, but for a rule of the simplest kind & with the fewest exceptions, to deliver us from the present chaos.

To get an idea of the number of words concerned, the reader should consider the following questions, & realize that some of the items stand for thousands, some for hundreds, & some for dozens, of similar cases. Does stale make staleish or stalish? love, loveing or loving? mile, mileage or milage? live, liveable or livable? strive, striveing or striving? excite,
