page: 369

Russia by the country [i.e., ir eee

which was the mutual enemy [i.e., o

both Russia & the Western Powers].

In such places common is the right

word, & the use of m. betrays

ignorance of its meaning. It should

be added, however, that m. was

formerly used much more loosely

than it now is, & that the OED,

giving examples of such looseness,

goes no further in condemnation

than ‘ Now regarded as incorrect ’,

‘Commonly censured as incorrect,

but still often used in the collocations m. friend, m. intance, on

account of the ambiguity of common’.

The Dickens title has no doubt

much to do with the currency of m. tine fault is of a different kind, betraying not ignorance, but lack of the taste or care that should prevent one from saying twice over what it suffices to say once. This happens when m. is combined with some part of each other, asin: It is this fraternity of Parliament-men serving a common cause, mutually comprehending each other’s problems & difficulties, & respecting each other's rights & liberties, which ts the foundation of the structure. It may fairly be said that the sole function of mutual(ly) is to give the sense of some part of each other when it happens to be hard to get each other into one’s sentence; if each other not only can be, but is, got in, m. is superfluous; in the quotation it adds nothing whatever, & is the merest tautology.

A few bad specimens follow:—The ring was mutually chosen by the Duke & Lady Elisabeth last Wednesday./ They have affinities beyond a m. ad- mtiration for Mazzini./M. exchange. of prisoners./A m. exchange of berthage accommodation at Soukonnoien & Bremen./It involves . . . m. semibankruptcy of employers & employed./ M. quotation of each other.

For the distinction between m. & reciprocal, see RECIPROCAL, muzhik. See mousix.

869

my. For my & your work &c. (not

mine), see ABSOLUTE POSSESSIVES.

mynheer, mein Herr, Herr. The

first is Dutch & can mean gentleman,

sir, or Mr; the second is German

for sir; the third is German for

gentleman & Mr.

myriad is generally used of a great

but indefinite number; but fis

well to remember that its original

sense, still occasionally effective, is

ten thousand.

mystic has been much slower than

mysterious in becoming a popular

word & thereby losing its definitely

spiritual or occult or theological

implications. Everything that puz-

zles one has long been called mys-

terious (who committed the latest

murder, for instance), but not.

mystic. It is Maat desirable that

mystic should be kept as long as

ssible from such extension. n-

ortunately the NOVELTY-HUNTERS, tired of mysterious, have lately got hold of it: But I don’t want to be mystic, & you shall hear the facts & judge me afterwards.

mystifi - A bad form; see -EDLY.

- For inflexions, see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

myth is a word introduced into English less than a century ago as a name for a form of story characteristic of primitive peoples & thus defined by the OED: A purely fictitious narrative usually involving supernatural persons, actions, or events, & embodying some ular idea concerning natural or historical phenomena. By those who wish to mark their adherence to this original sense the word is still often pronounced mith. But the meaning

pularly attached to the word is Fittte more than a tale devoid of truth or a non-existent person or thing or event; always in these senses, & usually even in the original one, the pronunciation is mith. See POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES,

mythopoeic, -paic. See x, a.
