page: 372

+ sitarian is the better word, (1) as having a less un-English or a somehow more acceptable sound, (2) because its obvious connexion with necessity rather than with necessary makes the meaning plainer, & (3) as being already the more usual word. Necessarian should be regarded as a NEEDLESS VARIANT.

nectar has kept the word-makers busy in search of its adjective; nectareal, nectarean, nectared, nectareous, nectarian, nectariferous, nectarine, nectarious, & nectarous, have all been given a chance. Milton, with nectared, nectarine, & nectarous, keeps clear of the four-syllabled forms in which the accent is drawn away from the significant part; & we might do worse thun let him decide for us.

need. He seems to think that the Peronne bridge-head was abandoned earlier than need have been./It was assumed that Marshal Foch’s reserves & army of mancucre had been used up and need no longer to be taken into account as a uniform, effective body. These extracts suffice to show that lapses in grammar or idiom may occur with need. The first looks like some confusion between the verb & the noun need; at least the two right ways of putting it would be (a) earlier than it (i.e. the bridgehead) need have been (sc. abandoned), where need is the verb, & (b) earlier than need was (sc. to abandon it), where need is the noun.

With uncertainties whether need ig a noun or a verb, whether needs is a verb or a plural noun or an adverb, & what relation is borne to the verbal needs & needed by the abnormal need often substituted for them, there are certain difficulties. The writer of the second extract has missed the point of idiom that, while needs needed are ordinary verbs followed by infinitive with to, the abnormal need is treated as a mere auxiliary, like must, requiring no fo; the reserves needed no longer to be taken, or did not necd any 872

+ longer to be taken, but need no longer be taken, into account. The rules for the use of need instead of needs & needed are:—It is used only ininterrogative & negativesentences; in such sentences it is more idiomatic than the normal forms, which are however permissible; if need is preferred, it is followed by infinitive without fo, but needs & needed require to before their infinitive. Idiomatic form, They need not be counted; normal form, They did not need to be counted, or They needed not to be counted; wrong forms, They need not to be counted, They needed not (or did not need) be counted.

needle. 4 n. in a botile of hay is the right wording, boitle being an old word, now dialectal only, for bundle; it is often mistaken for a mistake, & changed to bundle of hay or haystack.

needleful, Pl. needlefuls; see -FuL.

NEEDLESS VARIANTS. Though it savours of presumption for any individual to label words needless, it is certain that words deserving the label exist; the question is which they are, & who is the censor that shall disfranchise them. Every dictionary-maker would be grateful to an Academy that should draw up an index expurgatorius & relieve him of the task of recording rubbish. There is no such body, & the dictionary-maker must content himself with recognizing, many many years after the event for fear he should be precipitate, that a word here & there is dead, aware the while that he is helping hundreds of others to linger on useless by advertising them once more. Natural selection does operate, in the worlds of talk & literature; but the dictionaries inevitably lag behind. It is perhaps, then, rather a duty than a piece of presumption for those who have had experience in wordjudging to take any opportunity, when they are not en pediin actual dictionary-making, of helping things
