page: 373

+ on by irresponsible expressions of opinion. In this book, therefore, reference is made regarding many words that either are or ought to be dead, but have not yet been buried, to the present article or to that called SUPERFLUOUS woRDS. Those only belohg here which can be considered by-forms diffcring merely in suffix or in some such minor point from other words of the same stem & saldecioaae fe Sometimes the mere reference s been thought sufficient; more often short remarks are added qualifying or explaining the particular condemnation; an incomplete list of these references is given below to enable the reader to examine details. Here the general principle may profitably be laid down that it is a source not of strength, but of weakness, that there should be two names for the same thing, because the reasonable assumption is that two words mean two things, & confusion results when they do not. On the other hand, it may be much too hastily assumed that two words do mean the same thing; they may, for instance, denote the same object without Meaning the same thing if they imply that the aspect from which it is regarded is different, or are appro-

riate in different mouths, or differ in rhythmic value or in some other matter that may escape a cursory examination. To take an example or two: it is hard to see why necessartan & necessitarian, or hydrocephalic & hydrocephalous, should coexist & puzzle us to no purpose by coexisting; but correctitude by the side of correctness had once, if it has not now, a real value, since it was expressly made to suggest by its sound conscious rectitude & so present correctness in an_ invidious light; again, it would be rash to decide that dissimulate was a needless variant for dissemble on the

unds that it means the same & is less used & less clearly English, without thinking long enough over it to remember that simulate & dis- 373

+ simulation have a right to be heard on the question.

Some of the words under which reference to this article is made (not always concerning the title-word itself):—acquaintanceship, askant, blithesome, bumble-bee, burden, -cephalic, chivalry, cithern, competence, complacence, concernment, concomitance, corpulence, correctitude, covert n., debark, depicture, diminishment, direful, disgustful, dismission, dissemble, infinitude, necessitarian, quicten.

ne’er-do-weel, ne’er-do-well. The Scotch spelling is recommended. The OED’s remark is: *‘ The word being of northern & Sc. origin, the form -weel is freq. employed even by southern writers ’.

negative. ‘The answer is in the negative’ is. Parliament language, but deserves much severer condemnation (as a pompous PERI- PHRASIS for No, sir) than most of the expressions described as unparliamentary language.

NEGATIVE & AFFIRMATIVE IN PARALLEL CLAUSES. Of actual blunders, as_ distinguished from lapses of taste & style, perhaps the commonest, & those that afflict their author when he is detected with the least sense of proper shame, are various mishandlings of negatives. Writers who appear educated enough to know whcther a sentence is right or wrong will put down the opposite of what they mean, or something different from what at mean, or what means nothing at all, apparently quite satisfied so long as the reader can be trusted to make a shrewd guess at what they ought to have said instead of taking them at their word; to his possible grammatical sensibilities they pay no heed whatever, having none themselves. It is parallel clauses that especially provide opportunities for going wrong, the problem being to secure that if both are negative the negative force shall not be dammed up in one alone, & conversely that

NEGATIVE AND AFFIRMATIVE
