page: 374

+ if one only is to be negative the negative force shall not free to spill over into the other. Some classified specimens of failure to secure these csscentials may put writers on their guard; the corrections appended are designed rathcr as proofs of the error than as satisfactory, or at any rate as the best, emendations,

1. If you start with a negative subject you may forget on reaching the second clause to indicate that the subject is not negative there also:—No lots will therefore be put on one side for another atiempi to reach a better price, but must be sold on the day appointed (but all must be sold)./No nation which is given a tract of territory by the Conference will want the decision to be set aside, or will consider it an injustice tf it is set aside (any such nation will at least consider)./[During a Paris airraid] Very few pcople even got out of bed, & went through their ordeal by fire as an inescapable fate (& the majority went)./English mines were laid in the Cattegat, but none were laid at a depth of less than thirty-five feet, & were consequently not dangerous to commerce (& they were)./ Neither editor nor contributors are paid, but are moved to give their services by an appreciation of the good work (but all are).

2. You may use negative inversion in the first clause, & forget that the second clause will then require to be given a subject of its own because the inversion has imprisoned the original subject:—Nor does he refer to Hubrecht’s or Gaskell’s theories, & dismisses the paleontological evidence in rather @ cavalier fashion (& he dismisses)./Not only was Lord Curzon’s Partition detested by the people concerned, but was administratively bad (it was)./In neither case is this due to the Labour Party, but to local Socialist aspirations (This is due in neither case).

3. Intending two negative clauscs, you may enclose your negative

etween an auxiliary & its verb in

+ the first & forget that it cannot then act outside its enclosure in the second:—There is scarcely a big hotel, a brewery company, or a large manufactory, whick has not sunk a well deep into the London chalk & igs drawing is own supply of water from the vast store (& succeeded in drawing; if has continues, not does so with it)./No scheme run by Civil Servants sitting in a London office ts likely to succeed if these genilemen have not themsclves lived on the land, & by experience are able to appreciate actual conditions of agrtsaline (& learnt to appreciate).

4 Conversely, intending a negative & an affirmative clause, you may so fuse your negative with a construction common to both clauses that it carries on to the second clause when not wanted:—These statements do not seem weli weighed, & to savour of the catchword (& savour—cutting the connexion with do not seem)./ If the Colonial Secretary is not going to use his reserve powers when trial by jury breaks down, & to acquiesce tn the view that no consequences need follow when a settler shoots a native for stealing a sheep, he may as well give up the business of governing altogether (& acquiesces—cutting the connexion with is not going).

5. You may negative in your first clause a word that when supplied without the negative in the sccond fails to do the work you expect of it:—To raise the standard of life of the many it is not sufficient to

wide the riches of the few but also to produce tn greaicr quantities the Goods required by all (it is also necessary to produce).

6. You may so misplace the negative that it applies to what is common to both clauses instead of, as was intended, to what is peculiar to one:—Jt is not expected that tomorrovo’s spcech will deal with peace, but will be confined to a general survey of ... (It is expected .. . will not deal).

7. You may treat a double negative expression as though it were form-
