page: 875

+ ally as well as virtually a positive one:—Jt would not be difficult fo quarrel with Mr Rowley’s views about art, but not with Charles Row himself (It would be easy)./He has cast about for & neglected no device chemical or mechanical that might add to his ability (& tried every device).

NEGATIVES. It has been mentioned in the preceding article, which is directed against the most insidious form of the danger, that blunders with negatives are extraordinarily frequent. Such blunders require only care for their avoidance, to be conscious of the danger is enough to induce that care, & those who would realize the danger may easily do so. Abundant illustrations of it will be found in the articles on NEITHER, NO, NOR, NOT, NOTHING LESS THAN, & NEGATIVE & AFFIRMATIVE IN PARALLEL CLAUSES, For those who do not care for the trouble of turning up special articles, nor require detailed discussion, a few miscellaneous specimens are here collected without comment:— Were it not for its liking for fare eggs, the badger could not but considered other than a harmless animal./Sir Willoughby is one of the staunchest of Liberals; his defeat in North St Pancras at the General Election was hardly less creditable to the electors than his rejection at the L.C.C. election some years ago./When the boys come home the old club will start again; in the meantime who shall deny that the ‘ Muddied Oafs’ have not made good?/Manifestly we can grant no armistice while they occupy French or Belgian territory, or delude ourselves into thinking that a@ League of Nations is possible while . . ./To consider & report whether the Council should not discontinue altogether the direct management of the service & should dispose of or lease the boats, piers, & plant./ No rival is too small to be overlooked, no device is too infamous not to be practised, if it will... ./Not

875

+ a whit undeterred by the disaster which overtook them last week./1s it quite inconceivable that if the smitten had always turned the other cheek the smiters would not long since have become so ashamed that .- 2/1 do not think it is possible that the traditions & doctrines of these two institutions should not fail to create rival schools./But it would not be at all surprising if, by attempting too much, Mr Sichel has not to sgme extent defeated his own object./How can Mr Balfour tell but that two years hence he may not be too tired of official life to begin any new conflict?/They could hardly fail to regard it as anything but an erpression of want of confidence in our whole South-African policy./No age can see itself in a proper perspective, & is therefore incapable of giving its virtues & vices their relative places,

négligé. So spelt & accented.

negligible, -geable. The first spelling is better; cf. incorrigzbdle, dirigible. The prevalence at one time of -geable is perhaps explained by the word’s having been familiarized chiefly in the translated or untranslated French phrase quantité négligeable.

negotiate makes -tiable, -tor; see -ABLE 1,-OR. The use of the verb in its improper sense of tackle successfully is comparable in faded jocularity with the similar use of individual (see alsO MATERIALIZE), & stamps a writer as literarily a barbarian. Novelty is what makes such misuses attractive, & when the novelty is gone people of sense discard them. See also Poty- SYLLABIC HUMOUR.

negro, negrillo, negrito. Pl. negroes, but negrillos & negritos; see -O(E)s 1, 6.

neighbourhood. Jn the n. of (e.g. £100) for about is a repulsive combination of PoLysyLLABIC HUMOUR & PERIPHRASIS.

1, Pronunciation. 2.

neither.

3. Number of the pro- Meaning.
