page: 878

1. For the question between the next three &c. & the three &c. next, see FIRST 4.

2. Next June, n. Friday, &c., can be used as adverbs without a pre-

sition (Shall begin it next June);

ut, if nezrt is put after the noun, idiom requires a preposition (may be expected in June next, on Monday neat). See Fripay.

8. The ‘ No Surrender’ party had the rank & file at their back because they fought to the last ditch to save the grandest institution in the country; do they expect support now in wrecking the two next important institutions? The two next important institulions is clearly used in the sense ‘ the two institutions next in importance’. The OED quotes no example of such a use, but it is perhaps not uncommon colloquially, & must be a conscious or unconscious experiment in extending the convenient nezt best idiom. hat idiom requires a superlative, & such words as oldest, worst, narrowest, weightiest, suit it well; but it is ugly with adjectives having no superlative but that with most, & there is a temptation to try whether, for instance, next important will not pass for next most important. It should be resisted; the natural sense of the two next important institutions is ‘ the two next institutions that are of importance ’, which need by no means be the two that are next in importance.

nexus. The English plural nexuses is intolerably sibilant, & the Latin, nerus (-is), not mezi (see -vs), sounds pedantic; the plural is consequently very rare.

nice. 1. N. makes nicish; see MUTE E.

2. Nice & as a sort of adverb= satisfactorily (I hope it will be n. a. fine; Aren't we going n. a. fast?) is an established colloquialism, but should be confined, in print, to dialogue.

3. Meaning. N. has been spoilt, like CLEvER, by its bonnes fortunes;

3878

+ it has been too great a favourite with the ladies, who have charmed out of it all its individuality & converted it into a mere diffuser of vague & mild agreeableness. Everyone who uses it in its more proper senses, which fill most of the space given to it in any dictionary, & avoids the modern one that tends to oust them all, does a real if small service to the language.

Nicene. The name of the place from which the creed is so called is spelt Nicaea or Nicea, not Nicoea.

nic(e)y, sweetmeat. Omit the e; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

nickel makes -lled; see -LL-, -L-.

nick-nack. See KNICK-KNACK.

nict(it)jate, -ating, -ation. The forms with the extra syllable are the commoner, & those without it are NEEDLESS VARIANTS,

nidus. Pl. -duses, -di (-i).

niello. PI. -li (-é), -los, see -0(E)s 8.

nigger, applied to others than full or partial negroes, is felt as an insult by the person described, & betrays in the speaker, if not deliberate insolence, at least a very arrogant inhumanity.

nighty (night-gown). So spelt; see eEY, -IE, -Y.

» eist. Pronounce ni‘t-, with the h silent; see PRONUNCIA- TION.

nimbus. Pl. -bi (-f).

For nimbus(s)ed see -S-, -s8-.

nineties, "nine-. See TWENTIES.

nitre, -ter. See “RE & -ER.

nitrify. For inflexions see Verss IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

-N-, -NN-. Monosyllables ending in n double it before suffixes beginning with vowels if the’ sound preceding it is a single vowel (a, e, i, 0, u, y), but not if it is a diphthong or a double vowel or a vowel & r: mannish, but darning; fenny, but keener; winning, but reined; conned, but coined; runner, but turned. Words of more than one syllable follow the rule for monosyllables if their last syllable is accented, but
