page: 880

+ negative must not, lke qualitications that, not being negative, do not so vitally affect the sense, be comma’d off from the words they belong to as though they were mere parentheses. The rule ad needs stating to be accepted; but the habit of providing adverbial phrases with commas often gets the better of common sense. It is clear, however, that there is the same essential absurdity in writing He will, under no circumstances, consent as in writing He will, never, consent, or He will, not, consent. It is worth while to add, for the reader’s consideration while he glances at the examples, that it would often be better in these negative adverbial phrases to resolve no into not... any &c. We are assured that the Prime Minister will, in no circumstances & on no consideration whatever, consent (will not under any... oronany... Or omit the commas, at the least)./And Paley & Butler, no more than Voltaire, could give Bagshot one thousandth part of the confidence that he drew from... (could not, any more than... Or could no more than Voltaire give)./ We are, of course, reminded that the doctors, no more than the friendly societies, are completely satisfied (are not, any more than the societies... Or omit the commas)./Proposals which, under no possible circumstances, would lead to any substantial, or tndeed perceptible, dbalad abe for a home industry (which would not lead under any... Or which would under no possible circumstances lead).

5. Writing of compounds. About no ball (noun) & no-ball (verb), nobody, & nohow, doubts are needless; the forms given are the right ones. No one, on the principles explained in Hyprens (8b, & 2), should be written either noone or no-one, since it both has a specialized meaning & has lost its second accent; noone is disqualified by its monosyllabic look; but there is no objection to no-one, & that form is

+ recommended, with the warning that printers are attached to no one; for fuller discussion, see EVERYONE. The adverbs noways & nowise are best so written; but in nowise, which is often used instead of the correct in no wise, is as absurd as by nomeans or on no-account would be; cf. any 1.

6. Pl. noes; see -O(E)s 2.

noblesse. See FRENCH WORDS.

nodus. PI. -di (-I).

nom-de-guerre, nom-de-plume, pen-name, pseudonym. Nom-de- guerre is current French, but, owing to the English currency of nom-de- plume, is far from universally intelligible to Englishmen, most of whom assume that, whatever else it may mean, it can surely not mean nom-de-plume. Nom-de-plume is open to the criticism that it is ridiculous for English writers to use a French phrase that does not come from France; not perhaps as ridiculous as the critics think (see MORALE), but fear of them will at any rate deter some of us. Nobody verre uses pen-name_ without

eeling either ‘ What a good boy am I to abstain from showing off my French & translate nom-de-plume into honest English!’, or else * I am not as those publicans who suppose there is such a phrase as nom-deplume’. For everyone is instinctively aware that pen-name, however native or naturalized its elements, is no English-bred word, but a translation of nom-de-plume. Pseudonym, lastly, is a queer out-ofthe-way term for an everyday thing. But it is perhaps the best of the bunch except for those who take the commonsense view of nom-deplume—that it is the established word for the thing, & its antecedents do not concern us.

nomad makes -adic; see -p-, -pp-.

nomenclature. The dictionaries that give a list of synon with each word do a very doubtful service to literature. One can hardly believe but that the authors of the
