page: 882

+ previous negative suffices; that is what has been done in: Sir Guy Granet was naturally & properly at pains to prove that his company had not acted negligently or carelessly or had been unduly influenced by reasons of economy (There was a choice here between or been & and had not been; or had been makes nonsense). - The other caution, much more often required, is that if the negative is attached not to an auxiliary (or other word common to two clauses) that will carry it forward, but to some other part of the first clause, the negative force is cut off & has to be started afresh by nor. The following five examples illustrate the danger; in each or must be corrected into nor if the rest of the sentence is to remain as it is, though some slight change of arrangement such as is indicated would make or possible:-—President Wilson has determined that no troops shall march, or anything resembling a military or naval demonstration be carried out (that troops shall not march, or)./in ws six months of power it has offered not one constructive measure or done a single thing to relieve suffering (it has not offered one)./It ts with no unfriendly intention to Germany or with any desire to question her right or hcr need to possess a powerful Navy (it is not with any)./Mantfestly we can grant no armistice while they occupy French & Belgian territory, or delude ourselves into thinking that a League of Nations is possible (we cannot grant an)./He did nothing without consulting Lovel, or failed in anything without expect- ‘ing & fearing his admonishing (he did not do anything... or fail).

The above are the ordinary types of mistake with nor. Others that should hardly require mention are either... nor, & the poctical omission of the first negative. Either... nor is as bud as NEITHER... o07r3 but: There was not, either in 1796 in Italy, nor on the Mediterranean coast of Spain in 1808, any British

+ force at work which .../As we have not got the world’s tonnage production for April, nor yet either the British nor the world’s losses for the same month, it is only possible to...

Do nor undo is legitimate in poetry, but not in prose of so ordinary a kind as: For her fingers had been so numbed that she could do nor undo anything.

normalcy ( = normality) is a HyBRID DERIVATIVE of the * spurious hybrid ’ class, & seems to have nothing to recommend it.

north-. Compounds (n.-east &c.) are pronounced with th. Of the derivatives, northern & northerly have dh, but northward(s), norther, & northing, have th.

northerly. For the special uses & meanings of this set of words, see EASTERLY.

nostril makes (-)nostrilled; -Lu-, -L-.

nostrum. Pl. -ums, not -@; -UM.

nosy, nosey. See -EY & -y IN ADJECTIVES, & -FY, -IE, -Y.

not. 1. Not all)(all...not. 2. Not in meiosis & periphrasis. 8. Not in exclamations. 4. Not plceonastic. 5. Not... but. 6. Not only.

1. Not all)(all... not. All is not gold that glisters; Every land does not produce everything. Precisians would rewrite these sentences as Not all is gold that glisters (or Not all that glisters is gold) & Not every land produces everything. The negative belongs logically to all & every, not to the verbs, & the strict sense of the first proverb would be that glistering proves a substance to be not gold. A valued correspondent writes— Do not you think that the use of all... not ought to be restricted to propositions of the type All A is not-B, & where Not all A is B is meant, that should be the order? Of course that never has been a rule, from ‘** All of you have not the knowledge of God” onwards, but it would save a great deal of ambiguity if it could be made one. I notice that Somerville & Byrne, in their German Grammar,
