page: 884

+ of an actual or virtual negative in the main sentence. We all know people who habitually say I shouldn't wonder if it didn’t turn to snow soon when they mean tf it turned. But the same mistake in print is almost as common as it is absurd:— Nobody can predict with confidence how much time may not be employed on the concluding stages of the Bill./ Is it impossible to imagine that, in consequence of the growing friendship between the two great peoples on both sides of the Channel, an agreement might not one day be realized?/I do not of course deny that in this, as in all moral principles, there may not be found, here & there, exceptional cases./IIe is unable to say how much of the portraiture of Christ may not be due to the idealization of His life & character./It would not be at all surprising if, by altempting too much, Mr has not to some extent defeated his own object./Who knows but what agreeing to differ may not be a form of agreement rather than a form of difference?

5. Not...but. Mrs Fraser’s book, however, is not confined to filling up the gaps in Livingstone’s life in England & the after-history of his children, but it deals most interestingly with her father’s own early adventures in Africa &@ ... See BUT $ for more flagrant mishandlings of not followed by but. The difference between right & wrong often depends on the writer’s seeing that the subject, for instance, of the not sentence must not be repeated (or taken up by a pronoun) in the but sentence, but allowed to carry on silently. The above double sentence, which is not idiomatic English as it stands, is at once cured by the omission of tt, The relation between one form & the other is exactly that between It is not black, but i is white (which is impossible except in special conditions) & Jt is not black, but white.

6. Not only out of its place is like a tintack loose on the floor; it might have been moet serviceable

884

+ somewhere else, & is capable of giving acute & undeserved pain where it is. To read the following extracts one after another, all of them requiring only a preference for order over chaos to have tidicd them up, must surely call a blush to the Englishman's cheek for his journalists’ slovenly ways:—ZJreland, unlike the other Western nations, preserved n. o. tts pre-Christian literature, but when Christianity came, not direct from Rome but from Britain & Gaul, that literature received a fresh im-

ulse from the new faith (N. o. did

reland . .. preserve)./He referred his audience to a time when n.o. was the Regular Army in no difficulty of finding recruits, but actually got them as soon as compulsion for home defence had been introduced (when the Army n.o. had no difficultv)./ Professor Dicey’s argument could be used most convincingly to prove that n.o. ought self-government never to have been granted to the Colonies but ought also immediately to be withdrawn from the English people itself (to prove that self-government n. o. ought never)./N.o. had she now a right to speak, but to speak with authority (She had now a right n.o. to speak)./Up to the last of them it is assumed n.o. that the Allies are not partics to the correspondence, but are even officially ignorant of its existence (that the Allics n. o. are not parties)./N.0. does the proportion of suicides vary with the season of the year, but with different races (The proportion of suicides varies n. o. with)./N. o. would this scheme help the poorer districts over their financial difficulties, but would remove from London the disgrace that tn some parts of London the streets are... (This scheme would n.o. help)./N. 0. was the audience drawn from central London; those privileged to hear the specch came from all parts (The audience was not drawn from central London only. The blunder is here double, & this tintack must be not merely picked up, but smashed up, before it can be harmless).
