page: 885

NOTE

mote, n. For synonymy see sicn. note, v., makes -table; see MUTE E. nothing less than. The OED re- marks:—‘ The combination nothing has two quite contrary senses’, & gives as the first ‘ quite equal to, the same thing as’, with, et methinks my as nothing less & as the second ‘ far from being, any thing rather than ’, with, for illustration, laws, expected To the second sense it adds the description ‘ Now ammar, s being different parts of speech in the two,

less than

for illustration, But

father’s execution

than bloody tyranny;

Who, trusting to the

mil.t. an attack.

rare’, As a matter of

either sense is legitimate,

aS appears in the light of para- phrases:—my father’s death was

no smaller thing than tyranny (i.e., less is an adjective); they expected nothing in a lower degree than they

expected an attack (i.e., less is an adverb); grammar, then, leaves the sere open. eae ambiguity are very great. the peiige at they expected n.l.t. an atiack did not happen to be fixed by trusting to the laws, who would dare decide whether they expected it very much or very little? The sense called by the OED ‘ now rare’ should, in the interests of plain speaking, be made rarer by total abandonment. It is unfortunately less rare than the label would lead one to rig id bet passages like the two that follow are not uncommon, & are to many readers very puzzling:—It recognizes also both the necessity of reform & liberation Srom dead dogmas & rubrics, & the im- Possibility of reform coming from a House of Commons desiring nothing less than to occupy its debates with discussions of the validity of the thirty-nine articles./Now we are introduced to inspired ‘ crowd-men’ or heroes who have a passion for making order out of the human chaos & finding expression for the real soul of the people; these heroes or crowdmen resemble n.1.t. the demagogue as popularly conceived.

1351 But the risks of

notice makes -ceable; see MUTE E.

notify. For inflexions see VeRBs

IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

nought. See naucur.

houmenon. Pronounce now’minén:

pl. -ena, see -on 1.

noun has two adjectives—nominal

& nounal, but is comfortable with

neither. The objection to the first

is that it is a word much used in

This has induced

gtammarians to form the word from

which they of all ople should

have shrunk—nounal It is what

is described in the article Hysrip

DERIVATIVES as a spurious hybrid;

see that article for a discussion of

coastal & similar words. The gram-

Marian’s right course is to work

with the word noun as far as

possible, &, when an adjective or

adverb is indispensable, use nomin-

al(ly),

NOUN & ADJECTIVE ACCENT. When

& word of more than one syllable

is in use both as a noun & as an

adjective, there is a certain ten-

dency, though much less marked than

the corresponding one with nouns & verbs (see next article), to differentiate the sound by accenting the last syllable in the adjective, but not in ne cee thus He is an exper’t golfer, but He is an expert tn handwriting. A few examples are given, of which the first four are undisputed, & the rest questionable; from these the reader will be able to form an opinion for application to similar cases <—compa’ct aa, co’mpact n.; exper’t a., e’xpert n. ; insti’nct a., i’nstinct n. ; minu’te a., mi’nute n.; conte’nt a., co’ntent(s) n. (sometimes); conver’se a. (sometimes; & cf. the adv. conver’sely), co’nverse n. (= contrary &c.); supi‘ne a. (usually; & cf. the adv. supit’nely), su’pine n. ; suspe’ct a., suspect n. (= suspect person; somctimes); uprigh’t a. (sometimes; & cf. the n. uprigh’tness), u’pright n. (=post &c.). NOUN & VERB ACCENT, PRONUNCI- ATION, & SPELLING. When there

‘other senses.
