page: 389

+ alternative subjects; the rules for the number of the verb differ in the two types. The compound subject is necessarily plural, whether its components are both plural, of different numbers, or both singular. To make the verb singular, as has been done in the extracts below, is accordingly wrong; at least, it is ungrammatical, though grammar may sometimes, when there is a better justification than carelessness or ignorance, be overridden; the reason why the rule is broken as often as it is is perhaps confusion between the two forms, compound & alternative, distinguished above, the latter admitting sometimes of asingular verb. Wrong examples:— Those who have been encouraging one-half of these peoples to believe that their lives, their liberties, & their religion is in danger have assumed a great responsibility./The Allics are even prepared to retire troops & cease operations if & when proper pledges & security is given.

If the verb in sentences of this type precedes the compound subject (There were a table & some chairs in there), it becomes legitimate to use a singular verb under some circumstances (see 7 below).

3. Or. If the facts are as your correspondent (or your printer) state, Egypt must be an odd sort of country. State should be states; see 2 for the difference between a compound subject with and & two or more alternative subjects with or. When, as here, both alternatives are singular in grammar & in sense (you is plural in grammar even when singular in sense; army may be plural in sense though singular in

rammar, see 8), the verb can onl

singular. So Mother or child is (not are) to die. But when the alternatives differ in number, as in Mother or children are to die, Is the child or the parents to be blamed?, the methods in order of merit are: (a) Evade by finding a verb of common number: Mother or children must die, Shall the child or the

389

+ parents be blamed?; (b) Invoke ellipsis by changing the order: The mother is to die, or the children, Is the child to be blamed, or the parents? ; (c) Give the verb the number of the alternative nearest it: Mother or children are to dic, Is the child or the parents to be blamed? What should not be said is Mother or children is to die, Are the child or the parents to be blamed?

4. Red herrings. Some writers are as sig drawn off the scent as young hounds. They start with a singular subject; before they reach the verb, a plural noun attached to an of or the like happens to cross, & off they go in the plural; or vice versa. This is a matter of carelessness or inexperience only, & needs no discussion; but it is so common as to call for a few illustrations:—Further acquaintance with the memoirs of Prince Chlodwig zu Hohenlohe-Schillingsfiirst enable us the better to appreciate . . ./The results of the recognition of this truth is .../The foundation of politics are in the letter only./An immense amount of confusion & indifference prevail./The partition which the two ministers made of the arabe of government were singularly happy./ Those dangerous influences whose appearance were the chief cause of our action.

5. Harking back with relatives. Who, which, & that, can in themselves be singular or plural, & there is a particular form of sentence in which this produces constant blunders. He is one of the best men that have ever lived (with which compare He is one that has lived honestly). In the first sentence there are two words capable of serving as antccedent to that, viz one (as in the bracketed sentence) & men. A moment’s thought shows that men is the antecedent necessary to the sense: Of the best men that have ever lived (or of the best past & present men) he is one. But with one & men (or their equivalents) to attach the relative to, writers wilh
