page: 392

+ body can see for kimself. No-one who can help it chooses A; it is correct, & is sometimes necessary, but it is so clumsy as to be ridiculous except when explicitness is urgent, & it usually sounds like a bit of pedantic humour. B is the popular solution; it sets the literary man’s teeth on edge, & he exerts himself to give the same meaning in some entirely different way if he is not prepared, as he usually is, to risk C; but it should be recorded that the OED, which quotes examples under every, they, & themselves, refrains from any word of condemnation. C is here recommended. It involves the convention that where the matter of sex is not conspicuous or important he & his shall be allowed to represent a person instead of a man, or say a man (homo) instead of a man (vir). Whether that, with A in the background for especial exactitudes, & paraphrase always possible in dubious cases, is an arrogant demand on the part of male England, everyone must decide for himself (or for himself or herself, or for themselves). Have the patrons of B made up their minds yet between Everyone was blowing their noses & Everyone were blowing their noses?

12. Quantity words. There are heaps more to say, but I must not taz your space further. The _ plurals heaps & lots used colloquially for a great amount now always take a singular verb unless a plural noun with of is added: There is heaps of ammunition, but There are heaps of cups; There is lots to do, but Lots of people think so. Compare the use of half in Half of it is rotten, but Half of them are rotten.

13. Nonsense. He comes for the first time into the Navy al an age when naval officers—unless they are so meritorious or so fortunate as to be one of the three Admirals of the Fleet —are compelled by law to leave it. Naval officers cannot be one admiral; & what is wrong with unless they are Admirals of the Fleet?

892

numerous is not, as the following extract makes it, a pronoun:— These men have introduced no fewer than 107 amendments, which they hnow perfectly well cannot pass, & numerous of which are not meant to pass. See various, which is much more often misused in the same way.

nuncio. Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 4.

nurse makes -sable; see MUTE E.

nurs(e)ling. The form recommended, though rather less common hitherto than the other, is nurseling; see MUTE E for the criterion.

nursy, not -sey; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

O

-O- is a connecting vowcl of Greek origin, its extended modern function being so to shape the end of a Greek or Latin word that when a suffix or another word is applied to it the two will coalesce recognizably into a single derivative or compound. Three points should be noticed:— 1. The thing ending in -o- is not a word, but essentially the beginning only of a word; We owe it to the genius of Hertz that we are nur able to measure directly the velocity of electro & magnetic waves; electro is there used as an adjective instead of electric, & is indefensible. The use of CURTAILED worDs such as dynamo, photo, chromo, & electro itself, for dynamo-clectric machine, photograph, chromolithograph, & electro-plate, is another matter. 2. The words fit for the -o- treatment are, if not necessarily authentic ancient Greek or Latin, at least such as may pass for Greek or Latin. If the ancient Romans did not call the Russians Russi or talk of America & Americant, we can suppose that was only because they had not the chance, & are therefore entitled to make Russo-, Americo-, & Americano-; but the Greeks & Romans knew what speed was, & yet no-one supposes they called it speed, whence it follows that speedo- & speedometer are barbarisms. 3. It
