page: 394

+ also unobservant, gives substitute the construction of replace, instil that of fill, & prefix that of preface. It is seldom that the mistake is made with native words; an example will be found under foist. Two or three specimens may be here given; the reader who wishes for more will find them under the words substitute, prefiz, inculcate, inflict, infuse, enforce, affix, ingratiate, enjoin, & others. The atiempt to convict Mr Masterman yesterday of an tndiscreet utterance in a public speech é& to affix the Government with responsibility therefor utterly failed (& to affix responsibility to the Government)./A quarterly which is doing so much to initiate into the minds of the British Public what is requisite for them to know (to initiate the B.P. in what is requisite)./The ecclesiastical principle was substituted by the national (the national principle was substituted for the ecclesiastical).

objurgate makes -tor; see -or.

obligated as a synonym for obliged (having received a favour &c.) is now a mere solecism; but in the full sense of bound by law or duty to do something it is still used, esp. in legal language.

obligato. See OBBLIGATO.

obligatory. The pronunciation recommended is obli’gatorf.

oblige makes -ging; see MUTE E. The derivatives of o. & obligate (see OBLIGATED above) are troublesome; there are two possible adjectives in -able (see -ABLE 1), viz, obligable from obligate (=that can be legally bound; pronounce O’biigabl), & obligeable from oblige (=that can have a favour conferred; pron. obli’jabl). Obligee & obligor belong in sense to obligate, & have curious meanings: obligor, not one who confers an obligation, but one who binds or obligates himself to do something; obligee, not one who is obliged, but one to whom a service is due (towards whom a duty has been undertaken),

894

oblique complement. See TEcH- NICAL TERMS.

nie ppc bona lb Thereissome tendency to confine the latter to the secondary or figurative senses; obliquity of mind or judgement or outlook, but obliqueness of the ground, a Chinaman’s eyes, or the alignment; cf. opacity, & see -Ty & -NESS. It is perhaps well to fall in with such DIFFERENTIATION.

obliterate makes -rable, -tor;

see “ABLE Il, -OR.

oblivious. A word badly misused in two ways. 1. Its right sense is no longer aware or no longer mindful; it is not simply unaware or unconscious or insensible. The following examples all offend against this principle:—A contempt to which the average Englishman in his happy self-sufficiency is generally oblivious./ He may have driven off quite oblivious of the fact that any harm had been

ne./And they are ingenuously oblivious to the ‘ howlers’ so constantly perpetrated./General von Stein denied that the propaganda in the army was polttical, & he added, quite oblivious of the import of what he was saying: ‘ The soldier had to be unstructed as to the reasons of the war’./Singly or in groups, oblivious to the traffic in the streets, they pursued their eager quest. 2. Even when the word might bear its true sense of forgetful (as opposed to unaware), it is often followed by the wrong preposition (to); this is an indirect result of the mistake explained in 1; it will be noticed that a majority of the quotations there given show to instead of of; that is on the analogy of insensible to. But in the following examples to has been used even where the meaning might otherwise be the correct one of forgetful:—Each of them oblivious to the presence of anybody else, & intent on conversation./A principle to which the romances of the eighteenth century were curiously oblivious./Mr Humphreys is always oblivious to the Jact that the minortty in one part
