page: 395

ession. e making of these mistakes ig part of the price paid by those who reject the homely word, avoid the obvious, & look about for the imposing; forgetful, unaware, un-

conscious, unmindful, & insensible, while they usually give the meaning

more precisely, lay no traps.

obnoxious has two very different senses, one of which (exposed or

open or liable to attack or injury)

requires notice because its curren

is now so restricted that it is

puzzling to the uninstructed. It igs

the word’s rightful or de-jure mean-

ing, & we may hope that scholarly

writers will keep it alive, as they

have hitherto succeeded in doing.

Meanwhile the rest of us need not

scruple to recognize the usurping

or de-facto sense offensive or objec-

tionable; this has perhaps no right

to exist (‘apparently affected by association with noxious’ says the OED), but it does & will, &, unlike the other, it is comprehensible to everyone.

oboe. See HAUTBOY.

observance)(observation. The useful differentiation in virtue of which neither word can be substituted for the other, & each is appropriated to certain senses of observe, should not be neglected. Observance is the attending to & carrying out of a duty or rule or custom; it has none of the senses of observation (watching, noticing, &c.), & observation in turn does not mean rforming or complying. Though the distinction is modern, its prevalence in good writing may be judged from the OED’s having only one 19th-c. & no 20th-c. ope of observance, as against many of observation, in the sense consciously seeing or taking notice. Unfortunately, the journalists’ perverted taste for out-of-the-

4 of the kingdom is represented by the majority in another part. /In England the very completeness of the defeat of Roman Catholicism has rendered the people oblivious to the danger of its

895

OCCIPUT

way forms is undoing this useful

achievement, & in the last 20 years

such uses as the following, almost

unknown for two or three centuries,

have again become common:—To

reinforce observance with 7; ina-

tion./That the Americans are & wi

remain interested in Europe, & that

a close observance of European &

Asiatic affairs is an essential &

tmportant part of the life of the

citizen of the U.S./Emerson does not

check his Me s he scorns

observance./Mr Abbott's verse, basing

its claims to beauty on significant

observance, is apt for that very reason

fo .. ./From him Mr Torr inherits

both his gift for exact observance ¢:

soely humour./His early poetry, the

product of exalted sensation rather

than of careful observance. / Whose

powers of observance ¢& have

combined to make as varied a racon-

leur as... In all these the word should be obs! tion is added in which observation is

obstacle. Their athy, fatalism, & resentment of interference constituted, & still constitute, a formidable obstacle of progress. After obstacle, idiom requires to, not of.

obstetric(al). See -ic(aL). The short form is much commoner, & is recommended; its formation is in fact faulty (a midwife is obstetrizx, -icis, so that obdstetricic would be the true adjective), while that of obstetrical would pass; but only pedantry would take exception to obstetric at this stage of its career. obstruct makes -tor; see -or. obtain. See Forma. worps. Customer—Can you get me some? Shopman—We can o. it for you, madam. obturate makes -for; see -or. obviate makes -iable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -oR. occiput. Pronounce dksi-.
