page: 396

oceupy. For inflexions see VERBs | IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6.

occur makes -rred, -rring, &c.; see -R-, -RR-. For occurring see Pro-

| -O(E)S. The Englishman has a NUNCIATION 58.f.

ocean. For o. greyhound see

| words in -o. No-one who is not Sop@aquETs.

ocellus. Pl. -llt (-1).

ochlocracy. Pronounce 6k-.

ochre. For spelling see -RE & -ER; & for ochr(e)jish & ochr(e)ous see SPELLING POINTS, 8 8.f.

octaroon. See OCTOROON.

octavo. See FOLIO. Pl. -08; see -O(E)S 6.

octet(te). Spell -ef; see DUET.

octingentenary, octocentenary, octocentennial. In preference to all these octingenary is recommended; see CENTENARY.

octodecimo. See Fouio. Pl. -03; see -0(E)s 6

octonarius. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

octopus. PI. -uses; the Greek or Latin pl., rarely used, is -podes (-éz), not -pi; see LATIN PLURALS, & cf. POLYPUS,

octoroon, -taroon. Both are bad forms, the -r- being imported from quadroon, which has a right to it. But the second is worse than the first, since octa- is not (like quadr-) Latin, but Greek. For meaning, see MULATTO 2,

octosyllabics. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

octroi. Pronounce 6’ktrwah. For synonymy see TAX.

oddment. Though the word itself is established & useful, its formation is anomalous (see -MENT) & should not be imitated.

ode. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

odo(u)r, odorous. Keep the -u- in the noun; see -ourn & -or, -oUR- & -OR-.

Pl. -cys.

OE, &, E. See x,a. The following spellings of words beginning with oe or its substitutes are recommended: oecist; oecology &c.; ecumenical; oedema &c.; Oedipus; oesophagus;

+ oestrum. The pronunciation in all is simply é. legitimate grievance against the

repared to flout usage & say that for im every word in -o shall make -0es, or shall make -os, can possibly escape doubts; one kind of wholehogger will have to write heros & nos & potatos & gos & negros, while the other kind must face embryoes, photoes, cameoes, duodecimocs, & generalissimoes. In this book, most words in -o have been entered with the plurals that seem advisable; here, one or two guiding principles may be indicated. Although thcre are several hundred nouns in -o, the ending is one that is generally felt to be exotic, & the plural in -oces, which is shown, by its being indispensable with the most familiar words (no, go, cargo, jingo, hero, negro, &c.) to be the normal form, is allowed only to a small minority, most words having -os. It must be understood that the following rules are not more than gencrally true, & that sometimes they come to blows with each other over a word.

1. Words used as freely in the plural as in the singular usually have -oes, though there are very few with which it is invariable; names of animals & plants fall naturally into this class. So banjoes; bravoes; cargoes; dingoes; dominoes; heroes; potatoes.

2. Monosyllables take -oes; so goes, noes.

3. Words of the kind whose plural is seldom wanted or is restricted to special uses have -os; so dos (the musical note); bravados; calicos; crescendos; dittos; guanos; infernos; lumbagos.

4, When a vowel precedes the -o, -os is usual, perhaps because of the bizarre look of -ioes &c.; 80 arpeggios; baboos; bagnios; cameos;

yos; folios; punctilios.

5. The curtailed words made by dropping the second element of a
