page: 398

+ which a large proportion of the money given goes for the expenses of collection.

2. Patching the unpatchable. These resemble the previous set so far as the writers are concerned; they have done the same thing as before; but for the reader who wishes to correct them there is the difference that only one course is open; of must be simply omitted, & between or without cannot be substituted. We can say for you & for me instead of for you & me if we choose, but not between you & between me for between you & me; with cries & with tears means the same as with cries & tears, but without cries or without tears does not mean the same as without cries or tears; on this point, see OVERZEAL. It could be done without unduly raising the price of coal, or of jeopardizing new trade./ He will distinguish between the American habit of concentrating upon the absolute essentials, of ‘ getting there’ by the shortest path, & of the elaboration in detail & the love of refinements in workmanship whitch mark the Latin mind./Without going into the vercd question of the precise geographical limitations, or of pronouncing any opinion upon the conficting claims of Italy & of the ie ee what may be said is ‘that...

8. Side-slip. Besides the types

iven in the previous sections, so

autifully systematic in irregularity .as almost to appear regular, there .are more casual aberrations of which mo more need be said than that the ‘sentence is diverted from it; track into an of construction by the

resence somewhere of an of. Ana-

ogous mistakes are illustrated in the article SIDE-sLrp. Swub-section 8 prohibits the Irish Parliament from making any law so as to directly er tndirectly establish or endow any religion or prohibit the free exercise thereof or of giving a preference or tmposing a disability on account of religious belief or ecclesiastical status. / The primary object was not the 398

+ destruction of the mole forts, or of the aeroplane shed, or of «ohatever military equipment was there, or even of killing or capturing tts garrison./ Lord Parmoor referred to the progress which had been made in the acceptance of the principle of a@ League of Nations, mentioning especially tts inclusion in the Coalition programme, & of the appointment of Lord Robert Cecil to take charge of this question at the Peace Conference. / Its whole policy was, & ts, simply to obstruct the improvement of the workingman’s tavern, & of turning every house of refreshment & entertainment in the land into that sort of coffee tavern which...

4, Irresolution. Iere again we have illustrated Germany's utter contempt for her pledged word & of her respect for nothing but brute force./Hlis view would be more appropriate in reference to Hume's standpoint than of the best thought of our own day. The results of having in mind two ways of putting a thing & deciding first for one & then for the other: we have tllustrated, & we have an illustration of; to Hume’s standpoint (than to the thought), & to the standpoint of Hume (than of the thought).

5. Needless repetition of of. There is a classical tag about the pleasure of being on shore & of watching other folk in a big sea. A matter not of

ammar, but of style & lucidity; in style the second of is heavy, & in sense it obscures the fact that the pleasure lies not in two separate things but in their combination.

6. Misleading omission. The prohibition of meetings & the printing & distribution of flysheets stopped the Radicals’ agitation. Unless an of is inserted before the printing, the instinct of eye compels us to start by assuming that the printing &c. of flysheets is parallel to the prohibition of meetings instead of, as it must be, to meetings alonc.

7. Some freaks of idiom. You are the man of all others that I did not suspect. He ts the worst liar of any man I know. A child of ten years
