page: 402

+ you cannot understand out of a word that is yet to come another word (as article out of a coming articles, nation out of a coming nations, Voortrekker out of a coming Voortrekkers), but only the same word, as orator out of orator. When, as always happens in this idiom, there is a change of number, the only thing is to see that the place from which the understood word is omitted is after, not beforc, the word from which it is to be supplied; for from a word that has already been expressed the taking of the other number is not forbidden. Accordingly, the right form for the words that concern us in the examples a-f will be:—One of the most spacious, tf not the mosi spacious, of salons; One of the finest poems of an equal length produced of recent years, if not the finest; One of the best professions open to women, if not the best of all; One of the greatest export articles of Norway, perhaps the greatest; One of the most enterprising nations in the East, if not the most; One of the oldest Voortrekkers, if not the oldest. -

It may be thought that for a the best has not been donc, & that One of the, if not the, most spacious of salons would have been less clumsy, & vet legitimate. It is an improvement on the original, & by inserting a the & correcting the stops makes a plausible attempt at compromise; but- it is not legitimate, because most spacious has to be taken as at the same time singular & plural; English disguises that fact by its lack of inflexions, but does not annul it; &, though most people are not quite sure what is the matter, they can feel that there is something the matter.

4. One of the men who does things. Does should be do. This blunder, casier to deal with than that in 38, but not less frequent, will be found discussed in NuMBER, 5.

5. Kind of pronoun. To avoid confusion in this & the later sections

+ between certain uses of the pronoun one that tend to run into each other, it will be necessary to ask the reader to accept, pro hac vice only, certain names. One is a pronoun of some sort whenever it stands not in agreement with a noun, but as a substitute for a noun preceded by a or one: in ‘I took one apple ” one is not a pronoun, but an adjective; in ‘I want an Vee may I take one?” one stands for an apple or one apple, & is a pronoun. But for the purpose of this article it is more important to notice that one is not always the same kind of pronoun; it is of three different kinds in these three examples:—One of them escaped; One is often forced to confess failure; One knew better than to swallow that. In the first, one may be called a numeral pronoun, which description will cover also I will take one, They saw one another, One is enough, & 80 on. In the second, one has a special sense; it stands for a person, i.e., the average person, or the sort of person we happen to be concerned with, or anyone of the class that includes the speaker; it does not mean a particular person; it might be called an indefinite, or an impersonal, pronoun; for the sake of contrast with the third use, impersonal pronoun will here be the name. In the third, one is neither more nor less than a substitute for i, & the name that best describes it is the false first-personal pronoun. The distinction between the numeral & the impersonal, which is plain enough, is important because on it depend such differences as that between One hates his enemies & One hates one’s enemies; those differences will be treated in section 6. The distinction between the impersonal & the false first-personal, a rather fine one in practice, is still more important because it separates an established & legitimate use from one that ought not to exist at all. The false first-personal pronoun one is a new invention of the self-
