page: 406

+ is an orthodox position for the udverb, easily determined in case of need; to choose another position that may spoil or obscure the meaningis bad; but a change of position thut has no such effect except technically is both justified by historical & colloquial usage & often demanded by rhetorical needs.

The OED remarks on the point should be given: ‘ Only was formerly often placed away from the word or words which it limited; this is still frequent in specch, where the stress & pauses prevent ambiguity, but is now avoided by perspicuous writers’. Which implies the corollary that when perspicuity is not in danger it is needless to submit to an _ inconvenient restriction.

A specimen or two of different kinds are added for the reader’s unaided consideration:—The address to be written on thas side only./ Europe only has a truce before tt, but a truce that can be profited by./Some of the Metropolitan crossings can only now be negotiated with considerable risk./If only the foundry trades had been concerned, probably the employers would not have greatly objected to conceding an advance./I only know nothing shall induce me to go again./ I only asked the question from habit./ We can only form a sound & trustworthy opinion if we first consider a large variety of instances.

onomatopoeia. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

onomatopoeic, -poetic. The first form (pronounce -pé’ik) is decidedly preferable, because the other inevitably suggests, at Icast to those who do not know Greek, irrelevant associations with poct. For writing of -ocic, see £, &.

onto, on to, on. The logic of this electioneering leads straight to the abolition of the contributions & the placing of the whole burden on to the State./The Pan-Germans are strong enough to depose a Foreign Secretary & force their own man 406

+ on to the Government in his place. Writers & printers should make up their minds whether there is such a preposition as onto or not; if there is not, they should omit the fo in such contexts as the above, which are good English without it; if there is, & they like it better than the simple on or to (an odd taste, except under very rare conditions), they should make one word of it. Abstain from the preposition if you like; use it & own up if you like; but do not use it & pretend there is no such word; those should be the rcgulations. The usc of on to as separate words is, however, correct when on is a full adverb; & very rarely doubts may arise whether this is so or not; is on an adverb, or is onto a preposition, for instance, in He played the ball on to his wicket? as He played on could stand by itself, it is hard to deny on its independent status. Occasions for on to: We must walk on to Keswick; Each passed it on to his neighbour; Struggling on to victory. Occasions for on or to or onto, but on no account on to: Climbed up on(to) the roof; Was invited (on)to the platform; It struggles (on)to its legs again; They fell 300 ft on(to) a glacier.

onward(s). The shorter form is much commoner in all senses, except possibly in phrases of the type from the tenth century onwards.

oolite. Pronounce O’olit.

opacity)(opaqueness. The figurative senses are avoided with the second, but the literal senses are not confined to it, though there is perhaps a tendency to complete differentiation: The opacity of his understanding; Owing to the opaqueness, or opacity, of the glass.

operate makes -rable, -lor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

operculum. PI. -la.

opinionated, -ative. Both have existed long enough in English to justify anyone in using either. But for those who do prefer a sound to

OPINIONATED
