page: 407

+ a faulty formation it may be said that the first is unobjectionable, & the second not. A Latin opinionatus might have been correctly made from the noun opinio; cf. dentatus from dens, & many others; & the English representative of optnionatus would be indifferently opinionate or opinionated. But Latin -atious belongs to verb-derivatives only, & opinativus from the verb opinor, giving English opinative (which once existed), would have been the true source for a word in -alwe.

opportunity. He rapidly rose by the display of rare organizing ability to be superintendent over the affairs of the company in the Far East, with practically a free hand—a fact of which he took every opportunity. You take the o., or an o., or every 0., of doing something. You fake advantage, or all possible advantage, of a fact or event or state of affairs. The two sets of phrases must not be mixed; see CAST-IRON IDIOM, & ANALOGY.

oppose makes -sable; see MUTE E.

opposeless. See -LESSs.

opposite tempts careless writers to the slovenly clipping seen in: He can thwart him by applying w to the opposite purpose for which it was intended (he is pupil, him teacher, & it the teaching). Insert from (or to) that after purpose; & for similar temptations cf. as 8 (the question as to whom it belongs, &c.), REGARD (J regard it my duty to..., &c.), & DEPEND.

oppress makes -ssible, -ssor; see -ABLE 2, -OR.

optative. The natural pronunciation would have been O’ptativ (‘ cf. ablative, precative, relative’ says the OED); t, as the word is very rare outside its technical use in grammar, & those who deal in

grammar have somehow come to call it Spta’tiv, it is not worth while to attempt to reform them; any-

one who wishes to use it apart from

grammar (The will or optative power,

+ choosing or rejecting among the objects presented to the mind) is justified in saying 6’ptativ. For the grammatical use see TECHNICAL TERMS.

optic. For the noun use, = eye, see PEDANTIC HUMOUR; ‘* Formerly the learned & elegant term ’—OED.

optimism, -ist(ic). Besides optimism, which affirms the definitive ascendency of good, & pessimism, which affirms the definitive ascendency of evil, a third hypothesis is possible. / The optimistic or sentimental hypothesis that wickedness always fares ill tn the world./The company had suffered severe losses, but at the last meeting the chairman spoke with a fair amount of optimism./Mr Balfour, I learn, has rented his flat till October; but he is optimistic if he really thinks that he, or whoever represents the Foreign Office, can leave Paris by October. The first two quotations show the words in their proper sense, the last two in their modern popular triviality. They have become VOGUE-WORDS, on much the same level as INDIVIDUAL & MENTALITY. They belong in time between those two, & are not yet discredited like the former, but have lost the charm of novelty that still lingers about the latter. Like both those, they owe their vogue to the delight of the ignorant in catching up a word that has puzzled them when they first heard it, & exhibiting their acquaintance with it as often as possible; & like both those they displace with what differs more or less from the idea intended the familiar words that would express it exactly. In the third & fourth quotations, sanguine & hope would have given the sense not less but more exactly than optimistic & optimism. See POPULARIZED TECH- NICALITIES.

opus. PIl., seldom used, opera; see LATIN PLURALS.

opusculum. PI. -ula.

or. 1. Or) (nor. 2. Number, pronouns, &c., after or. 38. Or in
