page: 409

+ with or there is much difference between without falsehood or deccit (which implies that neither is present) & without falsehood or without deceit (which implies only that one of the two is not present). In all the examples except the last, either or must be changed to and, or the word or words repeated after or must be cut out; in the last example, if or is to be retained, it will be necessary, besides omitting no, to change one to person. No great economy or no high effici can be secured./All these princi ak causes were in operation before PM Lloyd George came on the scene or before his budget was heard of./There would be nothin ne very surprising or nothing necessa fraudulent in an unconscious conipinics to borrow from cach other./We need something more before we can conclude that Germany is going to be democratized in any effective way, or before we can be sure that this move also is not a reeapon in the war./All this, we are told, can be done without any flirtation with Home Rule or without any sacrifice of the loyalists./. . . prevents the labourer from being a free agent or from having a free market for his labour./To no conference of pacifist tendencies or to no gatherings where representatives of the cnemy people will be found, will American labour _ organizations send delcgaics./Every arrangement ends in a compromise, é& no one or no party may ever be expected to carry its own views out in their entirety.

-OR is the Latin agent-noun ending corresponding to the English -er; compare doer & perpetrator. English verbs derived from the supine stem of Latin ones—i.e., especially most verbs in -ate, but also many others such as oppress, protect, act, credil, possess, invent, prosecute— usually prefer this Latin form to the English one in -er. Some other

verbs, e.g. govern, conquer, & purvey,

not corresponding to the above

description have agent nouns in -or

409

+ owing to their passage through French or other circumstances that need not here be set forth. An attempt has been made to register the verbs whose agent nouns end in -or, with references to this article. A few odd differences may be of interest: decanter & castor; dispenser & distributor; adapter & inventor; digester & collector; corrupter & corrector; deserter & abductor; eraser & ejector; promoter & abettor.

9 -geism. The first is better; see MUTE E.

orate. A BACK-FORMATION from oration, & marked by the slangy jocularity of its class.

oratio obliqua, recta. See TEcH- NICAL TERMS.

oratorio. Pl. -os; see -o(r)s 4.

oratress. See FEMININE DESIGNA- TIONS. |

orb. See GLOBE.

orchis, -chid. The first form is applied chiefly to the English wild kinds & is accordingly the poctic & the country word; pl. -ises (see -S-, -SS-).

ordeal. All the verse quotations in the OED (Chaucer, Spenser, Cowley, Butler, Tennyson) show the accent on the first syllable. Whether -dél or -dial is right is Iess clear.

order. For wrong constructions after in order that (t.0.t. the complaint that colliery proprietors are diverting domestic coal for industrial purposes can be considered), see 1N ORDER THAT.

orderly. See -LILy.

oread. Pronounce or‘lad.

oreography &c. See OROGRAPHY.

organize makes -zable; see MUTE F.

organizedly. A bad form; see “EDLY.

organon. PI. -ana, -ns; see -ON I.

originate makes -nable, -tor; see -ABLE Il, -OR.

orison. Pronounce 6’rizn.

Orleans. Pronounce or’llianz.

ornament. See Noun & VERB ACCENT, 1 C.

ornithology, ornithorhyncus, <c.
