page: 410

+ The proper sound of the first element is orni’tho, not ar’nitho, & it seems better to keep the I except when the falling of the main accent on the next svilable (-o-) makes it unnatural; see Fase QUANTITY. This would give, among common words: ornithocepha’lic, ornitholo’gical, orni’thomancy, & ornithorhy’ncus; but orn!tho’logist, ornItho’logy, & ornitho’scopy.

orography, orolingual, &c. The identical representation of Greek oros mountain & Latin os mouth by oro- is regrettable. The most convenient arrangement consistcnt with correctness would have been to make ori- the combining form of Latin os mouth (oritcentral, ori-anal,_ orilingual, &c.), & oreo- that of Greek oros mountain (oreography, oreometric, &c.). As ori- does exist in orinasal & other mouth-words, & oreo- has not been entircly superseceded in the mountain-words, it is possibly not too late to suggest that this distinction should even now be established.

orotund. The odd thing about the word is that its only currency, at least in its non-technical sense, is among those who should most abhor it, the people of sufficient education to realize its bad formation; it is at once a monstrosity in its form & a pedantry in its use. If the elocutionists & experts in voice-production like it as a technical term, they are welcome to it; the rest of us should certainly leave it to them, & not regard it as a good substitute for magniloquent, sounding, highflown,inflated, pompous, imposing, & the like.

oscillate makes -llable, -tor; see -ABLE I, -OR.

osculatory. A_ favourite Potry- ‘SYLLABIC-HUMOUR Word: The two ladies went through the o. ceremony./ At the end of one letter were a number of dots which he (counsel) presumed were meant to represent an oO. performance.

ossify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE, -Y, -YE, 6. 410

ostler, he. Pronounce 6’sler; see PRONUNCIATION. The form without h- is the now established one, though etymologically wrong; hospital, hostel, hotel, & hostler, belong together.

ostracize makcs -zable; see MUTE E.

other. 1. Each o.)(one another. 2. On the other hand. 8. Of all others. 4. Other)(others or another. 5. Other than.

1. Each o.)(one another. For the syntax of these, & for the distinction sometimes made between them, see EACH 2.

2. On the 0. hand. For the difference between this & on the contrary, see CONTRARY 2.

3. Of all others. You are the man of all others I wanted to see. A mixture of You are the man of all men &c. & You are the man I wanted to see beyond all others. A still popular ILLOGICALITY, perhaps to be counted among the STURDY INDEFENSIBLES that are likely tosurvive their critics.

4 Other)(others or another. The writers of the following sentences may be supposed to have hesitated between other & others; if they had decided for others, they would have been more in tune with modern usage; to say they would have chosen more correctly is hardly possible:—The Unionist Party will do well to remember that the wrecking policy is, like other of their adventures in recent times, @ dangerous gamble./We find here, as in other of his novels, that he has no genius for .. ./Mrs will, we hope, incite other of her countrymen & countrywomen to similar studics./ We were quite prepared for the most rigid prohibition of trade with Germany; so was France & other of our Allies./A Privy Councillorship, an honour which has but rarely been won by other than those who were British subjects from the moment of their birth.

In four of these we have what the OED calls the absolute use of the adjective, the noun represented by other being present elsewhere in the

OTHER
