page: 412

+ telegrams to the various States suggesting that they should concur in the Governor-General residing in New South Wales o. t. when Parliament was sitting. One or two of these are justifiable, while one is certainly not, from the grammarian’s point of view; regarded as ornaments, they are clearly of no great value; on the whole, other than should be registered as a phrase to be avoided except where it is both the most natural way of putting the thing & grammatically defensible.

otherwise is now having very curious experiences—emphatically is having in the present tensc, because, while the OED shows no trace whatever of the two uses to be illustrated below, both of them are so common at this moment that probably no-one ever reads _ his newspaper through without meeting them. Whether this popularity is a sign of lately developed indispensability, or merely a new example of the speed with which a trick of bad English can be spread by fashion (cf. ASSET, SUBSTITUTE, PROPOSITION, PROTAGONIST), it is hard to say with confidence; but, as one use is a definite outrage on grammatical principles, & the other not very sed to reconcile with them, we may perhaps hope that they are freaks of fashion only, & that their future will be as short as thcir past.

The first is the ungrammatical use of the adverb otherwise when the adjective other would be correct; cf. OTHER for the converse mistake. Comment will be better reserved till the reader has scen some examples:—This reduction in total expenditure has been made concurrently with certain increases—automatic & otherwise—in particular items./There are large tracts of the country, agricultural & otherwise, in which Labour writ does not run./No further threats, economic or otherwise, have been made./This is a common tncident in all warfare, industrial or otherwise./No organi-

412

+ zations, religious or otherwise, had troubled to take the matter up./The United States is no longer under any obligation to vreserve neutrality, whether ‘true’ or otherwise./The author’s line of demarcation between stamps desirable & otherwise is rather arbitrary./Place a fair share of taxation on the owners, ducal & otherwise, holding land & not developing it.

An apology may fairly be expected for presenting so long a string of monotonous examples. The apology is that, before asking the journalist to give up a favourite habit, one should convince him that it is his habit. That the habit is a bad one needs no demonstration; but it is worth while to consider how it has come into existence, & whether abstention from it is really a serious inconvenience. In all the above quotations, the structure is the same —an adjective deferred till after its noun & followed by an and or an or joining to it the adverb otherwise. Now, what should possess anyone, under those circumstances, to match the adjective with otherwise instead of other? Is it not (far-fetched as the explanation may seem) that the old saying ‘Some men are wise & some are otherwise’ has lately struck the popular consciousness as witt > & has incidentally inspired a belief that otherwise, & not other, is the natural parallel to an adjective? The justification of the proverb’s own wording is simple—that it isa pun, & that puns treat grammar as love treats locksmiths, with derision. A pun, however, & still more the faded memory of a pun, is a bad basis for a generalidiom. But, next, there is no dificulty whatever in abstaining from this bit of bad grammar. Itis true that things have now reached the stage when many people fee] that tochange the popular otherwise to the correct other is sometimes pedantic; but it is only sometimes, & there are other resources. The above examples would none of them be less natural if the offend-
