page: 413

+ ing expression were rewritten thus: certain automatic & other increases— some agricultural & some not—no further economic or other threats— industrial or not—religious or nonreligious—thether ‘true’ or not— desirable stamps & others—the ducal & other owners. In correcting, the simple change of otherwise to other has been avoided, though in fact the critic who would say *° pedantry’ to it must be a little crazy on the subject.

In the second use now to be deprecated, the grammar admits of a rather claborate defence, but the plrase is not worth the trouble of defending. It is this time not an adjective, but a noun, to which otherwise supplies the parallel. Take the three forms: What concerns us is his solvency; What concerns us ts his solvency or insolvency; What concerns us is his solvency or otherwise. An enormous majority of the sentences in which or otherwise answers to a noun are of this type; i.e., it makes no appreciable difference to the meaning & effect which of the three forms is chosen. The first & the second are as much & as little different in most contexts as Are you ready? is diffcrent from Are you ready or not?; there is a possibility, which seldom passes into fact, that the expression of the alternative, which if not expressed would be implied, conveys a special emphasis. The third differs from the second (if grammar is put aside) only as a piece of ELEGANT VARIA- TION differs from the same meaning given without the variation; otherwise is used to escape repeating, in

insolvency, the previous solvency.

Few readers who will compare

without prejudice the three forms

will refuse to admit that the best

of the three, whercver it is possible,

is the first & shortest—What con-

cerns us is his solvency—, the addi-

tions or insolvency & or otherwise

being mere waste of words. If

writers in general put the question

to themselves, made the admission,

413

+ & acted upon it, not one or otherwise in the long list that follows would have been written. Or otherwisc after a noun is (a) nearly always superfluous, (b) when it is not superfluous, an inferior substitute for or with the negative form of the preceding noun or an equivalent, & (c) grammatically questionable. Examples of the ordinary foolish use now follow, & the reader is invited to agree that each would be improved by the simple omission of or otherwise:—Crystalline character ts acknowledged to be a safe test of identity 0.0. in the realm of physiology./I do not think I made any assertion as to the mutability o. 0. of nature./Its usefulness, 0.0., to Germany depends entirely upon the material conditions of the wars to which it will be applied. /The clectoraic may be consulted on the merits, o. 0., of a_ single specific measure./A searching examination of the financial wisdom, 0.0., of such undertakings./ This witness has been called as to the accuracy, 0.0., of the statements of two other witnesses./A Royal Commission to consider & report on the need 0.0. for State protection of this asset in our resources./To enable judgment to be passed upon the merits, 0. 0., of any fancy formula for winning wars./The success of our efforts dcpends on the success o. 0. of the German submarine campaign./I am not concerned with the accuracy 0. 0. of the figures given./Wtthout offering an opinion as to the desirability o. o. of the growth of a definite party./ Any tnquiry as to the correctness o. 0. of his asscssment./It is entirely for the High Court to ascertain the truth 0. 0. of the statemenis./The provision of coal & the financing of ravv materials for Austrian industry arc not dependent on the solvency o. 0. of the Austrian Siate.

It has been allowed above that o. o. in this construction is not quite always superfluous. It is not superfluous in With the view of showing the applicability (0. 0.) to the practical affairs of government of the principlcs
