page: 418

+ it is misused, but in the hope of calling attention to it as a phrase that should be more used. Its rights are now perpetually infringed by pueE to. The difference is that, while 0. ¢. can be either adjectival or adverbial (The accident was not 0. t. carelessness; O.t. my carelessness he broke his Icg), d. t. can only be adjectival (The accident was not d. t. carelessness). In the following examples (& see pvr for others) owing must be substituted for due:— Due to this omission he has unfortunately committed himself to views he finds it difficult to go back on./But, due largely to the fact that the hall was situated a long distunce from the Congress building, the visitors did not attend in such large numbers as previously, See QUASI-ADVERBS.

owl-like. For hyphen see -LikeE.

own. For own the soft impcachment, see IRRELEVANT ALLUSION.

ox. Pl. oxen.

oxidize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

oxymoron. Pl. -s or -ra; see -ONn. For meaning see TECHNICAL TERMS,

P

pacé. This latinism (p. fud by your Icave, or if you will allow me to say s0; p. Veneris if Venus will not be offended by my saying 80) is one that we could very well do without in English. Not only is it often unintelligible to many readers even when rightly used; it is also by many writers wrongly used. In the two following pieces, which have unluckily to be long if the point is to be clear, the meaning is * according to Mr Begbie ’ or ‘ according to the Jungborn’ enthusiasts’; it ought to be just the opposite— *though Mr B. (or the enthusiasts) will doubtless not agree’ :—After the beauty of rural life in the South his picture of Belfast is a vision of horror. On the details of that picture we need not dwell; but the moral which Mr Begbte appears to draw Srom his contrast is that a Conservadive Irish Parliament will do little to 418

+ belter the conditions of town life, & that the industrial classes would find relief from those conditions more quickly under the rule of the English Parliament, whitch, care Mr Begbie, is advancing rapidly towards some form of Socialism./For more than ten thousand years these things have been recognized in some part of the world; during that lapse of time, at least, some men & women have been living according to their own lights rather than according to the light of nature. Now, pace the Jungborn enthusiasts, the time has come to change all this. If man would survive as a species, we learn in effect, he must begin the return journey to the place whence he came.

Minor objections are that the construction is awkward in English (p. Mr Smith is the best we can do for p. Caesaris in the genitive), & that the Latinless naturally, but distastefully to those who know Latin, extend the mcaning or application as they do those of vIDE, RE, & E.G. So: But in the House of Lords there is no hilarity—pace Lord Salisbury’s speech last night. Pace does not mean notwithstanding a fact or instance, but despite someone’s opinion.

ha. See PASHA.

pachydermatous. A favourite with the PoLysyLLABIC HUMOURists,

pacif(ic)ist. There is no doubt that the longer form is the better; for full discussion see -1sT A; but its chances of ousting the wrong form are small.

pacify. For inflexions see Vrrss IN -IE &c., 6.

Paddy. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -y.

ne. Three syllables (padro’né);_ pl. -22 (-é).

pacan. See #, a.

pageant. Pronounce p&’jant.

pailful. Pl. puilfuls; see -FuL.

paillasse. See PALLIASSE.

painedly. A bad form; see -EDLY.

paintress. See FEMININE DESIGNA- TIONS.

©

See COLLECTIVES 3.

pair, n.
