page: 421

+ PARALLELEPIPED finding. The right solution is to start the sentence with And women are finding employment not merely &c. In INVERSION the _ section headed inversion in parallel clauses is devoted to this & similar types.

3. Dependent & independent. The municipality charged itself with the purchase of these articles in wholesale quantities, & it was to the Town Hall that poor people applied for them, & were served by municipal employees. The parallel sentences in question were, in their simple form, (a) The

people applied for them to the Town Hall, & (b) The poor people were served by municipal employees. The writer has decided, for the sake of emphasizing Town Hall, to rewrite ain the it was... that form; but he has forgotten that he cannot make a dependent & leave 6b inde-

ndent unless he supplies the

atter with a subject (¢ vant were served), The correct possibilitics are: (i, both independent) The people applied to the Town Hall for them, & were served by municipal employees; (ii, both dependent) It was to the Town Hall that the people applied, & by municipal employees that they were _ serocd; (iii, dependent & independent) It was to the Town Hall that the people applied, & they were served by municipal employces.

parallelepiped.

Pronounce p§ara- 421 lelé’pipéd.

paralogism. See GREEK G.

paralyse. So spelt; for the curious form see ANALYSE,

paramo. Pl. -o8 ; see -o(E)s 6.

paranoea,-nola. The former would be the regular form, but the other, with unlatinized Greck spelling, is more used. For -noea, -nca,sec 7, &.

parapeted. So spelt; scc -T-, -TT-.

paraphrase, vb, makes -sable; see MUTE E.

paraplegia. See GREEK G.

paraselene. Five syllables (-é’nf).

parasitic(al). The longer form has no special function, & is now little used, See -1C(AL).

PARENTHESIS parasitism. So spelt; see MUTE E.

parcel makes -lled &c. ; -LL-, -L-,

parcimony. See PARSIMONY.

pardon makes -oned, -onable, &c.; see -N-, -NN-.

parenchyma. Pron. paré’ngkima.

parenthesis. Pl. -theses (-€z); see LATIN PLURALS, 2.

Is. 1. Relevance. 2. a 8. Dashes as sign of p.

1. Relevance. A parenthesis may have or not have a grammatical relation to the sentence in which it is inserted. In This is, as far as I know, the whole truth there is such a relation, & in This is, I swear, the whole truth there is not; but one is as legitimate as the other. It is not equally indifferent whether the parenthesis is relevant or not to its sentence; parentheses like the following cannot possibly be justified: In writing this straightforward & workmanlike biography of his pia ase (the book was finished

efore the war, & delayed in publication) Mr Walter Jerrold has aimed at doing justice to Douglas Jerrold as dramatist, as social reformer & as good-natured man. The time of writing & the delay have no conceivable bearing on the straightforwardness, workmanlikeness, biographicality, grandfatherliness, justice, drama, reform, or good nature, with which the sentence is concerned. If it had been called a longexpected instead of a straightforward biography, it would have been quite another matter; but, as it is, the parenthesis is as disconcerting as a pebble that jars one’s teeth in a mouthful of plum pudding. The very worst way of introducing an additional fact is to thrust it as a parenthesis into the middle of a sentence with which it has nothing to do. A _ similar example is: Napoleon’s conversations with Bertrand & Moncholon (it is unfortunate that there are several misprints in the book) are a skilful blending of record & pastiche.
