page: 422

2. Identification. Still more fatal than readiness to resort to parenthesis where it is irrelevant is inability to tell a parenthcsis from @ main sentence. He attacked the Government, declaring that they cared more for votes than voters. A remarkable change had come over the Government, he suggested, since the Bill had left the Committee, & expressed doubts as towhether Mr Mastcrman altogether approved of the new turn of affairs. In this, he suggested is as much a parenthesis as if it had been enclosed in brackets; if it were not parenthetic, the sentence would run Ie suggested that a change had come. But the writer, not knowing a parenthesis when he sces (or evcn when he makes) one, has treated it as parallel with expressed, & so fully parallel that its he may be expected to do duty with expressed as well as with suggested, Kither the first part should be rewritten as above with suggested for its governing verb, or the second part should be cut off from the first & begin He expressed doubts, or clse another parcnthesis should be resorted to—ZIt was doubtful, he continued, whether Mr...

8. For double dashcs as a form of p.-, sec STOPS.

parenthetic(al). In most uses the longer form is obsolescent; but it has still a special sense worth preserving, i.e. full of or addicted to parentheses (a horribly -ical style). see -IC(AL).

par excellence. See FRENCH WORDS.

parget. Pronounce -j-.

lah. Pronounce par‘la or par’Ia.

pari mutuel. See FRENCH WwoORDs.

pari passu. Pronounce par’! pa‘si.

parisyllabic. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

parlance. See JARGON.

parley. Pl. of noun, -eys. For verb inflexion, see VERBS IN -lIE &c., 2.

parliament. Pronounce par‘lament.

pario(u)r. Keep the u; but see -OUR & -OR.

parlous is a word that wise men leave alone. It is the same by

422

+ origin as perilous; but it had centuries ago the same fate that has befallen awful & chronic within living memory; it became a VOGUE- WORD applied to many things very remote from its proper sense; it consequently lost all significance, “died of its own too much’, & was for a long time (for most of the 18th century) hardly heard of. In the 19th century it was exhumed by ARCHAISM & PEDANTIC HUMOUR, & the adepts in those arts should be allowed exclusive property in it. About the following curious example it is not very clear either why the writer selected or what he understood by the word: Here & there, perhaps, human nature will out, & in Mr Lyttelton’s introductory discourse on ‘ The Empire’ it is not surprising to find the speaker touching parlously on the controversy with which the name of Birmingham &@ the Chancellor a tts University are tnseparably connected. But with admirable restraint the right honourable gentleman soon waves that argument away & bows acknowledginent to Adam Smith.

Parmesan. Pronounce -z-.

for

° See BURLESQUE synonyms.

paronomasia. TECHNICAL TERMS.

paroquet. See PARAKEET.

parricide)(patricide. The first i3 the orthodox form. Patricide has no doubt been substituted by some deliberately, in order to narrow the meaning to murder(er) of a father, as matricide & fratricide are limited, & by others in ignorance of the right word. Parricide includes not only the murder of cither parent or any near relative or anyone whose person is sacred, but also treason against one’s country; & the making of patricide to correspond to matricide is therefore natural enough,

parry. For inflexions see VERBS IN “IE &c., 6.

parsimony, parci-. The variation dates back to Latin manuscripts; but ° Latin scholars appear to agree
