page: 423

PARTAKE

form,

abandoned.

partake makes -kable: see MUTE F. partially is often used where parly

would be better. This is, no doubt,

because it is formed normally, by

way of the adjective partial, while

partly formed direct from the noun

partis abnormal. There is between

the two words much the same differ-

ence as between wholly (opp. partly)

& completely (opp. partially); in

other words, partly is better in the

sense ‘as regards a part & not the

whole ’, & partially in the sense ‘ to

a limited degree’: It is partly wood;

This was partly due to cowardice;

A partially drunken sailor; His partially re-established health. Often either will give the required sense equally well; partly is then recommended, since it is partially that tends to be Over-uscd; see LONG VARIANTS for other such pairs. An example or two of the wrong partially are:—The two fect are partially of iron & partially of clay./Whether The Case is Altered may be wholly or partially or not at all assignable to the hand of Jonson.

participate makes -pabile, -lor; see “ABLE 1, -OR.

PARTICIPLES. 1. Unattached p. 2. Absolute construction. 8. Fused p. 4. Initial p. &. 5. Accent & pronunciation in p.p. (or adjective or noun) & verb.

1, Unattached p. For this danger, as insidious as notorious, see Un- ATTACHED PARTICIPLE,

2 Absolute construction. The Municipal Council, having refused their assistant clerks’ demand for a rise in salary, those in the Food Supply offices today declared a strike. This false stopping (there should be no comma after Council) is an example of what is perhaps both the worst & the commonest of all mistakes in punctuation. See Apnso- LUTE CONSTRUCTION, a that parsimonia was the actual spelling in classical Latin ’—OED. As pars- is also the prevailing modern the parc- spelling should be

PARTICIPLES

8. Fused p. Jimmy Wilde’s jirst

fight in the United States resulted in

him being beaten by Jack Sharkey. /

They are so well chosen that there 1s

little fear of the reader to whom the

more familiar aspects of the subject

ceased to appeal being wearied

by them. ‘ Him being beaten ’, * the

reader being wearied ’, are examples

of a construction regarded in this

book as a corruptin influence in

modern English, & ful y discussed in

the article Fusep PaRrTICIPLR,

4. Initial participle &c. If news-

paper editors, in the interest of their

readers, maintain any discipline

Over the gentlemen who provide

inch-long paragraphs to stop gaps,

they should take measures against

a particular form that, by a survival

of the unfittest, bids fair to swallow

up all others. In these paragraphs,

before we are allowed to enter, we

are challenged by the sentry, being

& participle or some equivalent

posted in advance: to secure that

our interview with the C.O. (or

subject of the sentence) shall not

take | Seek without due sca

The fussiness of this is probably entertaining while it is quite fresh; one cannot tell, because it is no longer fresh to anyone. Examples:—Described as ‘ disciples of Tolstot’, two Frenchmen sentenced at Cheltenham to two months’ imprisonment for false statements to the registration officer are not to be recommended for deportation. /Composed of the 3rd Royal Fusiliers, the Scottish Horse, & the 2nd Royal Dublin Fusiliers, the 149th Brigade, as General Jackson (50th Division) says in his foreword, represented ‘ the very best material, traditions, & qualities of England, Scotland, & Ireland ay: Winner of many rowing trophies, Mr Robert George Dugdale, aged seventyfive, dicd at Eton./Appointed Inspector-General, West African Frontier Force, Brevet - Lieut. - Colonel A. H. W. Haywood, C.M.B., D.S.O., of the R.G.A., in 1910 spent six months’ furlough by crossing the 423 Sahara Desert./ Aged seventy-nine,
