page: 424

+ the Rev. F. T. Wethcred, vicar of Hurley, near Marlow, whose death ts announced, bathed daily in_ the Thames, winter & summer, till a few months ago./ Believed to be the youngest organist in the country, Master Herbert Woolverton, who officiates at Hutton Church, Essex, has passed the examination as Associate of .. -/ Thirty-four years in the choir of the Chapel Royal, Hampton Court Palace, Mr Francis P. Hill, of Milner Road, Kingston, has retired./Found standing in play astride the live ratl of the electric line at Willesden & in danger of instant death, Walter Spentaford, twelve, was fined 12s. for trespass.

5. Accent & pronunciation in p.p. (or participial adjective or noun) & verb. Beside many of the verbs formed from Latin supine stems (animate, dilute, extract, &c.) there are passive participles of the same spelling, now used as adjectives or nouns. They are often distinguished from the verbs by a differcnce of sound. This may be (A) a shifting of the accent, as in attri’bute v., a’ttribute n.; co’nsummate v., consu’mmate a.; convi‘ct v., co’nvict n.; dicta’te v., di’ctates n. ; dige’st v., di’‘gest n.; dilu’te v., dilute a. ; extra’ct v., e’xtract n.; frustra’te v., fru’strate a.; refu’se v., re’fuse n.; (B) the obscuring of the vowel of -ate, as in advocate v., advocate n.; animate v., animate a.; articulate v., articulate a. ; compassionate v., compassionate a.; degenerate v., degenerate a.; delegate v., delegate n.; deliberate v., deliberate a.; designite v., dcsignate ' a. ; desolate v., desolate a.; elaborate v., elaborate a.; estimate v., estimate n.; legitimate v., legitimate a.; moderate v., moderate a.;

regenerate v., regenerate a.; re-

probate v., reprobate n.; scparite

v., separate a.; subordinate v.,

subordinate a. & n.; or (C) a change

of consonant sound, as in diffuse

(-z) v., diffuse (-s) a. ; refuse (-z) v.,

refuse (-s) n.

ords are referred to this article

(Participies 5 A or B or C) to draw 424

+ attention to a double pronunciation; see also NouN & VERB ACCENT.

parti-coloured, party» partic-. The first is recommen .

-zable; see

particularize makes MUTE E.

parting. The British Empire is at the p. of the ways. Empires & men are now so familiar with that position that, when told they are there once more, they are not disquieted; their only impulse is to feel in their breeches pockets for the penny with which they may toss up. See HACKNEYED PHRASES.

partisan, -zan. Whether the two nouns (adherent of a party, the weapon) are etymologically connected or not is doubtful. The weapon is accented on the first syllable, the adhcrent sometimes so & sometimes on the last. It would be well to make partisa’n (or -za’n) invariable for the latter; & perhaps the -s- might be appropriated to it, & the -z- to the weapon: parttisa’n adherent; par’tizan weapon. But, as the distinction would at least partly arbitrary, & as the weapon word is now seldom wanted, this suggestion is not very likely to be acted upon.

tive. See TECHNICAL TERNS.

party. For this in the sense person, see POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES.

parvenu, pas. See FRENCH WoRDs.

Spell pasha & proeyponyie;

oem makes passed for its past tense (You passed me by), & for its p.p. used verbally (Ji has passed out of use); but when the p.p. has become a@ mere adjective it is t

In past times). The distinction

tween p.p. & adjective is rather

fine in Those times passed away

p.), Those times are passed away

NTRANSITIVE P.P.), Those times arc

past (adjective).

passable, passible. The. first word

(pronounced, usually, pah-) is the
