page: 425

+ adjective from the verb pass; the second (pronounced pas-) is a separute word in learned & especially theological use, meaning capable of feeling. See also IMPASSABLE.

passé, passementerie, passe-partout. See FRENCH WORDS.

passer-by. Write the hyphen.

passible. See PASSABLE.

PASSIVE DISTURBANCES. 1. The double passive. 2. Passive of avail oneself of. 3. Do after passive. 4. As.

The conversion of an active-verb sentence into a passive-verb one of the same meaning—e.g. of . You Killed him into He was killed by you— is a familiar process. But it sometimes leads to bad grammar, false idiom, or clumsiness,

1. The double passive. People believed him to have been murdered can be changed to He was belicved to have been murdered; but They attempted to carry out the order cannot be changed to 7'he order was atiempted to be carricd out without clumsiness or worse. For full discussion sec DOUBLE PASSIVES.

2. Passive of avail oneself of. We understand that the credit will be availed of by three months’ bills, renewable three times, drawn by the Belgian group on the British syndicate. A passive is not possible for avail oneself of; see AVAIL.

3. Active of do after passive verb. Inferior defences could then, as now, be tackled, as Vernon did at Porto Bello, Exmouth at Algiers, & Seymour at Alexandria. The active form would be .4n admiral could then, as now, tackle inferior defences; if defences could be tackled is substituted, the voice of did must be changed too—as was done, or as they were, by Vernon &c. This lapse is «& common onc; see DO 3c.

4 As. The great successes of the Co-operators hitherto have been won as middlemen. Active form, sound enough—The Co-operators have won their successes as middlemen. Conversion to the passive has had the effect of so tying up the co-operators 425

+ with of that it is not available, as in the active form, for as middlemen to be attached to. A common lapsc.

past. See pass. Past master, two words unhyphened.

paste, vb, makcs -fable; see MUTE E.

pastel (pigment paste). Pronounce pa’sicl.

Pasteurism, -ize. Accent the first syllables.

pastiche. See FreNcH worps.

pastil(le). The long form is now usual, though pastil was long ago established.

Pronounce -ahlé; pl. P3

sastorale. -lt (-€).

pasty, n. Pronounce pah-.

paté. See FRENCH WORDS.

patella. Pl. -lae.

paten, patten. The first spelling is now usual for the Eucharist platter, the sccond for the mud-shoe.

patent. Pa-, or pd-? Pa- predominates in England, p&- in America. But even in Engkand some retain pa&- for the sense connected with letters p., i.e. for the technical uscs as opposed to the gencral or ctymological senses open & plain. This distinction is based on the fact that p. in the general senses comes direct from Latin, & in the technical senses from French. The one pronunciation pé-, however, is recommended for British use in all senses. It should be remembered that the Latin quantity (p&-) is of no importance; see FALSE QUANTITY.

paterfamilias. In Roman history, or references to it, the plural should be patresfamilias; but as an adoptcd English word it makes paterfamiliases. See LATIN PLURALS.

path. Pl. pronounced pahdhz; see -TH & -DH.

pathetic fallacy is a phrase made by Ruskin; the OED quotes from Modern Painters: All violent feelings: ... produce ...a falseness in... impressions of external things, which I would generally characterize as the * Pathetic fallacy’. In ordinary modern use pathos & pathetic are limited to the idea of painful
