page: 428

+ pedestal makes -lled; see -LL-, -L-.

. Adj. pedigree’d; see -ED & ’D. pediar. So spelt. peewit. See PEWIT. peignoir. See FRENCH WORDS. pekoe. Pronounce pe’ko. Pelasgi, -gic. See GREEK G. pellucid. See TRANSPARENT. pelta. PI. -ae. pelvis. Pl. -ves (-éz).

nalize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

enates. Pronounce pina’tez.

penchant. See FRENCH WORDS.

neil. Pronounce -sl. P. makes -lled, -lling, &c. ; see -LL-, -L-.

pendant, pendent, pennant, pennon. There is much confusion bctwecen these; the rcasonable distribution of meanings to forms would be as follows: pendent, the adjective, hanging; pendant, a noun, a hanging ornament or appurtenancc; pennant, a noun in nautical use for certain pieces of rigging & certain flags; pennon, a noun in heraldic & military use for a lance-streamer or the like. Pendent should not be used as a noun; pendant should be neither an adjective nor the nautical noun; pennon should not be the nautical noun; see DIFFER- ENTIATION.

pendente lite. Pron. péndé’nti li'ti.

pendulum. Pl. -ms; see -UM.

penetralia. A plural noun.

penetrate makes -irable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

penful. Pl. -ls; see -FUL.

peninsula(r). Uscs of the noun (-la) instead of the adjective (-lar), as the Peninsula War, or vice versa, as the Spanish Peninsular, are wrong, but not uncommon. The former is indeed defensible, on the ground that nouns can be used attributively, but at least ill advised.

penman should be used with reference to handwriting only, not to the writing of books or articles; in the sense writer or author it is an

affectation—not indeed a new in- . vention, but a REVIVAL.

pen-name. See NOM DE GUERRE,

+ pennant. See PENDANT.

pennon. See PENDANT. P. makes -oned; S€€ -N-, -NN-.

penny. Pl. usually pence, but pennies of the separate coins as such (pennies only will work the machine) or as objects (buttons the size of pennies).

pension makes -oned, -onable; see -N-, -NN-. In the sense boardinghouse, pronounce as French (see FRENCH WORDS).

pentameter is so much appropriated to the short line of the classical elegiac couplet that it is better to avoid it as a name fer the English blank-verse or heroic-coup- Iet line. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

penthemimeral, penult. See TrEcH- NICAL TERMS.

peradventure. Scc ARCHAISM,

per capita. The consumption of tobacco «& alcohol has inercased during the ycar as follows: spirits, 1-112 gallons per capita, compared with 1:030 in 1911./The entire production of opium in India is tco grammes per capita yearly. This use is a modern blunder, encouraged in some recent dictionarics. * (So much) a head ’, or * per man ’, which is the meaning here, would not be al capita (any more than it would

‘per men’), but per caput. Per capita describes the method of sharing property in which persons, & not families, are the units, & its opposite is per stirpes; Patrimonial estates are divided per capita; purchased estates, per stirpes; it is out of place, & somcthing of a barbar-

ism, however lately popular, except

in such a context.

percentage. See Love OF THE

LONG worD, & MISAPPREHENSIONS.

The notion has gone abroad that 3

percentage is a small part. Far

from that, while a part is always

less than the whole, a percentage

may be the whole or more than the

whole; there is little comfort to be

had in 1025 from reflecting that our

cost of living can be expressed as
