page: 429

+ @ percentage of 1914's. The uneducated public prefers a word that sounds scientific, even if it gives the sense less well, to another that it can understand; see POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES. In ail the following examples but the last, the word percentage has no meaning at all without the addition of small or of something else to define it; & in the last the greater part would be the English for the larger percentage:— But in London there ts no civic consciousness; the London-born provides oniy a percentage of iis inhabitants. / The wealthy employers do not really count when you consider the position of domestic service, because they are. only few in number & employ only a percentage of the total of domestic servants./It is none the less true that the trade unions only represent a percentage of the whole body of railway scorkers./Our tax revenue is now fully one hundred & sixty millions sterling, & the Single Land Taz would not yield more than a percentage of this./The largest percentage of heat generated is utilizable, but the rest escapes & is lost. For an exact parallel, see rropoRTION.

perchance is very much out of place in pedestrian prose, as, for instance, in There ts nothing, perchance, which so readily links the ages together as a small store of jewels & trinkets. See ARCHAISM, INCONGRUOUS VOCABU- LARY, & POETICISMS.

percolate makes -lablc, -tor; see -ABLE I, -OR.

perdu, formerly naturalized & common, has become comparatively rare, but can still be at least pronounced as English (perdii’ or per’dii), though now usually printed in italics as French.

pére. See FRENCH WORDS.

peregrinate. A POLYSYLLABIC- 11UMOUR word.

peremptory. Pronounce pé’rimtori, not peré’mtori.

PERFECT INFINITIVE, i.e. fo have done &c. These are forms that often

429

+ push their way in where they are not wantcd, & sometimes, but less often, are themselves displaced by wrong presents.

1. After past tenses of hope, fear, expect, & the like, the perfect infinitive is used, incorrectly indced & unnecessarily, but so often & with so useful an implication that it may well be counted idiomatic. That implication is that the thing hoped &c. did not in fact come to pass, & the economy of conveying this without a separate sentence compensates for lack of: logical precision. So:—Philosophy began to congratulate herself upon such a prosclyte from the world of business, & hoped to have extended her power under the auspices of such a leader./It was the duty of that publisher to have rebutted a statement which he knew to be a calumny./ I was going to have askcd, when...

2. After past conditionals such as should have liked, would have been possible, would have been the first to, the present infinitive is (almost invariably) the right form, but the perfect often intrudes, & this time without the compensation noted in 1, the implication of non-fulfilment being inhcrent in the governing verb itsclf. So:—iIf my point had not been this, I should not have endeavoured to have shown the connexion./Jim Scudamore would have been the first man to have acknowledged the anomaly./ Peggy would have liked to have shown her turban & bird of paradise at the ball./The Labour members opened their eyes wide, & except for a capital levy it is doubtful whether they would have dared to have gone further. Sometimes a writer, dimly aware that ‘would have liked to have done’ is usually wrong, is yct so fascinated by the perfect infinitive that he clings to that at all costs, & alters instead the part of his sentence that was right: On the point of church James was obdurate; he would like to have insisted on the other grudging items (would have liked to insist).
