page: 430

8. With seem, appear, & the like, people get puzzled over the combinations of the present & past of seem &c. with the present & perfect of the infinitive. The possible combinations are: He seems to know, He seems to have known, He seemed to know, He seemed to have known. The first admits of no confusion, & may be left aside; the last is very rarely wanted in fact, but is constantly resorted to as an en-tout-cas by those who cannot decide whether the umbrella of He seems to have. known or the parasol of He seemed to know is more likely to suit the weather, The en-tout-cas has been taken in:—I warned him when he spoke to me that I could not speak to him at all if I was to be quoted as an authority; he seemed to have taken this as applying only to the first question he asked me (seems to have)./It was no infrequent occurrence for people going to the theatre in the dark to fall into the marshes after crossing the bridge; people seemed to have been much more willing to run risks in those days.

perfect, vb. Accent the last syllable; see ParricipLes 5A. For the adj., -able is bettcr than -tble; see -ABLE 2.

perfection, vb, should not be substituted for perfect; see LONG VARIANTS.

perforate makes -rable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

e. Noun & VERB ACCENT.

haps. Of the pronunciations, that with the r & the h both sounded is obsolescent; that with the r silent & the h sounded is orthodox; that in two syllables with r sounded but h silent is rare among the educated; that in one syllable (praps) is used by many more than would plead guilty, & does not deserve the scorn heaped on it by those who parody mispronunciations in print.

pericranium. Chicfly in Poty-

SYLLABIC HUMOUR. 430

peril makes -lling &c. (see -LL-, -L-), but perilous.

period. For synonyms see TIMF. For the full stop, see Stors. For the use in rhetoric, TECHNICAL TERMS,

PERIOD IN ABBREVIATIONS. The practice of ending every abbreviation with a period (Wm. for William as well as Gen. for General, viz. for videlicet as well as sc. for scilicet, qr. for quarter as well as lb. for libra) is ill advised. Abbreviations are puzzling, but to puzzle is not their purpose, & everything that helps the reader to guess their meaning is a gain. One such help is to let him -know when the first & last letters of the abbreviation are also those of the full word, which can be donc by not using the period, but writing wt (not wt.) for weight, Bp (not Bp.) for bishop, Mr (not Mr.) for Mister, Bart (not Bart.) for baronet, bot. for botany but bot for bought, Capt. for captain but Cpl for corporal, doz. for dozen but cw? for hundredweight, Feb. for February but fep for foolscap, Fri. for Fraulein but Mle for Mademoiselle, in. for inches but ft for feet, Geo. for George but Thos for Thomas, Lat. for Latin but Gi: for Greck, h.w., but ht wt, for hit wicket.

periodic(al). The -ic form is not used of publications (periodical literature, periodicals); the -ical form is not used of literary composition (Johnson’s periodic style); otherwise the two words do not differ in meaning, but the longer tends to oust the shorter.

peripeteia. See TECHNICAL TERMS

PERIPHRASIS is the putting of things in a round-about way. Jn Paris there reigns a complete absence of really reliable news is a periphrasis for There is no reliable news in Paris; Rarely does the ‘* Little Summer’ linger until November, but at times tis stay has been prolonged until quite late in the year’s penultimate month contains a p. for
