page: 431

+ November, & another for lingers; The answer is in the negative is a p. for No; Was made thc recipient of is a p. for Was presented with. The periphrastic style is hardly possible on any considerable scale without much use of abstract nouns such as case, character, connexion, dearth, nature, reference, regard, respect; the existence of abstract nouns is a proof that abstract thought has occurred; abstract thought is a mark of civilized man; & so it has come about that p. & civilization are by many held to be inseparable; these good people fecl that there is an almost indecent nakedness, a reversion to barbarism, in saying No news ts good news instead of The absence of intelligence is an indication of satisfactory developments. Nevertheless, The year’s penultimate month is not in truth a good way of saying November.

Strings of nouns depending on one another, & the use of compound prepositions, are the most conspicuous symptoms of the _peri-

hrastic malady, & writers should

on the watch for these in their own composition. An example or two may be _ illuminating:—A, nouns: M. Witte is taking active measures for the prompt preparation of material for the study of the question of the execution of the Imperial Ukase dealing with reforms./One of the most important reforms mentioned tn the rescript is the unification of the organization of the judicial institutions & the guarantee for all the tribunals of the independence necessary for securing to all classes of the community equality before the law./ I merely desired to point out the principal reason which I believe exists for the great exaggeration which is occasionally to be observed in the estimate of the importance of the contradiction between current Religion & current Science put forward by thinkers of reputation. B, compound prepositions: 4 Resolution was ‘moved & carried in favour of giving facilities to the public vaccination 431

+ officers of the Metropolis to enter the schools of the Board for the purpose of examining the arms of the children with a view to advising the parents to allow their children to be vaccinated. / What harbours or territory were offered to this country in exchange for Walfisch Bay & Zanzibar in connexion with the proposed arrangement with reference to the exchange of these British ports?

Other examples will be found under some of the words that lend themselves especially to periphrasis— case, character, connexion, dearth, eventuality, wk, instance, nature, neighbourhood, not 2, reference, regard.

perishable. For the formation, from an intrans. verb, see -ABLE 4,

perispomenon. Pl. -ena.

pertwig makes -gged; see -G-, -GG-. It is not a compound of wig; see TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY.

permanence, -cy. One of the pairs (see -CE, -cy) in which the distinction is neither broad & generally recognized, nor yet quite non-existent or negligible. Writers whose feeling for distinctions is delicate will prefer -ce for the fact of abiding, & -cy for the quality or an embodiment of it: We look forward to tts permanence; The permanency of the orthodox marriage bond; lis new post is not a permanency.

permeate makes -meable, -tor; see -ABLE I, -OR.

permit makes -f#led &c., -ssible; see °T-, -TT-, -ABLE 2. ‘The noun is accented on the first; see Noun & VERB ACCENT.

perorate is not in fact one of the _modern BacK-FORMATIONS like revolute, enthuse, & Oburgle, but it suffers from being taken for one, & few perhaps use it without some fear that they are indulging in a bold bad word:

perpetrate, perpetuate, make -rable, -uable, & -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

perplexedly. Four syllables; -EpLy.

per proc., per pro., Pp-Pp-» are abbre-
