page: 432

+ viations of per procurationem by the 432 agency of. The proxy’s signature should therefore be the one immediately after p.p. &c., the principal's name standing cither before p-p. &c. or after the agent’s name.

persecute makes -table, -tor; see MUTE E, -OR.

persifiage. For pronunciation see FRENCH WORDS; for meaning, TECH- NICAL TERMS.

persistence, -cy. The distinction is the same as with permanence, -cy, but is more generally appreciated: the persistence of poverty or of matter; courage & persistency are high gifts. See -CE, -CY.

2. P. of

PERSON. 1. Verb forms. relative.

1. When a compound subject consists of two or more alternative parts differing in person, there is sometimes a doubt about the right verb form to use (Are you or I next? &c.). See NEITHER 4, OR 2, for discussion.

2. P. of relative. Two questions arise, for which see wHo; these are exemplified in (a) To me, who has [or have?] also a copy of tt, 14 scems a somewhat trivial fragment, & (b) Most of us lost our [or their?] heads.

persona grata. Pronounce perso’na.

personal equation is a phrase of definite meaning; it is the correction, quantitatively expressed, that an individual’s observation of astronomical or other phenomena is known by experiment to require; minutely accurate assessment is essential to the notion. The learned sound of cquation, however, has commended it to those who want some expression or other with personal in it, & are all the better pleased if such commonplace words as View or Opinion or taste or judgement can be replaced by something more imposing. So: M. Poincaré likes Mr Bonar Law better than he liked Mr Lloyd George; let us hope that the improved p. e. will count for something./If Lady Astor's entrance upon the Parliamentary scene is

PERSONIFICATION worthy of commemoration, the cost of tit... should have been under the control of the ITouse, which naturally resents the treatment of this matter as a family affair; in general there is too much p. e. about Astorian politics. See POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES,

personal(i)ty. Personal property in the legal sense is -alty; the other noun work of personal is done by -ality; cf. real(i)ly.

personate makes -nable, -tor; see -ABLE I, -OR.

PERSONIFICATION, NOUNS OF MUL=~ TITUDE, METONYMY. When a country is spoken of as She, we have personification; when we doubt whether to write The Admiralty refuse or The Admiralty refuses, we are pulled up by a noun of multitude; when we call King George the Crown, we use metonymy. Some mistakes incident to these forms ot speech run into one another, & are therefore grouped together here, under the headings: 1. Ill-advised

rsonification. 2. Vacillation. 3

nattached posscssives.

1. Ill-advised personification. To figure ‘the world’ as a female, a certain ‘quarter’ as sentient, or ‘Irish womanhood’ as a woman, is to be frigid—the epithct proper to those who make futile attempts at decoration. Such_ personilications are implied in Just now the world wants all that America can . give her in shipping (read tt for her), in But on application to the quarter most likely to know I was assured that the paper in question was not written by Dickens (The quarter is no doubt a person or ear ag ae & capable of knowledge; but it will surely never do to let that secret out), & in The womanhood of Ireland stands for individualism as against co-operation, & presents the practical domestic arguments in her support (Whether her implies the personification of womanhood or of indtvidualism does not much matter; it must be one or the other, & neither is suited for the treatment).
