page: 433

+ It is in places like these, where a writer hardly intends personification, but slips unconsciously or halfheartedly into implying it, that he reveals his want of literary instinct. Far the commonest form taken by the weukness is that of which many examples are given under ’s INCON- GrRuous. To write famine’s or Austria’s instead of of famine, of Austria, is virtually to personify them; & the modern newspaper is perpetually doing this in the most prosaic contexts. So:—A particular character of @ monsoon season may reduce to famine’s verge millions of industrious ryots (The writer was afraid of verge of famine before millions of ryots; see OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN). / The tariff is also causing no profit, but heavy loss, to about nine out of ten of Austria’s farmers (Again, fear of of ...of... of).

2 Vacillation. The Government, the Times, the Party, & thc like, are nouns of multitude, which can be treated as units & therefore referred to by the words tt, its, & followed by singular verbs, or as bodies of people to which they, them, their, & plural verbs, are appropriate. Britain, Paris, & the like, are words naturally admitting of personification, & can be referred to in their literal sense by it & ifs, or in their personified sense by she & her. So

much everyone knows; what will

perhaps surprise the reader is to

find from the examples below how

oo writers are capable of absurdiy mixing the two methods in a single phrase or staggering, in

longer sentences, from one to the

other & back again. The noun-of-

multitude examples (for yet more

of which see NuMBER, 6) are placed -_————— PERSONIFICATION, 2 433

first, the personification ones after-.

wards; & the words in which the

vacillation is exhibited are in roman

type:—The Times also gives some

interesting comments by their special

correspondent. /During their stx years

of office the Government has done

great harm./That will gain ground

+ or not in proportion as the public is secure in their minds about the Navy./ It is the party to which Sir Henry Howorth belongs that is discredited by — their support of this unprincipled violation./The Union & Progress Party does not seem to be living up to their patriotic resolutions./The G ernment is pledged to reduce taxation, & of course they cannot begin to look at old-age pensions until it has had sufficient time to reduce expenditure. / The excuse of the Admiralty, which were responsible for these proceedings, 7s... (which was, or who were)./ The population, who was driven away on the morrow of the surprise of May 27, are glad to come back only two months later./Japan itself now ceases to be an island Power, & for the first time accepts responsi-

lilies. on the continent which it cannot abandon; her frontier is no longer the sca./When Poplar no longer maintains its own paupers she must no longer determine the standard on which they are to be maintained./ The United States has given another proof of its determination to uphold her neutrality.

3. Unattached possessi ves. Danish sympathy with Finland is writ large over all her newspapers, literature, & public speeches, as the most casual visitor to Copenhagen can see. Her means ‘of (the personified) Denmark’; we can all see that; but we most of us also resent, nevertheless, a personification that is donc not on the stage, but ‘ off’; a Denmark personified & not presented is a sort of shadow of a shade./This is a timely tribute from a man who has spent a large part of his life in Friendly Socicty work, & who would be the last to sanction anything that imperilled their interests. Their means ‘ of the Fricndly Societies ’ ; but where are they? The adjective Friendly Society is as unavailing here as Danish in the previous example./The true doctrine is that every public act of the Crown is an act for which his advisers are responsible. It is in some contexts indif-
