page: 434

+ ferent whether one says the King, His Majesty, or the Crown; but while the ane has his advisers, the Crown can only have tis; as to the possessive proper to His Majesty, see MAJESTY.

personify. For inficxions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

personnel, not -sonel. Pronounce personel,

perspic-. Perspicacious, -actty, mean (having or showing) insight; perspicuous, -uity, mean (the being) easy to get a clear idea of; see Patrs & SNARES. Shrewd & shrewdness, clear & clearness, or other short words, are used in preference by those who are neither learned nor pretentious. The learned, however, can safely venture on the perspicpairs; when the unlearned pretender claims acquaintance with them, they are apt to punish the familiarity by showing that he is in fact a stranger to them. The usual mistake is to write -uity for -acity, as in:—Somelimes, however, Dr Bells perspicuity was at fault./He claims for it superiority to other alternatwes, the defects of which he sees with that perspicuity which the advocates of each ideal system invariably display towards rival systems./The high-class West End & provincial tailors are displaying considerable perspicuity in buying checks.

perspire, perspiration. See GEN- TEELISMS.

persuade makes -dable (see MUTE E) as well as persuasible; the former is recommended (see -ABLE 2).

fon. Parodies of the phrase ‘of the Roman, Protestant, &c., p.’, e.g. Hats of the cartwheel p., are to be classed with Worn-outr HUMOUR; see also HACKNEYED PHRASES, denneties; “the first will probably

inence, -cy. There is no useful prevail. See -cr, -cy.

perturbedly. Four syllables if used; see -EDLY.

peruse. See Forman worps. P. makes -sable; see MUTE E.

434

pervade makes -dable; see MUTE E.

See Noun & VERB ACCENT.

pessimism. See optimism for comments on the popular use, & Popu- LARIZED TECHNICALITIES.

pester makes -ered; see -R-, -RR-.

pestle. Pronounce without -t-s; see PRONUNCIATION, Silent t.

petal makes -lled; see -LL-, -L-.

tit. For p. & compounds see

RENCH WORDS.

petitio principil. See TEcHnica. TERMS.

petition, vb, makes -oned &c.; see -N-, -NN-.

hie The OED recognizes only the pronunciation pét-.

trify. For inflexions see verbs

pe in -IE &c., 6.

petrol(eum). For synonyms see KEROSENE.

oe For p. officer see OFFICER.

pewit, pee~. The OED puts first the form pewit, but the pronunciation pé’-wit (not pii‘it), This makes things pra & it would seem

ter to spell peewit, unless pi‘it, which has Tennyson for it, rhymi pewit with cruet in Will Waterproof, is to be the sound.

ton. The three-syilable pronunciation (f4TItn) is best.

phagedaena. See GREEK G.

tery. Accent on the first ({4‘lan-).

phalanx. Ordinary Nias -zes, but in Anatomy phalanges (tali’njéz). See LATIN PLURALS.

phallus. PI. -li (-f).

tasmagoria is sing., not (as in the following) pl. :—We shall then be able to reach some conclusion as to the meaning & effect of these bewildering phantasmagoria. The word was designed tomean ‘crowd ofphantasms’,

phantasm)(phantom. The two are by origin merely spelling variants,

fferentiated, but so that the differences are elusive; the following tendencies are discernable, but sometimes conflict. 1. Phantom is the more popular form, -asm bei chiefly in literary use. 2. Bot meaning roughly an illusive appari-
