page: 435

+ tion, phantom stresses the fact that the thing is illusive, & -asm the fact that it does appear, so that they give respectively the negative & the positive aspect. 38. A phantom presents itself to the cye bodily or mental, a phantasm to any sense or to the intellect. 4. Phantasm has an adjective (phantasmal) of its own; evtantis has not, but is used attri-

tively (phantom hopes &c.) with much freedom, & where a true adjective is necessary borrows phantasmal; the two nouns are no doubt kept from diverging more definitely than they do by this common property in phantasmal.

Pharaoh. So spelt. Pron. far’5.

Pharisee. The adj. Pharisaic is preferable to Pharisaical; see -1C(AL). The -ism noun is Pharisaism, not -secism.

aceutical &c.

For pronun-

435 ciation see GREEK G.

poeila. Pronounce -pé’a.

or the spelling see 2, a.

pharyngitis. See GREEK G.

phenomenal means ‘of the kind apprehended by ( any of) the senses’ ; that is, eve ing that is reported to the mind by sight, hearing, taste, smell, or touch that whether the

rt answers to reality or not— is p. If the report is correct, the thing reported is also real; if not, it is ‘merely phenomenal’, The question of real existence & its relation to perception & thought is the concern of Metaphysics, & p. is a metaphysical word, contr variously with real, absolute, & noumenal. But the object here is not to expound the metaphysical meaning of these terms; it is only to point out that p. ts a meta-

hysical term with a use of its own.

o divert it from this proper use to a job for which it is not needed, by ne it do duty for remarkable, extraordinary, or hag leone lous, is @ sin against the. English language. It has gone through the phases, Philosophic term, POPULARIZED TECH- NICALITY, & VOGUE-WORD, & is now

+ in the state of discredit (cf. 1N- DIVIDUAL) that follows upon unreasonable vogue. That is the moment when believers in sound English may deliver their attack upon such usages with hope of success.

phenomen(al)ism. The longer form igs recommended; see -18T, -ALIST.

phenomenon. Pl. -ena; see -on. P. in the sense * notable occurrence ” or ‘ prodigy ’ is open essentially to the same objections as PHENOMENAL used correspondingly; but less practical inconvenience results, since there is little danger of misunderstanding.

philately, -ist. It is a pity that for one of the most popular scientific degster one of the least popularly

telligible names should have becn found. The best remedy now is to avoid the official titles whenever stamp-collecting & -collector will do.

-phil(e). The -e originally taken on from French is now usually dropped, with the good result of bringing back the pronunciation from the queer -fil to -fil.

hilharmonic, philhellenic, &c. The -h- is better unsounded in these, but not in syllables on which the accent falls, as in philhellenism, -ist. See PRONUNCIATION.

philippine, philopoena, &c., the forfeit game. The first spelling is perhaps the commonest in England.

hilistine. The special modern meaning is thus given by the OED— A person deficient in liberal culture & enlightenment, whose intercsts are chiefly bounded by material & commonplace things (But oftcn applied contemptuously by connoisseurs of any particular art or department of learning to one who has no knowledge or appreciation of it; sometimes a mere term of dislike for those whom the speakcr considers ‘ bourgeois °).

philogynist. See GREEK G.

Philomel(a). See SOBRIQUETS.

philosophic(al). Except where -icas
