page: 437

SUMMARY OF SCHEME mate méte mite mote mite rick réck rick réck riick cawl cowl coil bak boor dowry madre mére mire more mure part pért port stéol stdod No c, q, or X g, 8, y, as in get, set, yet ch, sh, zk, sounds in witch, wish,

vision th, dh, sounds in pith, with ng, ngg, sounds in singer, finger hw, sound in whet

Accent after the vowel sound of the stressed syllable.

hoto. See CURTAILED WORDS.

1. -08 ; see -O(E)s 5.

phrase, vb, has -sable; sec MUTE E.

phraseology. Pron. frazid‘lo}!.

phthisis. The old pronunciation dropped the ph-, but this will probably recover its sound now that everyone can read. The Greck word had short i, but fthi- is now usual; see FALSE QUANTITY.

phylloxera. Pronounce & accent fMlokzcr’a,

phylum. PI. -la.

physic, n. Scc FORMAL WORDS.

physic makes -cked, -cking, -cky; gee -C-, -CK-.

physician, doctor, surgeon, in ordinary parlance. ‘ The p.’ & * the d.’ may be used to denote the same Pe viz one whose vocation is to

eal physical troubles, p. being the ForMAL worD, & no particular relation to s. being implicd by cither. A s.is always a doctor who undertakes to perform manual operations, but not necessarily onc who confines himself to them. Physician is also used in contrast with s. to denote onc who deals with medicines & treatment,

not withsurgical instruments, & again in contrast with general practitioner to denote a specialist or consultant.

It must be remembered, however, that °In the United Kingdom, every

medical practitioner is now required to have a qualification as Physician & also as Surgeon; so that a general

practitioner usually describes himself as ** Physician & Surgeon ” ’—OED. 4357 —

PICTURE physics)(physiology. The two words had once the same wide meaning of natural science or natural philvcsophy. They have now been narrowed & dificrentiated, physics retaining only the properties of matter & energy in inorganic nature, & physiology only the normal functions & phenomena of living beings.

physiognomy, -nomical. The g is silent.

physiology. See puysics. For the adjective, -ical is so much the commoncr that it should be.accepted as the only form. See -1C(AL).

pi (pious). See CurTAILED WORDS.

pianist. Pronounce pé’anist.

fano. The instrument is pli’nd; pl. -os, see -o(E)s 5. The musical direction is pyah’nd.

pianola. Pronounce péani'la.

piazza. The OED gives pia’za; but the Italian pyah’tsa is perhaps as often said; see ITALIAN SOUNDS.

pibroch. Pronounce as _ Scotch (pe-, & ch as in loch).

pi ue. The p. novel is defined in the Enc. Brit. as:—‘ The prose autobiography of a real or fictitious personage who describes his experiences as a social parasite, & who satirizes the society which he has exploited’. The type is Spanish, but the most widely known example is the French Gil Blas. Picaro is a Spanish word meaning vagabond.

piccolo. Pl. -os; see -0(F)s 6.

pickaxe. For spelling see Axr.

picket, vb, makcs -eted, -eting, &c. ; see -T-, -TT-.

picket, picquet, piquet. The second form serves no purpose at all; the third should be reserved for the card-game, & picket be used for all other senses, including that of the military outpost often spelt with “qu- OF -cqu-.

picnic makes -cking, -cked, -cker, -cky; see -C-, -CK-.

picture. Pil’ktir is academic; pi’ktyer is impossible except with a deliberate pause after the ¢ (though many people think they say
