page: 439

PIXY RIVATIVES. Pivot used attributively

will almost always serve the need.

pixy, -le. The first is better.

izzicato.

Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 6.

Pplacable. The OED gives pla-

precedence.

Placard. The pronunciation re-

commended is pla’kard for the noun

& plekar’d for the verb; see Noun

& VERB ACCENT,

placate. The pronunciation re-

commended is plak&’t, but both

1l8’kat & pla’kat are also heard.

e word is much more in American

than in British use, but is quoted

from the 17th c. Beside the adjec-

tive placable, placatable can be made

for the gerundive use; see -aBLE 1.

place, vb, makes -ceable 3 S€@ -ABLE 1.

placid makes -dest; see -ER & -EST 4,

plagiarize makes -zable; sec MUTE E.

plague makes -guable, “Zuing, -guy; see MUTE E, -EY & -y,

Plaice (fish). So spelt.

plaid. Pronounced plad in Scotland, but plad in England.

makes plainness. P. sailing is (* probably "—OED) a popular use of the nautical term plane sailing, which means navigation by a plane chart, ‘a simple & easy method, approximately correct for short distances’, The corruption, if it is one, is so little misleading, since plain sailing is as inteHigible in itself as clear going or any such phrase, that any attempt to correct it is needless as well as vain.

plait. Pronounce plat. planchette. See FRENCH worDs. plane, vb, makes -nable; MUTE E.

e » 85 a correction of the plain sailing of ordinary use, is a

try; see PLAIN. Plangent. Pronounce -anj-. Plantain. Pronounce pli‘ntin. plaster makes -ered &c.; -rR-, -RR-. Plat (food served). See FRENCH WORDs. plateful. Pl. -ls; see -Fut. plate glass. Two words

un- Pronounce pitsikah’td.

439 byphened; see Hyruens 8 B.

PLATYPUS

plateau. See FRENCH worDs; but

the sound pla’té, & the pl. -s, are

now common; see also -x,

platen, -tt-, pressing-plate in print-

ing. The OED prefers -t- to -it..

Pronounce -it-.

platform. The political sense of

party programme is still rather

American than English, but in

England too is now not uncommon,

platinize makes -zable; see MuTE E.

platitude, -dinous. The words are

misused in the following extracts;

for the differences between Pr

commonplace, & truism, see COMMON-

PLACE. [le would probably in his

speech at Glasgow have avoided the

use of certain phrases & argumenis

which, though he clearly means them

to be innocuous & even platitudinous,

have none the less been the subject of

vehement controversy. / The miners

acknowledge the force of this principle

or platitude as freely as the rest of us.

Platonic love. For the origin of the

expression, see Plato’s Symposium.

For its meaning, the definition, &

one or two quotations, from the

OED here follow:—( Definition) Applied to love or affection for one of the opposite sex, of a purely spiritual character, & free from sensual desire. (Quotations): (Howell) It is a love that consists in contemplation & idaeas of the mind, not in any carnal! fruition. (Norris) Platonic Love is the Love of Beauty abstracted from all sensual Applications, & desire of Corporal Contact. (Lewes) Love is the longing of the Soul for Beauty; the inextinguishable desire which like feels for like, which the divinity within us feels for the divinity revealed to us in Beauty. This is the celebrated Platonic Love, which, from having originally meant a communion of two souls, & that in a rigidly dialectical sense, has been degraded to the expression of maudlin sentiment between the sexes, platypus. Pl. -puses, not “pi; see LATIN PLURALS.,
