page: 441

PLEONASM, 4 evidently unconscious, & expresses the same notion twice over in the

belief that he is

Such are remain, by themselves, but which can be defended, by those who care to defend them, as not worse than With these may be classed the queer use of both, repugnant to sense but not to or the two is replaced by it though the emphasis attaching to both ig absurd; so:—Both men had some-

uselessly pleonastic.

grammar, whcre

necessarily

thing in common./Archer Bey tele- phoned to General Morris & both See BOTH 2 for more varieties of this

conferred at the Residency.

very common ineptitude.

4. A further downward stcp brings us below the defensible level, & we come to the overlappings described in the article Haziness:-—It is singular how apparently slow some minds scem io learn the elementary truth./We have been enabled to make large economies while at the same time increasing the efficiency of the fleet. See also aco & BECAUSE.

5. Lastly, there are the pleonasms in which by wrongly repeating a negative or a conjunction the writer produces a piece of manifest nonsense or impossible grammar, So:— * You just come wi me in a tub pair, & I should not wonder tf I could not lick you into shape ’./It

very great thing that . before guns, shells, mountings, rangefinders, &c., are adopted, that the opinion of real & not of soi-disant experts shall be taken./We can only say that if the business men who read the Times are really of opinion that this is a sensible procedure, & that, i met dl find any satisfaction whatever in writing 5 es of a huge

) body knows can never be recovered, they will have only themselves to thank if... saying it once. EQUALLY As (2), more PREFERABLE, & continue to REMAIN, which mean neither more nor less than equally (or as) preferable, &

PLURALITY

plesiosaurus. PI. -ri (-1).

plethora. Pronounce plé’thora.

pleura. Pl. -rac.

pleurisy. So spelt, not plu-; the

derivation is from pleura rib, not

plus pluris.

plexus. Pl. -uses or plexus (-iis),

not -zi; see -us.

plica. tee pak

pliers. So spelt.

pliocene. See PLeIsTocenr.

lumb-. The b is silent in lumber,

ptumbery, plumbing, & plumbless,

but sounded in plumbago, plumbeous,

plumbic, plumbiferous, & plumbism.

plume makes plumy; see -Ey & y.

plump(en), vb. See -EN VERBS.

plumpy. Poetical only.

plunder makes -ered &c. : -R-, -RR-.

PLURAL ANOMALIES. See -1cs 2

for the question whether words in

-ics are singular or plural, Plural

names of diseases, ag mumps,

measles, glanders, can be treated as

singular or plural; chickenpox &

smallpoz, originally plural, are now

reckoned singular. Innings, corps,

& some other words in -S, are

singular or plural without change

of spelling, but, while corps has -s

silent in singular & sounded in

plural, an innings & several innings show no distinction, whence arises the colloquial double plural inningses. For the plural of Court Martial & Lord Justice, the number of porridge, & the difference between pence & pennies, see the words.

plurality. With three-cornered contests as common as they now are, we may have occasion to find a convenient single word for what we now call an absolute majority, i.e. a majority comprising more than half the votes cast. In America the word majority itself has that meaning, while a poll greater than that of any other candidate, but less than half the votes cast, is called a plurality. It might be well to borrow this distinction, but to better it b changing plurality to plurity. The correct meaning of plurality is not morencss (which is the notion wanted, but
