page: 442

+ which would be plurity), but pluralness or severalness or more-than-oneness. Plurity is an obsolete English word exactly suited to the need; cf. REvIvaALs. See also MAJORITY.

ply, vb. For infexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

pneumatic, pneumonia, &c. The OED gives ni- only for these particular words, but prefers pni- for less familiar words from the same stems, such as pneumatology, pneumonometer. It is to be hoped that these silent letters may recover their voices now that everyone can read; cf. PHTHISIS, PSYCHOLOGY.

pochard. The OED puts pdichfirst, but péch-, pok-, & pdk-, are also recognized.

pocket makes -efed, -eting, &c.; see -T-, -TT-.

pocketful. Pl. -ls; see -FuL.

pdko- 442

pococurante. Pronounce koorah’nté, Pl, -ti (-é).

podagra. The OED puts first the pronunciation pd‘dagra.

podgy. So spelt; see -EY & -y.

podium. Pronounce po-; pl. -ia.

poetess. See FEMININE DESIGNA- TIONS,

poetic(al). See -1c(AL). The two forms are more or less peculiar in being both in constant use, while yet there is no clear division of functions between them. Certain tendencies, not always operative, there are:—poetical labcls, while -tc admires (The -ical works of —; Conceived in a truly -ic spirit); -ical is the form for ‘ written in verse’, & -ic for ‘instinct with poetry’ (Poetical composition; The -ic impulse); -ical is the commonplace, & -tc the rhetorical form (In a poetical mood; but In -ic mood); -ical is sometimes used at the end of a sentence when in another position -ic would be more natural (An idea more true than -ical, cf. A no less true than poetic idea); & -ic is sometimes jocularly substituted for -ical (The -ic effustons of an advertising soapboiler).

POETICISMS. Simple reference of

+ words to this article warns the reader that to use them in ordinary prose contexts is dangerous; see also INCONGRUOUS VOCABULARY. A small haphazard collection of specimens is:—an, conj.; aught; beauteous; broidery; canorous; childly; clamant; _ delightsome; _direful; duteous; eke, adv.; ere; erst; lorn; magnifical; plain, vb; plangent; whilom.

poeticize makcs -zable; see MUTE E.

pogrom. Pronounce pogrd’m.

poignant. Pronounce poi’nant.

point. For synonyms in the sense province &c., see FIELD. P. of view is the native phrase now being ousted by standpoint. The latter is a translation of the German Standpunkt, & appears in the form standpunct in one of the earliest OED quotations. What is killing

POINT p. 0. v. is no doubt the awkwardness of following it, as is constantly necessary, with another of (from the p.0.v. ‘of philosophy); the process may be expected to continue, & there is no valid objection to standpoint; p.o.v. will linger for a time where the of difficulty does not present itsclf (from my, or Mills, p.o.v.). It is certainly better that standpoint should be accepted than another solution that is being tried on purpose to avoid it—that is, the using of point by itsclf as equivalent to point of view (from the point of the Tory Party): They agree that the demand of {3 a week by the men was unreasonable if it was meant to sustain ‘a mere existence’, but from the point of a living wage w was not unreasonable. Wiew-point, an earlier product of the repugnance to siandpoint, has the disadvantage of calling to mind what standpoint allows to be forgotten, that the idiomatic English is undoubtedly p. of view. The perplexed stylist is at present inclined to cut loose & experiment with angle. What is here recommended is to use p.o.v. as the normal expression, but not be afraid of standpoint on occasion.
