page: 444

+ POLLUTE pollute makes -table; see MUTE E.

polyglot makes -ttal, -itic, -ttism; exceptionally, see -T-, -TT-.

polypus. Pl. -pi (-1) or -puses. The inconsistency between this & octopus is due to its having come to us through classical Latin, in which it was declined like the ordinary Latin nouns in -us.

POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR. Scc PE- DANTIC HUMOUR for a slight account of the impulse that suggcsts long or abstruse words as a means of entertaining the hearer. Of the long as distinguished from the abstruse, terminological inexactitude for lie or falschood is a favourable example, but much less amusing at the hundredth than at the first time of hearing. Oblivious to their pristine nudity (forgetting they were stark naked) is a less familiar specimen. Nothing need here be added to what was said in the other article beyond a short specimen list of long words or phrases that sensible pcople avoid. Batavian, Caledonian, Celcstial, Hibernian & Mi@ilesian, for Iutch, Scotch, Chinese, Irish. Solution of continuity, Kai habiliments, refrain from lacteal addition, & olfactory organ, for gap, breeches, take no milk, & nose. Osculatory, pachydermatous, matutinal, diminutive, fuliginous, fugacious, esuricnt, culinary, & minacious, for kissing, thick-skinned, morning, tiny, sooty, timid, hungry, kitchen, & threatening. Frontispiece, individual, equitation, intermediary, cachinnation, & epidermis, for face, person, riding, means, laughter, & skin. Negotiate & peregrinate for tackle & travel.

pomade. The OED gives -id as the English pronunciation, & -ahd as a foreign one; the latter, however, is probably almost universal.

pommel, pu-. The first spelling is usual for the noun, the second for the verb, though the verb is merely a use of the noun, & not of different origin, Both are pronounced pim-, & both make -lled (see -LL-, -L-).

444

POMPOSITIES. Such words as beverage, catarrh, collation, comestibles, condiment, co’nsort, divagation, edifice, emporium, ere, evince, exacerbate, inlermediary, the military, munificent, save (except), spouse, vituperate, have ail ‘a certain use in the world, no doubt’; but they are seen in the newspapers very much more often than occasions for those certain uses occur, & may serve as specimens of hundreds that are habitually substituted for others mercly as pompous ornaments.

ponceau. See FRENCH WORDS.

poncho. Pronounce with -ch-. Pl. -033 sec -O(E)s 6.

pongee. Pronounce ponjé’.

pontifex. Pl. -fices (-éz).

pontify. For inflexions see vERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

r. The unorthodox pronunciations por & por are heard often enough to nccessitate a warning. For poorness & poverty see the latter. For ‘a p. thing but mine own ’, see MISQUOTATION,

pop, = popular concert.

See Cur- TAILED WORDS.

popularize makes -zable > MUTE E.

POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES. The term of this sort most in vogue at the moment of writing (1920) is undoubtedly acid test (The measure, as our correspondent says, provides an acid test for every Free Trader), which became familiar through a conspicuous usc of it during the war by President Wilson. In contrast with this newest acquisition may be sct intoricated, so long popular as to be not now recognizable for a medical term at all; it is just a ponderous GENTEELISM for drunk. Have we to fear something of the kind with anaesthesia? the extract that follows raises apprehensions: This appetite grows by what it feeds upon, & it is accompanied by a total anaesthesia towards [i.e. carelessness of] the public interest & the results upon those who are victimized by these proceedings. A few examples of these popularized technicalities
