page: 446

+ The verb meaning nonplus (with its noun poser unanswerable question) is a different word from that meaning to lay down or place, being shortened from appose.

poseur. See FRENCH worDs.

POSITION OF ADVERBS. The word adverb is hcre to be taken as including adverbial phrases (e.g. for a time) & adverbial clauses (e.g. if possible), adjectives used predicatively (e.g. alone), & adverbial conjunctions (e.g. then), as well as simple adverbs such as soon & undoubtedly. To lay down & illustrate exhaustive rules would not be possible in reasonable compass; nor is there any need to do so; the mistakes that occur are almost always due to certain false principles, & these may be isolated for treutment. Many readers may justly feel that they do not require advice on so simple a matter as where their adverbs should go, &, to save them the trouble of reading this long article, here is a string of sentences exhibiting all the types of misplacement to be discussed. Those who perceive that the adverb in each is wrongly placed, & why, can safely neglect the rest; the bracketed number after each refers to the section in which its type is discussed:—The people are now returning & trying to again get together a home (1)./ITe came to study personally the situation (2)./He exercised an influence that ts still potent & has yet adequately to be measured on the education of our younger artists (8)./1t deals with matters as to which most persons long ago have made up their minds (4)./We still are of opinion that the only way of getling rid of ‘ abuses’ is a root-&branch alteration of the thing itself (5)./The Food Ministry must either take action or defend effectively their inactivity (6)./To decry the infantry arm for the sake unduly of piling up artillery & what nol, is the notion of persons who ...(7)./As ‘ the Monroe doctrine" of late years has loomed so

| verb-form to make the 446

+ largely in all discussions upon the international policy of the Untted States, an attempt to trace its growth & development as a popular ‘ cry’ might prove of some service (8).

There are certain verb groups about which the question is conceivable— Should they be allowed to be interrupted by adverbs? Such are the infinitive e.g. to try (may we say to earnestly try?), the compound verb e.g. have thought (may we say I have never thought so?), the copula & complement e.g. was a (may we say He was in some ways a riddle?), the verb & its object e.g. passed the time (may we say It passed pleasantly the time?), the gerund & its governing preposition e.g. by going (may we say by o

oing?). The first of these questions is a very familiar one; almost all who aspire to write English have had the split infinitive forced on their attention, & the avoidance of it has become a fetish; the other questions are not familiar, but the points here to be made are that they also require consideration, that a universal yes or a universal no is not the right answer either to the split-infinitive question or to any of the others, that the various answers sometimes come into conflict, & that to concentrate on the split-infinitive question & let the others take care of themselves is absurd.

The misplacements to be considered will be taken under the heads:— 1. Split infinitive. 2. Fear of split infinitive. 3. Imaginary split infinitive passive. 4. Splitting of the compound verb. 5. Separation of copulative verb & complement. 6. Separation of transitive verb & object. 7. Separation of preposition & gerund. 8. Heedless misplacings.

1. Split infinitive. The heinousness of this offence is estimated in the article SPLIT INFINITIVE. Here the general result of that estimate is merely assumed, viz: (A) that io love is a definitely enough recognized

clinging
