page: 448

+ begun so much to be felt by the London theatrical managers that t . . We think the public will not fail unfavourably to be impressed by the shifting nature of the arguments./ An Act has been passed enabling agricultural land compulsorily to be acquired at a fair market price./The right of the privately managed denominational school wholly to be maintained out of public money.

4. Splitting of the compound verb. By compound verb is meant a verb made up of an auxiliary (or more than one) & an infinitive (without to) or participle. When an adverb is to be used with such a verb, its normal place is between the auxiliary (or sometimes the first auxiliary if there are two or more) & the rest. Not only is there no such objection to thus splitting a compound verb as there is to splitting an infinitive, but any other position for the adverb requires special justification: I have never seen her, not I never have seen her, is the pojana i es though the rejected order becomes the right if emphasis is to be put on have (I may have had chances of seeing Bernhardt, but I never have seen her). But it is plain from the string of examples now to come that a prejudice has grown up against ang compound verbs; it is probab y a supposed corollary of the accepted split-infinitive prohibition; at any rate, it is entirely unfounded. In each of the first five extracts there is one auxiliary, & after that instead of before it the adverb should have been put; the other six have two auxiliaries cach, which raises a further question to be touched upon afterwards:—Single auxiliary: If his counsel still is followed, ‘ the conflict’ is indeed inevitable. / Its very brief span of insect-eating activity hardly can redeem its gencral evil habit as @ grain-devourcr. / Politicians of all sorts in the United States already are Sirding up their loins for the next election./ Yet one of the latest Customs rulings by the United States Board of Appraisers assuredly, to use the 448

+ phrase its members best would wnderstand, is ‘ the limit’./Two years later he went to Russia as British Ambassador, & he also was entrusted with the mission of carrying the Garter to .../Double auxiliary: Ozford must heartily be congratulated on their victory./If the desired end is ever atlained tt earnestly may be hoped that especial care will be taken with the translation. /The tmportance which quite rightly has been given to reports of their meetings./The Maharaja made arrangements for her education, which never since has becn permitied to languish./A German apologist anzious to prove that the war had needlessly been prolonged by the Entente./It is fortunate that a certain amendment which og desired was not carricd, or it would gravely have imperilled the solvency of certain of the approved societics.

Write must be heartily congratulated, it may be earnestly hoped, which has quite rightly been given, which has never since been permitted, had been necdlessly prolonged, would have gravely imperilled. This minor point of whether the adverb is to follow the first auxiliary or the whole auxiliary depends on the answer to a not very simple riddle—Is it in intimate connexion with the verbal notion itself independently of the temporal or other limitations imposed by the auxiliaries? Fortunately this riddle can be translated into simpler terms—Do the adverb & verb naturally suggest an adjective & noun? if so, Ict them stand next each other, & if not, not. Heartily congratulated, earnestly hoped, needlessly prolonged, gravely amperilled, suggest hearty congratulations, earnest hope, needless prolongation, & grave peril; but rightly given does not suggest right gift or right giving, & still less does never since permitted suggest no subsequent permission; which means that the notions of giving & permitting are qualified by rightly & never since not absolutely, but under the particular limitations of the
