page: 449

+ auxiliaries, & that the adverb is better placed between the auxiliaries than next to given & permitted. This, however, is a minor point, as was said above; the main object of this section is to stress the certain fact that there is no objection whatever to dividing a compound verb by adverbs.

5. Separation of copulative verb & complement. This is on the same footing as the separation of the compound verb discussed in 4; that is, it is a delusion to suppose that the insertion of an adverb between the two parts is a solecism, or even, like the splitting of the infinitive, a practice to be regarded as abnormal. On the contrary, it is the natural arrangement, & in the following examples fundamentally, also, & often, have been mistakenly shifted from their right place owing to a superstition:—Ji would be a _ different thing uf the scheme had been found fundamentally to be faulty, but that is not the case./It is not always in these times that the First Lord of the Treasury also is Prime Minister./The immense improvement which they have wrought in the condition of the people, & which often is quite irrespective of the number of actual converts.

6. Separation of transitive verb & its object. The mistakes discussed in sections 2 to 5 have this in common, that they spring from a desire, instinctive or inculcated, to keep the parts of a verb group together & allow no adverb to intrude into it. But there is one kind of group whose breaking up by adverbs that ought to have been placed not in the middle of it, but before or after the whole, is only too common. That is the group consisting of a transitive verb & its object. had to second by all the means in my power diplomatic action. To second diplomatic action is the verb & object, separated by a seven-word adverb; it is a crying case; everyone will agree to deferring the adverb, & the writer had either no literary ear or some

1351

449

+ pee or stylistic fad. The

onger the adverb in proportion to the object, the more marked is the offence of interpolating it. But the same mistake is seen, though less glaringly, in the following ten examples; the italicized adverb in each should be removed, sometimes to a place before the verb, sometimes to one after the object:—Are they quite sure that they have interpreted rightly the situation? /I should counsel, then, the schoolboy to take plenty of exercise in the open./A lull of the breeze kept for a time the small boat in the neighbourhood of the brig. / Russia is sweeping the Bukovina clean of Austrians, & north of the Pripet marshes holds firmly Hindenburg’s forces./He spoke in a firm voice, marking strongly the syllables, but in tones rather harsh./The only conceivable exception is some great

bra affecting vitally human

iberty & human conscience./The Prime Minister made a cou of speeches on Saturday, but he did not discuss any further the Irish question./The little finny warriors endeapeel to rip up each other with their sharp spines./It is thought that the Allies will regard favourably Belgium’s request./Continuation with the university courses would most certainly elevate further the people.

There are conditions that justify the separation, the most obvious being when a lengthy object would keep an adverb that is not suitable for the early position too remote from the verb. One of the extracts below ae | be adapted to illustrate; if it run ‘would expose to ridicule an authority that, as it is, is not very imposing’, the shortness of ‘to ridicule ’ compared with the length of the object would have

e that order the best & almost necessary one. But anyone who applies this principle must be careful not to reckon as part of the object words that either do not belong to it at all or are unessential to it; else he will offend the discerning reader's ear as cruelly as the authors now
