page: 450

+ to be quoted:—They are now busy issuing blue prints & instructions, é& otherwise helping in all sorts of ways our firms to get an efficient grip of the business of tractor-making in a hurry. The object is our firms alone, not that & the rest of the sentence; put it next to helping. Who are risking every day wit intelligence & with shrewdness fortunes on what they believe. Fortunes alone is the object; put it after risking./Ilis make-up, which approached too nearly sheer caricature to be reckoned quile happy. A very odd piece of tit for tat; too nearly divides approached from caricature, & in revenge caricature divides to be reckoned from too nearly; put sheer caricature next to approached./Failure of the Powers to enforce thetr will as to the Albanian frontier would expose to the ridicule of all the restless elements in East Europe their authority, which, as it ts, is not very imposing. There are two differences from the adaptation made above—tfirst that the adverb has eleven words instead of two, & secondly that the relative clause is not an essential part of the object; their . . . imposing should be put directly after expose.

7. Separation of preposition & gerund. This hardly needs serious treatment. But here is amusingly shown somebody’s terror of separating of & piling by an adverb— which is no more than an exaggeration of the superstitions dealt with in 8, 4, & 5. To decry the infantry arm for the sake unduly of piling up artillery & what not, is the notion uf persons who...

8. Heedlcss misplacings. It would appear from the analysis attempted above that when adverbs are found in wrong positions it is usually due to mistaken ideas of correctness. But now & then it is otherwise, & an cxample or two of merely careless placing may be given:—Dressings of cotton & linen are reserved only for the most serious cases (for the most scrious cases only)./The terms 4350

+ upon which the British * governing classes’ have obtained their influence are those upon which tt alone may be retained (upon which alone it may)./ As the Monroe doctrine of late years has loomed so largely (has of late years loomed; otherwise it means the recent Monroe doctrine). /Should, too, not our author be considered? (too might go after nol, or author, or considered, according to the meaning wanted; but no meaning can justify its present position)./But a work of art that ts all form & no emotion (& we doubt iwhcther, in all deference to M. Saint-Saens, such an anomaly did ever or could ever exist) would seem to belong more properly to the sphere of mathematics (the putting of the deference adverb after instead of before whether makes nonsense). / It has been implied that Germany is a collectivist State, or, if not, that it has at least far advanced in Socialism id far advanced, but has advanced

ar).

POSITIVE WORDS IN NEUTRAL PLACES. There are words whose essential function is to express the speaker's strong opinion; specimens are excellent, admirable, remarkable. incredible, disgraceful; to use these in.a negative, conditional, or interrogative sense is an offence against idiom too obvious to be common. You cannot stipulate that a thing shall be excellent; you can only pronounce it excellent on trial. To ask for a most delicious peach, a bottle of admirable claret, a profoundly interesting novel, is absurd (unless you are playfully quoting someone else’s commendation; Martin Chuzzlewit, for instance, with his experience of remarkable men, could legitimately ask whether Mr Choke was one of the most remarkable men in the country). Examples:—Smoked after dinner, with one or two glasses of excellent brandy, they are equal to Havanas./If they heard of the pecuniary trouble of an excellent scholar or man of letters, they should communicate the fact to
