page: 451

+ their secretary./An American soldier who was serving on the special staff for taking over the German engines told him that exceptional care is now being taken to secure German railway engines that are in admirable condition./The amphibious part of the operation, then, would be limited to what he could do in an incredibly short time./The statesmen of Tokio, for instance, will not renew the war unless intolerably provoked. Their desire now will be to consolidate their acquisitions, to devise an admirably cheap method of defending Manchuria for the future, & to reap, as they have already begun to do, the economic advantages of the splendid position to which their couniry has been elevated by the war (admirably is wrong, splendid right; the position is already secured; it will time enough for enthusiasm about the method when the Japanese have devised it)./You should have written to your cousin Morden, the moment they had begun to treat you disgracefully (so before disgracefully, implying * as I consider they have treated you ’, would have cured this)./All Governments who get into power by a most violent & unscrupulous use of party tactics fry to prolong their advantage by ... (Omit most)./When will the Church leaders realize that unily in action is so much more important than unity of belief? (Omit so)./Mr Thornely ts fond of finding his theme in the world of science & treating it with extraordinary aptness.

posse. Two syllables.

possess makes -ssur; sec -oR.

possession. Jn p. of, holding; in the p. of, held by: Prisoner was found in p. of a revolver; The necklace was found in the p. of prisoner’s wife.

POSSESSIVE PUZZLES. 1. Seplimus’s) (Achilles’. 2. Whose) (of which. 3. Mr Smith (now Lord London)’s. 4. ° The Times’ ’s opinion, 5. Somebody’s else.

1. Septimus’s, Achilles’, It was

+ formerly customary, when a word ended in -s, to write its possessive with an apostrophe but no additional s, e.g. Mars’ hill, Venus’ Bath, Achilles’ thews. In verse, & in poetic or reverential contexts, this custom is retained, & the number of syllables is the same as in the subjective case, e.g. Achilles’ has three, not four; Jesus’ or of Jesus, not Jesus’s. But elsewhere we now add the s & the syllable, Charles’s Wain, St James’s not St James’, Jones’s children, the Rev. Septimus’s surplice, Pythagoras’s doctrines. For goodness’ sake, conscience’ sake, &c., see SAKE.

2. Whose) (of which. See wHOSE for the question whether the use of whose as the possessive of which, & not only of who, (My thought, Whose murder yet is but fantastical) is permissible.

8. (A) Mr Smith (now Lord: London)’s intervention was decisive? or (B) Mr Smith’s (now Lord London) antervention? or (C) Mr Smith's (now Lord London's) intervention? or (D) The intervention of Mr Smith (now Lord London)? is clearly wrong because the intervention was not Lord London’s; B is intolerable because we cannot be happy without the ’s close before intervention, just as we cannot endure someone's else umbrella though we can with an effort allow the umbrella to be someone’s else; A is the reasonable solution, but has no chance against the British horror of fussy correctness; &, failing it, the ony, thing is to run away, i.e. to use D. An actual example of Bis: Jt was Lori Dunedin’s (then Mr Graham Murray) aid that was invoked.

4, In * The Times’ ’s opinion. This _also has to be run away from. To write in *‘ The Times’s’ opinion is not running away, but mercly blundering; if the newspaper title is to have inverted commas & the possessive is to be used, the form at the top with two independent apostrophes jostling each other is the only correct possibility. But therc 1 POSSESSIVE PUZZLES
