page: 452

+ are two escapes; one is to write the title in italics instead of inverted commas, vut the possessive 8s in roman type (The Times’s), & the other is to fly to of (in the opinion of ‘The Times ’).

5. For somebody else’s or somebody's else see ELSE.

possible. 1. Do one’s p. 2. Construction. 38. P.) (probable.

1. Do one’s possible is a GALLICISM; &, with do what one can in established existence, it is superfluous.

2. Construction. But no such queslions are possible, as it seems to me, to arise between your nation & ours. / No breath of honest fresh air is suffered to enter, wherever it is possible to be excluded. These are wrong. Unlike able, which ordinarily requires to be completed by an infinitive (able to be done, to exist, &c.), p. is complete in itself & means without addition able to be done or occur. The English for are p. to arise & is p. to be excluded is can arise, can be excluded. The mistakes are perhaps due to the frequency of such forms as It is p. to find an explanation, in which i is not an ordinary pronoun, but merely anticipatory; that is, the sentence in its simpler form would not be An explanation is p. to find, but To find an explanation is p. When it is felt that p. does require to be amplified, it is done by of with a verbal noun— Limits that are p. of exact ascertainments; but susceptible or some other word is usually better.

3. P.) (probable. It would be too much to demand that p. should always be kept to its strict sense & never so far weakened that tmpossible (or possible in a ncgative context) means no more than very unlikely; but, when probable & p. are in explicit contrast, the demand may fairly be made. The Prohtbition Amendment can only be revoked by the same methods as secured its adoption. I met no one in America who deemed this probable, few who thought it een possible. As all

+ sensible people know it, whatever its improbability, to be possible, the picture of American intelligence is uncomplimentary; but this absurdity is common enough, & ranks with the abuse of LITERALLY.

poste restante. See FRENCH WORDS.

st hoc, ergo propter hoc. See

ECHNICAL TERMS.

umous. The -h- is silent, &

o, though never omitted, etymologically incorrect.

posticous. Pronounce posti’kus.

postil(l)ion. The OED prefers the single -I-.

postmistress. See FEMININE DE- SIGNATIONS.

ne. Pronounce pospd’n.

postprandial. Chiefly in PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

postscript. Pronounce pd’skript.

postulate makes -lable, -tor; sec -ABLE I, -OR.

pot, not pott, of paper. See Pot(T).

potage. See FRENCH WORDS.

potato. Pl. -oes; see -o(E)s 1.

poteen, -th-. The OED treats -icen as the established spelling.

potency, -nce. In general senses -cy is much commoner; &, as -ce has technical senses in engineering, watch-making, &c., it would be better to confine -ce to these, & make -cy universal in the general senses. See -CE, -Cy.

potentate. Pronounce pd’-,

potential has no longer the meaning of potent, which should have been the word in: The Labour Party... was exercising most potential znfluence on some social problems. See LONG VARIANTS.

potful. Pl. -ls; see -FUL.

pother is now, except in dialects, a LireraRy worD. The more correct, but now less usual, pronunciation is pii’dher rhyming with other brother mother. There is no proof of connexion with either bother or powder, though it is thought that bother may be an Irish corruption of pother. ween pother & bother there is the difference in meaning that p. denotes ado or bustle or
