page: 454

+ the -ic form is usual. In the general sense of officious or opinionated, -ical is commoner. In the interests of differentiation these tendencies should be encouraged; see -1C(AL).

praise makes -sable; see MUTE E.

pram (perambulator). See Cur- TAILED WORDS.

pratique. Pronounce pra’tik.

pray. 1. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 1.

2. Pray in aid. One of the picturesque phrases that people catch we & use without understanding: We are disturbed to find that this principle of praying in aid the domestic circumstances of the woman appears to have been sanctioned officiall by the Committee on production. This writer, & most of those who use the words, suppose that in aid is an adverb, & that pray is therefore free to take an object—here circumstances. The fact is that the object of pray is aid, & in is not a preposition but an adverb, to pray in aid being word for word to call in help; if the helper or helping thing is to be specified, it must have an of before it, as in the following OED quotations:—A city or corporation, holding a Belts of the King, may pray in Aid of him, if anything be demanded of them rélating thereto./ An incumbent may pray in aid of the patron & ordinary.

pre-. In compounds whose second part begins with e or 7 a hyphen is used: pre-eminent, pre-issue. In others the hyphen is not necessary, but is freely used if the compound igs one made for the occasion, or if any peculiarity in its form might prevent its elements from being instantly recognized, or if recurrence from the sense now developed to a more primitive one is to be marked by especial stress on the elements: predetermine, prenatal, prearranged; pre-Coalition, pre-war, pre-position

(in contrast with preposition the

part of speech).

preety: For

inflexions see

ERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

precede makes -dable; see MUTE E.

precedence, precedent. The pronunciation is tricky. The OED gives for the first prisé’dns only (not pré’sidns), & for the second prisé’dnt only in adjectival use, but pré’sidnt only in noun use. This, which is a very disputable account of present usage, is not likely to remain true; pré’sId- is here recommended for all alike.

precedent. The House of Commons is always ready to extend the indulgence which [it] is a sort of precedent that the mover & seconder of the Address should ask for. A bad piece of SLIPSHOD EXTENSION; a p.is not a custom or a tradition (though it may start one; cf. Hazrness), but @ previous casc.

fosity & preciousness illustrate well the differentiation that should be encouraged whenever there is an opening for it between the two terminations; see -Ty & -NESS. The special sense of excessive fastidiousness in diction, pronunciation, & the like, is almost confined to -ty, & the more general senses are left to -ness. The opening here was provided by the fact that -ty represents the nch form & s0 calls up the Précieuses Ridiculcs of Moliére.

precipitance, -ancy, -ation. The most economical way of dealing with the words would have been to let -ancy perish, & make -ance mean rashness of action or suddenness of occurrence or speed of motion, & -ation the bringing or coming to pass with especial rashness or speed. But what is happening is that all three exist side by side, -ance & -ancy slowly giving way to -ation just as their parent precipitant has

given way to preciptiate. See also

PRECIPITOUS.

precipitate. 1. The verb makes

-ttable; see -ABLE 1. 2. The verb is

pronounced -at, the adjective &

noun -at or -It; PaRTICcIPLes 5 B.

precipitous. The position, then, is
