page: 455

+ this: (1) Are the workers justified in taking the precipitous action suggested in the resolution?/The step seems a trifle rash & precipitous when one remembers the number of banking & commercial failures that

Those who write thus either are ignorant of the established difference between p. & F iho data or must not be surprised if they are taken to be so. Formerly, -ous was freely used where we now always say -ate; but that time has long passed away. See Pairs & SNARES.

précis. See FRENCH worps.

preclude makes -dable; see MUTE E.

predestinate. 1. The verb makes enable; see -ABLE 1. 2. The verb is pronounced -at, the adjective -at or -It; see PARTICIPLES 5 B.

predetermine has -nable; MuTE E.

predicate. 1. The verb makcs -cable; see -ABLE 1. 2. The OED pronounces p., & its dcrivatives predicable & predication, with préd-, not préd-. The verb is said with -at, the noun with -It; see PARTICIPLES 5B. 8. P.) (predict. The Latinless have great difficulty in realizing that the words are not interchangeable variants. P. is from Latin praedicare to cry forth or proclaim, but predict from Latin praedicere to say beforehand or foretell; the Latin simple verbs are different, & prae has not the same meaning in the two compounds. P. makes predicable & predication, predict makes predictable & prediction. It is naturally predicate & its derivatives that are misused; examples of the misuse are:—The case for establishing compulsory & voluntary systems side by side in the same country is not only not proven, but involves a change in strategic theory that predicates nothing but disaster (threatens? foreshadows? presages? just possibly predicts; certainly not predicates)./A profound change in the balance of the Constitution predicable by anyone who had searched the political heavens during the last four years & observed the eccentric

455

+ behaviour of certain bodies & their satellitesis now upon us(predictable). / What she would say to him, how he would take it, even the vaguest predication of their discourse, was beyond him to guess (anticipation? outline? prevision? just possibly prediction; certainly not predication).

P. & its derivatives mean to assert, & especially to assert the existence of some quality as an attribute of the person or thing that is spoken of (Goodness or badness cannot with any propriety be predicated of motives./ To predicate mortality of Socrates, i.e., to state that Socrates is mortal). The words (apart from predicate n., the grammatical term) are mainly used in Logic, & are best left alone by those who have no acquaintance with either Logic or Latin. See Pairs & SNARES.

predict makes -tor; see -OR.

predispose makes -sable; MUTE E.

predominate makes -tor; see -or,

preface. 1. The verb makes -ceable; see -ABLE 1. 2. For p. & foreword, see the latter. 3. For p. & prefix, VV., See PREFIX.

prefect. Pronounce pré-. The adjcctive is prefectorial, not -toral.

prefer(able). 1. -r(r)-. 2. More preferable. 3. To, rather than, than.

1. Prefer makes -rring, -rred (see -R-, -RR-), but preferable (pré‘ferabl); the latter formation is anomalous but established. sec CONFER(R)ABLE for similar words.

2. More preferable is an inexcusable PLEONASM (3). The cure for that is clearly the alternative vote or the second ballot, the former alternative being, in our view, on every ground the more preferable.

8. To, rather than, than. If the rejected alternative is to be ex-

ressed, the normal construction for it is to: I p. pears to apples, riding to walking. The OED, defining the construction, gives nothing besides to except bcfore & above, both of which it obelizes as archaic or disused. A difficulty ariscs, however, with to; the object of prefer is often
