page: 457

+ with the title./A ‘ Coltection of Poems & Essays by Mary Queen of Scots ’, prefixed by an essay on the character & writings of Mary Stuart./Two notes dealing with recent cases on the subject of company directors are prefixed by the catchwords tn very prominent type: ‘ Retirement & Remorse ’./The story is prefixed by an introductory sketch of Pope Alexander VI’s Spanish ancestry./Every paragraph is prefixed with a kind of title to ut.

The poor old word preface, with foreword assailing it on one front & prefiz on another, is going through troubled times.

pregnant construction. See TEecu- NICAL TERMS.

judg(e)yment. Keep the -e- ; see

UTE E.

judice, n. The Committee's

ort adds that without doubt a marked prejudice to the eating of eels exists in Scotland. The prepositions after p. arc against & in favour of; this to is transferred from objection; see ANALOGY.

preliminary, adv. See Quasi- ADVEBBS.

prelude. The noun is pré‘lid; the verb used to be prila’d (° All the verse quotations & the dictionaries down to c 1830 ’—OED), but is now pronounced like the noun—a remarkable exception to the tendency mentioned in NouUN & VERB ACCENT.

premature. The pronunciation pré’matit is recommended, but the sound of the e & the place of the accent are both variable; in any case, the last syllable is fully pronounced & not weakened to -cher.

r as an adjective is now suggestive of tawdry ornament, though it was formerly not avoided by good

writers. The ELEGANT-VARIATIONiSt

finds it useful (There was a time when

the School of Literae Humaniores stood

first in potnt of number, but of late

the History School has taken premier

place), but would do better to find

some other way out. It is wise to 457

+ confine it now to such traditional

hrases as p. Earl or Baronet (Bacon

no issue of his marriage, the present Sir Hickman Bacon, premier Baronet of England, being descended from kis half-brother).

premiére. See FRENCH woRDSs.

premise(s), -ss(es). 1. The noun is

ré’mis, the verb primi’z; see

OUN & VEBB ACCENT. 2. The verb is spelt premise, not -ize; see -ISE) tee 8. The two noun spellings

-tses & -isses in the plural) may perhaps be thought useful; but ambiguity cannot often arise between the parts of a syllogism (-tsses; see, for m€aning, TECcH- NICAL TERMS) & of a public house (-ises); &, except practical utility, there is no reason for the variation. The two words are one, the parts of a syllogism being ‘the previously stated ’, & the parts of a public house &c. being ‘the aforesaid ’, (facts, places, &c.). The uniform spelling premise (pl. premises) is recommended. 4, The verb makes -sable; see MUTE E.

premium. Pl. -ms only; see -uM.

Erooreute - Abad form; -zpDty,.

prep. See CURTAILED worDs.

preparatory. For the use in They were weighing it preparatory to sending it to town, see Goisesovense.

prepare makes -rable; see MuTE F.

preparedly. Four syllables if used; see -EDLY.

prepay. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 1. Bees

PREPOSITION AT END. It is a cherished superstition that prepositions must, in spite of the incurable English instinct for putting them late (‘ They are the fittest timber to make great politics of’ said Bacon; & ‘ What are you hitting me for?’ says the modern schoolboy), be kept true to their name & placed before the word they govern. ‘ A sentence ending in a preposition is an inelegant sentence ” represents @ very general belief. One of its chief supports is the fact that Dryden, an acknowledged master of Q3
