page: 458

+ English prose,-*ent through all his prefaces contriving ate the final prepositions that he had been guilty of in his first editions. It is interesting to find Ruskin almost reversing this procedure. In the text of the Seven Lamps there is a solitary final preposition to be found, & no more; but in the later footnotes they are not avoided (Any more wasted words . « « I never heard of./Men whose occupation for the next fifty years would be the knocking down every beautiful igre | hands on). Dryden’s earlier

: ractice rendered. But the Dryden-Gibbon™ shows him following the English instinct; his later shows him sophisticated with deliberate Latinism:—‘ I am often put to a stand in considering whether what I write be the idiom of the tongue, ... & have no other way to clear my doubts but by translating my English into Latin’; the natural infcrence in this matter would be: you cannot put a preposition (roughly speaking) later than its word in Latin, & therefore you must not do so in English. Gibbon improved | upon the doctrine, &, observing that prepositions & adverbs are not always easily distinguished, képt on ‘the safe side by not ending sentenccs with on, over, under, or the like, even when they would have been adverbs. | The fact is that the remarkable freedom enjoyed by English in putting its prepositions Jate & omitting its relatives is an impertant clement in the flexibility of the language. The power of saying A state of dejection such as they are absolute strangers to (Cowper) instead of A siate of dejection of an intensity to which they are absolute strangers, or People worth talking to instead of People with whom tt ts worth while to talk, is not one to be lightly surtradition has remained in being, & even now immense pains are daily expended in changing spontaneous into artificial English. That depends on what they are cut with is not improved by conversion into That 458 they could lay their.

+ depends on with what they are cut; & too often the lust of sophistication, once blooded, becomes uncontrollable, & ends with, That depends on the answer to the question as to with what they are cut. Those who lay down the universal principle that

3, final prepositions are ‘ inclegant ’” are unconsciously trying to deprive the English language of a valuable idiomatic resource, which has been used freely by all our greatest writers except those whose instinct for English idiom has been overpowered by notions of correctness derived from Latin standards. The legitimacy of the prepositional ending in literary English must be uncompromisingly maintained; in respect of elegance or inelegance, every example must be judged not by any arbitrary rule, but on its own merits, according to the impression it makes on the feeling of educated English readers.

In avoiding the forbidden order, unskilful handlers of words often fall into real blunders (see Out or THE FRYING-PAN). A few examples of bad grammar obviousky due to this cause may fairly he offered without any suggestion that a rule is responsible for all blunders made in attempting to keep it; the words in brackets indicate the avoided form, which is not necessarily the best, but is at least better than that substituted for it:—The War Office does not care, the Disposal Board ts indifferent, d& there ts no-one on whom to fiz the blame or to hang (no-one to fix the blame on or to hang)./The day begins with a ride with the wife & as many others as want to ride & for whom there is horscflesh available (& as there arc horses for)./The question of an equal repartition of the cost of reparation, as well as of the interest & reimbursement of capital invested, is on what the whole matter hinges (is what the whole matter hinges on)./It ts like the art of which IZuysmans dreamed but never executed (the art that Huysmans dreamed of). /Recognttion
