page: 460

+ the OED gives only the pronunciation with s; that is undoubtedly the correct one, as in sentiment; but the sound has been assimilated to that of present, with which presentment is, but presentiment is not, connected; & with presentient, which is not in popular use, no-one would make the same mistake. Mistake or not, however, even the OED’s authority is hardly likely to cure presentiment - of its z, & the pronunciations here recommended are prizé’ntiment, prizé’ntment, présé’nshent.

preserve, n. For p.=jam, see FORMAL WORDS.

preserve, vb, has -vable; MUTE E.

presidentess. See FEMININE DE- SIGNATIONS.

pre tator, -tion. Now chiefly in POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

. The anglicized pronunciation pré’stij is given by the OED as well as the usual présté’zh, but is perhaps seldom heard.

prestissimo, resto. Pl. -08 5 -0(E)s 3.

makes - le; see MUTE R.

edly. Four syllablee .f used; see -EDLY; it is better to use presumably or other synonym.

presumptive. For heir p., see HEIR 2.

PRESUMPTUOUS WORD-FORMA-~ TION. A selection of words follows that for one reason or another should

not have been broughtinto existence.

Some, as basal, were not wanted;

some, as bureaucrat, were bad forma-

tions; some, as intensive, were

essentially liable to confusion with

others; & against some, as dan-

diacal, more than one of these

objections can be brought. They

are not here sorted into classes, the

rticular faults of each being stated

in its dictionary place, but are

merely put together as a general

warning to those who are given

either to reckless wordmaking for

themselves or to catching up of new

vogue-words started by others.

Amoral, amusive, basal, ; eaucrat,

(lower), 460

+ devolute, duologue, epistolatory, ewentuate, feature vb, femininity, forceeg foreword, funnsment, happenings, istoricity, tdi , talons. interpretive, lectureship, loculton, mentality, mineralogy, mintfy, monarchial, opinionative, pacifist, pleistocene, purposive, specdometer. presuppore makes -sable; MUTE E.

preterite. In dealing with English grammar, it is better to say past.

pretermit makes -ited, -iting (see -T-, -TT-), & -ssible or -itable (see -ABLE 1, 2.

prettify. For infiexions see VERBS IN -IE .» 6.

preux chevalfer. FRENCH WORDS.

prevaricate makes -for; see -OR.

preventable, -ible. The first is recommended; see -ABLE 2.

prevent(at)ive. The short form is better; see LONG VARIANTS.

previous. 1. For the construction in will consult you previous to acting, see QUASI-ADVERBS. 2. Too previous, originally amusing both because the sense of p. was a speciall made one, & because too was wi that sense deliberately redundant, has passed into the realm of WornouT HUMOUR. 8. The previous question is a phrase that does not explain itself. e all know that movi the p.q. is somehow a way 0 attempting to shelve the matter under debate, but the light of nature would suggest only, & wrongly, that the proposal was to go back to what the House had been engaged i before this present matter. p. q. is in fact a proposal that the matter under debate should not now

Seiiaget should now) be divided

upon. ose who wish to shelve the

matter move this p. q., to which they

now vote ay (formerly no).

pre-war. The only justification for

saying p. instead of before the war

is that before the war makes a very

unhandy adjective, & we are now

constantly in need of a handy one;

before-the-war conditions, lities,

prices, as phrases for everyday use,

will never do, & the only justifica-
