page: 462

princely. For the adv., see -LILy.

incess. As a | Sie (P. Edith,

. Victoria, P. yal, &c.) pronounced pri’nsis; as an independent noun, pri’nsés or prinsé’s.

principal, principle. Misprints of one for the other are very frequent, & should be guarded against.

prior. For the adverbial use (p. to = before) see QUASI-ADVERBS. But the phrase is incongruous, & ranks merely with FoRMAL WORDS, except in contexts involving a connexion between the two events more essential than the simple time relation, as in Candidates must deposit security prior to the ballot. The use deprecated is seen in: Prior to going to Wilishire, Mr very successfully hunted the Hounds.

prise. This spelling is sometimes used to differentiate the verb mcaning to force up by leverage from the other verb or verbs spelt prize; it is also the old spelling of the nautical verb meaning to capture. But the pronunciation (always -z) is against the success of this distinction, & the ordinary form prize is recommended.

privacy. The OED recognizes only priv-, not priv-.

privative. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

privilege, vb. He was generally believed to be an exceptionally taciturn man, but those who were privileged with Ais friendship say that this was a habit assumed against the inquisitive. An unidiomatic use, on the ANALOGY of honoured with.

prize, vb, makes -zable; see MUTE E. For the spelling in various senses, see PRISE.

pro (professional). See CurTaiLepD worps. Pl. pros; see -0(E)s 5.

pro & con. Pl., as noun, pros & cons.

probable. Two temptations call for notice. The first is that of attaching an infinitive to p.; cf. POSSIBLE; a thing may be likely to happen, but not p. to happen; ANALOGY is the corrupter: Should Germany meditate anything of the 462

+ kind tt would look uncommonly like a deliberate provocation of France, &

or that reason it seems scarcely pro-

ble to be borne out by evenis./ Military cooperation against Russia is scarcely probable to be more than a dream. ‘The second is the wrong use of the future after p. The result will probably be is right; but The probable result will be is a mixture between that & The probable result is; correct accordingly to is in: Jt is believed that Said Pasha will be forced to resign, & that his most probable successor will be Ktamil Pasha.

probe, if an -able adjective from it is required, must make probeable for fear of confusion with the ordinary probable—onc of the extremely rare necessary exceptions to therulegiven under MUTE E.

problematic(al). The longer form is een more common; there is no clear difference in usage; -IC(AL).

proboscis. The pl. recommended is -scises; the Latin form is -scides (-éz), & probosces is wrong. For p.= nose, sec POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

proceleusmatic. See GREEK G.

process. The OED gives pré’sés as the better pronunciation; but prd’sts or pro’sIs sccms more likely to prevail.

process (go in proccssion) is a BACK- FORMATION; pronounce prosé’s.

procés-verbal. See FRENcn WoRDS.

proclitic. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

procrastinate makes -nable, -tor; see -ABLE Il, -OR.

proctorize makcs -zable; MUTE E.

procure makes -rable; see MUTF E.

procuress. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS.

produce. Verb prodii’s, noun prd’dis; see Noun & VERB ACCENT. The verb makes -cible; see -ABLE 2.

proem, proemial. Pronounce prd’- ém, prée’mial. But the words, not having made their way like poem & poetic into common use, remain

uzzling to the unlearned & are

tter avoided in gencral writing.
