page: 463

profane, vb, has -nable; MUTE E.

professedly. Four syllables; -EDLy.

professorate, -riate. The differentiation that makes -rate the office of professor, & -riate the body of professors, deserves recognition.,

professoress. See FEMININE DE- SIGNATIONS. 3

proffer makes -ering, -ered; -R-,-RR-.

profile. Pronounce prd’fél.

profound makes -er, -est; see -ER & -EST 1 c.

profoundly. See PosiTriveE worps.

profuse makes -cr, -est; see -ER & -EST 1 c.

progenitress. See FEMININE DE- SIGNATIONS.

prognosis. Pl. -oses (-éz); see LATIN PLURALS.

prognosticate makcs -cable, -tor; see -ABLE lI, -OR.

prognostic. Forsynonymy see SIGN.

p (me). It appears from the OED quotations that -am was thc regular spelling until the 19th c., & the OlsD’s judgement is: ‘ The earlier program was retained by Scott, Carlyle, Hamilton, & others, & is preferable, as conforming to the usual English representation of Greck gramma, in anagram, cryptogram, diagram, telegram, &c.’.

progress. TheOEDgivespré-as preferable to pré-. Noun pro’gris, verb progré’s; see NouN & VERB ACCENT.

progression. <Arithmeiical p. & geometrical p. These are in constant demand to express a rapid rate of increase, whieh is not involved in either of them, & is not even suggested by a.p. Those who use the expressions should bear in mind (1) that you canoot determine the nature of the progression from two terms whose relative place in the series is unknown, (2) that every rate of increase that could be named is slower than some rates of a. Pp: & of g.p., & faster than some others, & consequently (3) that the phrases “better than a.p., than g.p.’, ‘almost in a. p., g.p.’, are wholly meaningless.

In 1903 there were ten thousand

463

+ ‘paying guests’, last year [1906]

y thousand. The rate of increase, ts better, it will be observed, than arithmetical progression. Better, certainly, than a. p. with increment 1, of which the fourth annual term would have been 10,003; but as certainly worse than a. p. with increment a million, of which the fourth term would have _ been 8,010,000 ; & neither better nor worse than, but a case of, a. p. with increment 18833}. The writer meant a. p. with annual increment 10,000; but as soon as we see what he meant to say we see also that it was not worth saying, since it tells us no more than that, as we knew before, fifty thousand is greater than forty thousand.

Even g. p. may be so slow that to raise 10,000 in three years to as little as the 10,008 mentioned above is merely a matter of fixing the increment ratio low enough. Neither a.p. mor g.p. necessarily implics rapid progress. The point of contrast between them is that one involves growth or decline at a constant pace, & the other at an increasing pace. Hence the famous sentence in Malthus about population & subsistence, the first increasing in a g. & the second in an a. ratio, which perhaps started the phrases on their career as Popu- LARIZED TECHNICALITIES. Of the following extracts, the first is a copy of Malthus, the second a possibly legitimate use, according to what it is meant to convey, & the third the usual absurdity:—The healthy portion of the population is increasing by c. p., & the feeble-minded by g. p./ Scientific discovery is likely to proceed by g. p./ As the crude prejudice against the soldier’s uniform vanished, & as ex-Regular officers joined the Voluntecrs, & Volunteers passed on to the Army, the idea that every man owes willing service to his country began to spread in an almost geometrical ratio.

rogressionist, progressist, progressive, nn. The last is recommended.
