page: 464

+ prohibit. The modern construction, apart from that with an object noun as in an Act prohibiting export, is from doing, not todo; the OED marks the latter as archaic, but it is less archaism than ignorance of idiom & the anal of forbid that accounts for it in such contexts as:— Marshal Oyama prohibited his troops to take quarter within the walls. /The German Government has decided to issue a decree prohibiting all Government officials to strike. P. makes -lor; see -OR.

prohibition. Pronounce prdi- ; the h is sounded, however, where the t following it bears the accent, as in prohibit itself. See PRONUNCIATION.

Proje’ Verb projé’kt, noun pr6’jikt; see Noun & VERB ACCENT. ’Fhe verb makes -tor; see -OR.

prolate, -lative. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

prolegomena. A plural, of which the sing., rarely used, is -menon.

prolepsis. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

prolific is in common use, but to make a satisfactory noun from it has passed the wit of man. Prolificacy, prolificalness, prolificity, & prolificness, have been tried & found wanting; substitutes such as fertility, productiveness, frutifulness, are the best solution.

prologue, -logize, -loguize. The

prevalent modern prone is

prdo6g, but the OKD gives prefer-

ence to prd‘lég. In the verb it

seems best to spell -gize, the Greeks

having the verb -gizo, but with

licence at least (see GREEK G) to

pronounce it pré‘logiz.

enade. Pronounce -ahd.

methean. See HERCULEAN.

ome -cy. The second is a

NEEDLESS VARIANT. See -CE, -CY.

promiscuous. The colloquial use for

random, chance, casual, &c., springs

from POLYSYLLABIC HUMOUR.

promise makes -sable; see MUTE E.

The noun promisor is confined to

legal use, & -er is the ordinary word.

P., vb, is liable to the abuse dis-

+ cussed in DousLe passives: If tt had been taken down, even though

romised to be re-erected, it might

¢ shared the fate of Temple Bar.

ry. So spelt, not -tsory.

ote. 1. P. makes -table; see

UTE E. 2. Construction. You can p. a person to an archbishopric, or p. him to be archbishop, or p. him archbishop, but not mix two of these & p. him to archbishop. The unidiomatic construction, however, is now commoner in the newspapers than it should be:—The crowning glory of an executive naval officer's career ts to be promoted to Admiral of the Fleet. / Major-General has been appointed to succeed Lieutenant- General —— as Director-General (temp.) of the Army Medical Service, & has been promoted to Lieutenant- General (temp.)./Over 1150 cadets of the Military Colleges were promoted to officers.

promulgate makes -atable, -tor; see -ATABLE, -OR.

pronounce makes -ceable; see “ABLE 1. Pronouncedly has four syllables; see -EDLY. Pronouncement is kept in being by the side of pronunciation owing to complete differentiation; it means only declaration or decision, which the other never does.

PRONOUNS & pronominal adjectives are rather tricky than _ difficult. Those who go wrong over them do so from heedlessness, & will most!

lead guilty when they are charged.

t is enough to state the dangers very shortly, & prove their existence by sufficient citations. 1. There must be a principal in existence for the pronoun or proxy to act for. 2. The principal should not be very

far off. 38. There should not be two

parties justifying even a momentary doubt about which the pronoun

represents. 4. One pronoun should

not represent two principals on one occasion. 5. The pronoun should

seldom precede its principal.

1. No pronoun without a principal

in being. Viscount Wolverhampton,
