page: 465

+ acting under medical advice, has restgned the office of Lord President, & His Majesty the King has been pleased to accept it (it is resignation; but as that word has not been used we can only suppose H.M. to have accepted the office)./The member for Morpeth has long been held in the highest respect by all who value sterling character & whole-hearted service in the cause of his fellows; it was Earl Grey who once declared that Mr Burt was ‘ the finest gentleman’ he ever knew (His means a man’s, & not, as grammar requires since ‘a man’ has not been mentioned, Mr Burt’s)./Now, the public interest is that coal should be cheap é& abundant, & that it should be got without the dangerous friction which has attended the disputes between masters & men in this, trade. And, if nationalization is to be the policy, it looks to an assured peace in the coal-trade as its main advantage. For this it will pay a fair price & be willing that a considerable experiment sho be made, but without the sure prospect of such a peace it will see no benefit to itself & a very doubtful benefit to the miners in the change from private to State ownership (Each of these tfs means the public, not the public interest)./The number of these abstainers is certainly greater than can be attributed to merely local or personal causes, & those who have watched the election agree that a portion of them are due to doubts & uncertainties about the Insurance Act (A portion, that is, of the abstentions, not of the abstainers)./An American Navy League Branch has even been established in London, & is influentially supported by their countrymen in this city (Whose countrymen?).

2. The principal should not be very far off. We have to go further back than the beginning of the following extracts to learn who he & she are:— And yet, as we read the pages of the book, we feel that a work written when the story is only as yet half told, amid the turmoil of the events which

465

+ he 7s describing, can only be taken as a provisional impression./It is always a shock to find that there are still writers who regard the war from the standpoint of the sentimentalist. It is true that this story comes from America & bears the traces of its distance from the field of action. But even distance cannotwholly excusesuch an exterior view as she permits herself.

8. There should not be two parties justifying even a moment’s doubt about which the pronoun represents. Mr Harcourt, who presided at a large public meeting, declared that tt was his experience as Home Secretary which changed Sir William Harcourt’s earlier views & convinced him that drastic legislation was necessary (Mr H.’s experience, or Sir W.’s? See also 5)./In the December previous to his raid on the Tower he was chief of a gang who, ov wering his attendants, seized the of Ormonde in St-James Street when returning from a dinner-party (His refers not to the preceding he, but to the following Duke; see 5, & FA.sr SCENT)./Four years, the years that followed her marriage, suffice Lady Younghusband for her somewhat elaborate study, ‘ Marie Antoinette: Her Early Youth, 1770-1774’ (Not Lady Y.’s marriage; see FA.Lse SCENT)./Professor Geddes’s fine example of sociology applied to Cwics, his plea for a comprehensive & exact survey of his own city as a branch of natural history required for the culture of every instructed citizen (The professor’s own city? Ah, no; here comes, perhaps better late than never, the true principal)./As it is, the shortsighted obstinacy of the bureaucracy has given its overwhelming strength to the revolution (Not bureaucracy’s, but revolution’s, strength; see also 5)./Coriolanus is the embodiment of a great noble; & the reiterated taunts which he hurls in play after play at the rabble only echo the general temper of the Renascence (Not Coriolanus, but Shakspere, is the hurler; the interloping of Coriolanus between Shakspere &
