page: 466

+ his proxy makes things difficult for the reader)./On the Lord Mayor's left was Queen Elena, as calm & placid as her husband, who had come into the Guildhall in Parma violet silk, with a@ large violet-coloured hat c&: a bouquet of orchtds of the same hue.

4, One pronoun, one job. ... which opens up the bewildering question as to how far the Duma really represents the nation. The answer to this ts far from solving the Russian riddle, but without answering it it ts idle even to discuss it (It represents, first, the bewildering question, secondly, the discussion of that riddle, & last, the riddle itself—which is not the same as the question)./This local option in the amount of outdoor relief given under the Poor Law has always operated inequitably d& been one of the greatest blots on the system; to extend it to the first great benefit under the Insurance Act will greatly lessen its usefulness (It is the blot, but as is the Act’s)./ Again, unconsciousness in the person himself of what he is about, or of what others think of him, ts also a great heightener of the sense of absurdity; it makes it come the fuller home to us from his tnsensibility to it (It is first the unconsciousness, secondly the sense of absurdity, & thirdly absurdity).

5. The pronoun should seldom precede its principal. For Plato, being then about twenty-eight years old, had listened to the * Apology’ of Socrates; had heard from them all that others had heard or seen of his last hours (had heard from others all that they had heard &c.)./The old Liberal idea of cutting expenditure dozen to the bone, so that his money might fructify in the pocket of the taxpayer, had given place to the idea of ... (the taxpayer's money might fructify in his pocket)./Both these dines of criticism are taken simultaneously in a message which its special correspondent sends from Laggan, tn Alberta, to the Daily Mail this morning (which the D. M, prints pias morning from its correspondent

cC.). 466

pronunciam(i)ento. The Spanish spelling is with the?, but the OED gives the English word without it. Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 6.

PRONUNCIATION. The ambition to do better than our ncighbours is in many departments of life a virtue; in pronunciation it is a vice; there the only right ambition is to do as our neighbours. It is true this at once raises the question who our neighbours are. To reply that some people’s neighbours are the educated, others’ the uneducated, & others’ again a mixture, is not very helpful in itself, suggesting social shibboleths; but there i3 truth in it, for all that, which may serve us if we divide words also into classes, viz that of the words that everybody knows & uses, & that of the words that only the educated, or any other section of us, know & use. As regards the first of these classes, our neighbour is the average Englishman; as regards the second, our neighbour is our fellow membcr of the educated or any other scction. The moral of which is that, while we are entitled to display a certain fastidious precision in our saying of words that only the cducated usc, we deserve not praise but censurc if we decline to accept the popular pronunciation of popular words. To make six syllubles of extraordinary, or end level & picture with a clear -¢1 & -tir, or maintain the old accent on the middle syllable of contemplate, all everyday words— these feats establish one’s culture at the cost of one’s modesty, & perhaps of one’s hearer’s paticnee. But it, with some word that most of us pass their lives without uttcring—comminatory, for instance, or intercalary—, a scholar likes to exhibit his deftness in saying many successive syllables after a single accent where the vulgar would help themsclves out with a second one (k6’minatori, kO’mina’torl; iInter’kalar!, If’nterk&’lari), why, no-one need mind. The broad principles are: Pro-
