page: 467

+ nounce as your neighbours do, not better; For words in general use, your neighbour is the general public. A few particular points may be touched upon:—

Silent t. No effort should be made to sound the t in the large classcs of words ending in -sten (chasten, ' fasten, listen) & -stle (castle, wrestle, epistle, jostle, bustle), nor in often, soften, ositler, nestling, watstcoat, postpone. But some good people, afraid they may be suspected of not knowing how to spell, say the t in self-defence.

Silent bh. In Hunt has hurt his head, it is nearly as bad to sound the h of has & his as not to sound that of Hunt & hurt & head. In many compounds whose second element begins with h, the h is silent unless the accent falls on the syllable that it begins; so philhe’llenism sounds the h, but philhelle’nic does not; similarly Phi‘lharmo’nic has fi‘lar-. In nihilism the bh should be silent, though nihil, if there is occasion to say the word, sounds it.

monetize & decolo(u)rize raise the question whether the peculiar vowel sound of money & colour (-ii-) is to be extended to derivatives involving recurrence to the Latin nouns; -mon- is recommended, &, if decolorize is spelt, as it should be, without u, then -cdl-.

Clothes, forehead, fortune, fossil, knowledge, are athe TO of the many words whose spelling & ordina

ronunciation do not correspond,

ut with which mistaken attempts are made to restore the supposed true sound, They should be called kléz, fd’rid, for’chddn, f5’sl, nd‘1lj, in accordance with the principles laid down above.

The variations ah & & for a, aw & 6 for o, 156 & 10 for lu, are widely

revalent in large classes of words

ass, telegraph, ask; gone, soft, loss; lucid, absolute, illumine); it need only be said that the first two are roughly local distinctions, ah & aw being southern & & & 5 northern, while 166 is displacing 1d, especially

467

+ in certain positions (see LU), irrespective of locality.

Obdurate & recondite, formerly accented on the middle syllable, but now more often on the first, represent many more whose accent has shifted or is shifting towards the beginning; but they are not in very common use, so obdu’rate & reco’ndite are more often heard than conte’mplate & illu’strate; sec RECESSIVE ACCENT. :

For a particular affectedly refined pronunciation, see GIRL,

Participles &c. of verbs &c. in -er(r), -ur(r). Is erring to follow err (er’Ing) or errant (é’ring)? are furry & currish to be fer’! & ker’Ish, or fii’ri & kii’rish? The OED is nearly but not quite consistent; in the words concurring, currish, demurring, deterring, erring, furry, purring, slurring, & spurring, the full er sound is given; recurring, however, is given as rikii’ring, & incurring & occurring are not marked. It may be taken that -erIng &c. (not -éring, -iirl, &c). are the orthodox sounds.

Readers to whom the pronunciation of English words derived from Latin (very slightly touched upon in FALSE QUANTITY) 18 bewildering will find some clues in an interesting article by the late John Sargeaunt in S.P.E. Tract iv.

For an easily intelligible yet fairly complete system of showing pronunciation in print, sec PHONETICS,

propaganda is singular, not plurel: ap., this p., &c.; & the plural, if required, is -as (The difference between these propagandas ts obvious enough). But it is not unnaturally mistaken for a Latin neuter plural = things to be propagated; it is in fact a curtailed phrase Congregatio de Propaganda Fide = Board for Propagating the Faith.

propagate makes -gable, -tor; see “ABLE 1, -OR.

propel makes -lled, -lling, -llable; BEC -LL-, -L-.

propensity. That pensity of lifting every problem from the plane
