page: 470

+ let it be said again that the unlettered British public are a hopeless proposttion in the matter of grand opcra.

Used for undertaking, occupation, trade: He has got a foothold mainly because the English maker has been occupied with propositions that give a larger proportion of profit./Establishing floaling supply depots at frequent tntervals across the ocean, a Abed ceahaa which only a multimillionaire could have undertaken./ The old spirit of common brotherhood amongst the members dies day by day, d: insurance is becoming ‘ a business proposition ’./For good or evil, railway nationalization is a vast business proposition./Colonial Preference became the ‘ sentimental side’, merely appealing to the Colonies, of what had become a business proposition./The agriculturist asks that * corn-growing shall become a paying proposition °./ Agriculture in England can never again become a paying proposition./ The future of the taximeter-cab proposition in the Metropolis presents a very interesting problem.

Used for opponent: F. Ouimet, who played so brilliantly yesterday, icas the proposition the holdcr had to face./The former is a@ very tough proposition as an opponent in singles./This Sircth Army now standing upposite us was not a very fearsome proposition./The Roumanian army has proved a peculiarly tough proposition,

Used for possibility, prospect: Petrol at 64d. or 7id. @ gallon was hardlu a commercial proposition./The only way lo increase the recruiling standard of the Territorial Force is to make the service a more attractive proposifion to the man & the employer.

Used for area, field: The mining district, according to the best information obtainable, is a placcr proposition, & placer mining ruins the land./ Lancashire ts vitally interested to secure a sufficient supply of colton on the Gezira plains in the Soudan, this locality being what one speaker described as ‘ the very finest cotlon-growtng proposition in the whole world ’.

470

Used for method, experiment: The territories will certainly require many novel proposttions for their development.

proprietress. See FEMININE DE- SIGNATIONS.

propylaeum. PI. -laea.

For spclling see 2, &.

prorogue makes -gable, -gation.

proscenium. PI. -ia.

proscribe makes -bable; see MUTE E.

prosecute makes -iable (see MUTE E), -tor (see -OR), -triz (see FEMININE DESIGNATIONS, & -TRIX).

proselyte makes -tism; see MUTE FE.

prosify. For infiecxions sec VERBS IN -IE &c., 6. .

prosody. See TECHNICAL TERMS. The adjective recommended is prosodic, & the -tst noun prosodist, for which see -1sT B on philanthropist.

prosopopoela. Pronounce prosdpopé’a; for spelling see =, @, & for meaning TECHNICAL TERMS. dita ot vb, makes -tor; see -OR.

he OED accents pro’spect, not prospect, in the only current verb senses; but the analogy of similar NouN & VERB ACCENTS is almost sure to prevail before long.

prospectus. Pl. -tuses, not -ti; -us.

prosper makcs -ercd &c.; -R-, -RR-.

prostitute, vb, makes -utable, -tor; see MUTE E, -OR.

strate. The adjective pro’strate, the verb prostra’te; see ParTici- PLES 5 A.

prosy, not -sey; sec -EY & -y.

protagonist. 1. Pronunciation. 2. Meaning & use.

1. Pronunciation. The popular rendering is protd’gonist; but, if any weight is allowed to the considerations advanced in 2, prdotago’nist would be better, (a) as being the scholar’s natural way of saying what should never have been anything but a scholar’s word, & (b) as at least discouraging the mistaken notion that p. & antagonist are a pair of words showing the common contrast between pro- for & anti- against.

2. Meaning & use. The word that
