page: 471

+ has so suddenly become a prime favourite with journalists, who more often than not make it mean champion or advocate or defender, has no right whatever to any of those meanings, & almost certainly owcs them to the mistaking of the first syllable (representing Greek proios first) for prd on behalf of—a mistake made easy by the accidental resemblance to antagonist. ‘* Accidental ’, since the Greek agonisites has different meanings in the two words, in one combatant, but in the other play-actor. The Greek protagonistes means the actor who takes the chief part in a play—a sense readily admitting of figurative application to the most conspicuous personage in any affair. The deuteragonist & tritagonist take parts of second & third importance, & to talk of several protagonists, or of a chief p. or the like, is an absurdity as great, to anyone who knows Greek, pe aetigconuclamgere ge Ge ae aaa of a person, instead of the p. of a drama or of an affair. In the newspapers it is a rarity to meet p. in a legitimate sense; but two examples of it are put first in the following collection. All the others are (for Greek scholars, who perhaps do not matter) outrages on this learned-sounding word, because some of them distinguish between chief pp. & others who arc not chief, some state orimply that there are more pp. than one in an affair, & the rest use p. as a mere synonym for advocate.

Legitimate uses: In Jeppé the subsidiary personages do little more than give the p. his cues./Marco Landi, the p. & narrator of a story which is skilfully contrived & excellently told, is a fairly familiar type of soldier of fortune.

Pro- and ant-: Protagonists & antagonists make a point of tgnoring evils which militate against their ideals.

Absurd uses with chief &c.: The chief p. is a young Nonconformist minister./Unlike a number of the leading pp. in the Home Rule fight,

471

+ Sir Edward Carson was not in Parliament when . -/it presents a spiritual conflict, centred about its two chief pp., but shared in by all its characters. /

Absurd plural uses: One of the pp. of that glorious fight for Parliamentary Reform in 1866 is still actively among us./One of these immense pp. must fall, &, as we have already foreshadowed, it is the Duke./By a tragic but rapid process of elimination most of the pp. have now been removed./As on a stage where all the pp. of a drama assemble at the end of the last act./That letter is essential to a true undersianding of the relations of the three great pp. at this period./ The pp. in the drama, which has the motion & structure of a Greek tragedy, rhe sas (Fy! fy! a Greek tragedy

pp. ?).

Confusions with advocate &c.: The new Warden is a strenuous p. of that party in Convocation./Mr , an enthusiastic p. of militant Protestantism./The chief p. on the company’s side in the latest railway strike, Mr

./It was a happy thought that placed in the hands of the son of one of the great pp. of Evolution the materials for the biography of another./ But most of the pp. of this demand have since shifted their ground./.As for what the medium himself or his pp. may think of them—for etymological purposes that is neither here nor there.

It was admitted above that we need perhaps not consider the Greck scholar’s feelings; he has many advantages over the rest of us, & cannot expect that in addition he shall be allowed to forbid us a word that we find useful. Is it useful? or is it merely a pretentious blundering substitute for words that are useful? Pro- in protagonist is not the opposite of antt- ; -agonist is not the same as in antagonist; advocate & champion & defender & combatant are better words for the wrong senses given to p., & p. in its right sense of the (not a) chief actor in an affair has still work to do if it
