page: 472

could only be allowed to mind its

own business,

protasis. Pl. -ases (-éz); see

LATIN PLURALS 2; &, for meaning,

TECHNICAL TERMS,

protean. Pronounce prd‘tian; see

HERCULEAN.

protect makes -tor (see -or), -tfress

(see FEMININE DESIGNATIONS).

protégé. See Frencu worps. A

female p. is spelt -ée, pl. -ées.

protest. Verb proté’st, noun prdé’-

tést; see Noun & VERB ACCENT.

The verb makes -tor, but it is less

used than -tfer,

protestant, when used as adjective or noun without reference to the specialized sense in religion, is often pronounced proté’stant for distinction.

Proteus. Pronounce prd’tis.

protocol, vb, has-led, aang: -LL-, -L-.

prot(h)onotary. The spelling without h, & the pronunciation with -né- as the accented syllable, are recommended;_ but prot(h)6’notar! is also permissible. * Both pronunciations, with the variants proto- & protho-, are now in official use ia different quarters "—OED.

prototype. William Hickey, gay young man about town, ... would be amazed tf he could see his prototype of today drinking barley-water at luncheon./The book is ‘A Guide to Modern Cookery ’, & the author is no less an authority than M. Escofficr, the ruler of the Carlton roast, the modern prototype of the immortal Brillat-Savarin, & . . ./It is perplexing to find the American Expeditionary Force described as ‘the immortal prototype of Britain’s gallant ‘‘ First Seven Divisions ” ’, until you find that for Mr the word ° prototype’? has exactly the opposite meaning of that which is given tn the dictionary. And by no means for Mr alone; for type, antitype, & prototype, see TYPE.

protract makes -for; see -or.

protrude makes -dadle (see MUTE E),

472

recommended in preference to pro-

ble; see -ABLE 2.

protyle (original undifferentiated

matter), A BAaRBaRisM; prothyl

would be better.

ve makes -vable; see MUTE E.

oved, not proven, is the regular

p.-p., the latter being properly from

the verb preve used in “Scotland

after it had given way to prove in

England; cf. weave woven, cleave

cloven. Except in the phrase not

proven as a quotation from Scotch

law, proven is better left alone.

provenance, provenience. The word

is, & will doubtless continue to be,

in literary use only. It is therefore

needless to take exception to the

first much better known form on the

ground that it is French & try to

convert the literary to the second,

even if it is better in itself.

provide makes -dable; see MUTE E.

provided (that). The following examples show that care is needed in substituting this for tf:—Ganganelli would never have been poisoned provided he had had nephews about to take care of his life./The kicks ¢: blows which my husband Launcelot was in the habit of giving me every night, provided I came home with less than five shillings./She & I agreed to stand by each other, &: be true to old Church of England, & to give our governors warning, provided they tried to make us renegades./A society has just been founded at Saratoff, the object being, as the members declare in @ manifesto to the Liberals, to use violent methods & even bombs provided the latter do so themselves. /The chances are that the direction to procced to Vladivostok at all costs, provided such tnstruction were ever given, may have been reconsidered./When will the War Council at the capital decide provided the war is to continue?

It will be agreed that if should have been written in all, & the object-lesson is perhaps enough. Those who wish for an abstract statement in addition may find that the following test, applied to each
