page: 473

+ ‘of the examples, will compel their rejection: A clause introduced by provided must express a stipulation (i.e. a demand for the prior fulfilment of a condition) made by the person who in the main sentence gives a conditional undertaking or vouches conditionally for a fact.

province. For synonyms, see FIELD.

proviso. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 6.

provoke. For the adjective provocable (pré’vokabl) is recommended in preference to provokable (provO’kabl).

provost. In the names of militarypolice officials, pronounce provd’, elsewhere pro’vost.

proxime accessit. PI., used in naming more than one, proxime accesserunt (akséser’tint).

prox(imo). See INSTANT.

prude makes -dish; see MUTE E.

prudent makes -est; -ER & -EST 4.

prudential). While -ent means having or showing prudence, -tal means pertaining to, or considered from the point of view of, or dictated by, prudence. To call an act -ent is normally to commend it; to call it -ial is more often than not to disparage it. A prisoner’s refusal to go into the witness-box is prudential but not prudent if he refuses for fear of giving himself away but actually creates prejudice against himself, prudent but not prudential if it deprives the prosecution of a necessary link in the evidence but is dictated merely by bravado, & both or ncither in conditions as easy to invent. But the difference is sometimes neglected, & -ial preferred merely as a LONG VARIANT.

prud’homme. See FRENCH worDs.

prune, vb, makes -nable; MUTE E.

prunella. For the meaning of leather or (usually misquoted <) p., see LEATHER 2.

prunello. Pl. -0s; see -o(F)s 6.

prurience, -cy. There is no differentiation; -ence is recommendcd; see -CE, -CY.

|

prurigo. Pronounce proori’g6 ; pl. 08; see -O(E)s 6.

473

pry. For inflexions, see VERBS IN “IE &c., 6.

Ps-. With the advance of literacy the pronunciation of the p in words beginning thus is likely to be restored except in psalm & its ne e. g- in the compounds of pseud(o)- such important words as psychical & psychology. The OED describes the dropping of the p sound as ‘ an unscholarly practice often leading to ambiguity or to a disguising of the composition of the word ’.

pseud(o)-. For the sound, see ps-.

pseudonym. See NOM-DE-GUERRE, PS-.

Psyche. Pronounce psi’k!I; see ps-.

psychic(al). Both forms have been & are in common use in all senses, & differcntiation has not yet started; but -al is, partly perhaps as corresponding in form to the frequent antithesis physical, tending to prevail; see -1c(AL). The spiritualists have indeed taken possession of ~<c as a noun (=medium?), & the rest of us might without much loss let them have it to themselves. Pronounce psi’kik- ; see Ps-.

psychological moment. The original German phrase, misinterpreted by the French & imported together with its false sense into English, meant the psychic factor, the mental effect, the influence exerted by a state of mind, & not a point of time at all, das Moment in German corresponding to our momentum, not our moment. Mistake & all, however, it did for a time express a useful notion, that of the moment at which a person is in a favourable state of mind (such as a skilled psychologist could choose) for one’s dealings with him to produce the effect one <lesires. But, like other POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES, it has lost its special sense & been widened till it means nothing more definite than the nick of time, to which as an expression of the same notion it is plainly inferior, It should be avoided in the extended sense as 23
