page: 474

+ HACKNEYED PHRASr, & at least restricted to contexts in which psychological is appropriate; see also IRRELEVANT ALLUSION. Three cxamples follow, going from bad to worse:—It is difficult to believe that grievances which have been spread over many years have suddenly reached the breaking-point at the precise p.m. tohen the Franco-German settlement was reaching its conclusion./There is a feeling that the p.m. has come to fight with some hope of success against la vie chére./Everything goes right, no sleeping calf or lowd-crowing cock grouse is disturbed at the p.m., the wind holds fair.

psychosis. Pl.

-oses (-€Z)3 see

474 LATIN PLURALS 2.

PT-. In ptarmigan, & in Ptolemy & its derivatives, the p is always silent. In other words the OED favours its being sounded; cf. Ps-. But ptomaine is perhaps the only one sufficiently common in talk for the pronunciation to matter.

ptomaine. The OED stigmatizes tom&’n as an illiterate pronunciation; but, as with cocaine, it is impracticable to maintain the threesyllable (p)t6’main.

pub. See CurTAILED WORDS,

pucka, bape pucca, pukka, &c. The OED gives precedence to the first spelling.

pucker makes -cred &c.3 -R-, -RR-.

pudenda, -dum, arc uscd indifferently with the same sensc, but the first with plural, the second with singular, construction.

puggree, puggaree. The OED treats the first as the standard form.

puisne. Pronounce pii‘ni.

puissant. The disyllabic pwi’sant, the older pronunciation, is recommended, the word itself being archaic. P. makes -est; -ER & -EST 4.

pulley. Pl. -eys; for verb inflexions see VERBS IN -IFE &c., 2.

pullulate. Pronounce pi‘lilat.

pulpify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

pulque. Pronounce poo’lki.

pulsate makes -atable, -tor;

see -ABLE 1, -OR.

ulse (heart-beat). The OED says * Formerly sometimes construed erroneously as a plural’, The mistake is still made.

pulverize makes -zable; sec MUTE E.

pummel. See POMMEL.

pun. The assumption that puns are per se contemptible betrayed by the habit of describing every pun not as a pun, but as a bad pun or a feeble pun, is a sign at once of sheepish docility & desire to seem superior. Puns are good, bad, & indifferent, & only those who lack the wit to make them are unaware of the fact.

Punchinello. Plural -os; -o(E)s 3.

punctilio. Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 4.

punctuate makes -uable, -tor; sec -ABLE 1, -OR.

punctum. PI. -ia.

puncture, vb, makes -rable;

see MUTE E.

pundit. For the correction of this into pandit, see DIDACTICISM.

pupa. PI. -ae.

ah ig For the derivatives pupil- (Dage, pupil(Dary, pupil(ljate, pupil- (led, pupil(ljize, &c., the double | is recommended ¢ see -LL-, -L-.

pores? vb, makes -sable; see Mure §£. As a substitute for buy (goods for moncy), p. is to be classed among FORMAL WORDS; but in figurative use (p. victory by sacrifice &c.) it is not open to the same objection. ¢

purée. See FRENCH worDs.

purge makces -geable; see -ABLE 1.

purify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

PURISM. Now & then a person may be heard to ‘ confess ’, in the pride that apes humility, to being © ‘a bit of a purist’; but purist & purism are for the most part missile words, which we all of us fling at anyone who insults us by finding not good enough for him some manner of speech that is good
