page: 476

+ are pure fabrications./An alternative, briefer, & much more probable account of the Controversial Parts of the Dialogue Purported to be Recorded in the Republic of Plato./He had no information of a Treaty between Japan & Germany purported to have been made during the war. Though the verb is an old one, there is in the OED quotations only one passive use, & that dated 1894. The above extracts are doubtless due to the corrupting influence of the DOUBLE PASSIVE;: that construction is especially gratuitous with p., the sense of which fits it to serve, in the active, aS a passive to suppose, represent, &c. In all the extracts supposed would stand; pretentiousness has suggested purport as a less familiar & therefore more imposing verb, & ignorance has chosen the wrong part of it (purported) instead of the right (purporting).

The first idiomatic limitation, then, is that the verb, though not strictly intransitive only (Jt purports, i.e. it is to the effect, that someone from Oxfordshire applied), should never be used in the passive. The second is that the subject, which is seldom a person at all, should at any rate not be a person as such—only a person viewed as a phenomenon of which the nature is indicated by speech, actions, &c., as the nature of a document is indicated by its wording. Normal subject: The story purports to be an autobtography. Legitimate personal subject: The Gibeonites sent men to Joshua purporting to be ambassadors from a far country. Illegitimate personal subject: She purports to find a close parallel between the Aeschylean Trilogy & The Ring, but she does tt by leaving out Siegfried altogether./Sir Henry is purported to have said * The F’.A. are responsible for everything inside the Stadium ’./Its genuineness is denied by Rakovsky & by both Zinoviev & McManus, who are purported to have signed it.

purpose, n. It serves very little

476

+ purpose to ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer to give a little more in this direction or in that. There are three idioms: Be to the, to (very) little, to no, p.; Do something to some, to much, to no, to (very) little, p.; Serve the, my &c., no, p hese should not (see CAST-IRON IDIOM) be confused. Serve very little purpose is a mixture of the third with one of the others.

purpose, vb., has -sable; MUTE E.

purposive (‘an anomalous form ’— OED) is one of the Hysrip DE- RIVATIVES described in the article of that name as spurious; the Latin suffix -ive is unsuited to the delatinized & anglogallicized pur-, which represents but conceals the Latin pro. Purposeful in some contexts, & purposed in others, will mect most needs, & there are deliberate. designed, adaptive, teleological, & many more synonyms. In the first of the following extracts purposeful, & in the second adaptive, would enable p. to be dispensed with:— The tendency is all in the direction of what Mr Masterman calls national self-consciousness; progress, steady & purposive, by the means of social science./The material origin of all purposive reactions would be adequately explained by the theory of natural selection.

purr. For purring see PrRonun- CIATION s.f. A ps) sang. See FRENCH WORDS.

he men who direct it are pur-sang mandarins, trained in all the traditions of a bureaucracy which lives not for, but on, the people. If one is brave enough to use the French words, one should be brave enough to place them as such—are mandarins pur sang.

purse, vb, makes -sable; MUTE E.

purseful. Pl. -ls; see -FUL.

pursuanti(ly). See QuUASI-ADVERBS.

pursue makes -uable; see MUTE E.

pursuivant. Pron. per’swivant.

pursy, not -sey; see -EY & -y.

purulent. Pronounce piir’dolent.
