page: 478

quandary. The pronunciation kwondar'l (‘ the original stressing "— OED) is recommended, the word being hardly a popular colloquial one. But RECESSIVE ACCENT, giving kw0’ndari, has been at work with it.

quand méme. See FrReENcH wonrps.

quantify. For inficxions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

quantit(at)ive. The long form is the right; but the use of the shortened one is more frequent, & perhaps less of a mere inadvertence, than that of qualitive for qualitative, & authoritive: And what ts true of railway traffic ts true, so far as this quantitive economy of labour ¢s concerned, of all industry in which mechanical power & laboursaving appliances are employed; & see LONG VARIANTS s.f. In the light of the Latin words tempestivus, primttivus, & adoptivus, anomalous in different ways, it would be rash to sa that quantitive, qualitive, & authoritive, were not defensible forms; but at any rate good English usage is ugainst them.

quantity. 4 negligible q. is a POPULARIZED TECHNICALITY, often used where negligible by itself gives all that is wanted, in the way noted in IRRELEVANT ALLUSION,

quarenden, -der, quarantine, the apple. The OED treats the first as the standard form.

quarrel makes -lled &c.; -LL-, -L-.

quarry, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

quart (fencing). See CARTE.

quarter, n. 1. Hyphening. 2. Constructions. 1. Hyphening. Quarter mile, not quarter-mile; but quarter-day, not quarter day; the difference depends upon the accent, & is explained in Hypnrns 8B; winter quarters, similarly, should be two separate words. 2. Constructions. For a q. of the price, for q. of the price, for a q. the price, for q. the price, are all blameless English. «After three & aq. centuries, or three centurics d&d aq.? See HALF,

quarter, vb, makes -ering, -ered, &c.3 see -R-, -RK-.

quartet(te). Spell -ef; see DUET.

uarto. See FOLIO. Pl. -03 ; -0(E)s 6.

uasi-adverbs. He was rolling up his sleeves preparatory to punching my head. From a narrowly grammatical point of view, the word should be preparatorily; but it never is, except in the mouths of those who know just enough grammar to be timid about it. The adjective is loosely attached to the action described in * rolling up his sleeves’, Most of those who would correct, or be tempted to correct, preparatory to preparatorily feel no temptation to write accordingly, instead of according, as or to, because the latter is so familiar as not to draw their attention. See also UNIDIOMATIC -LY, in which words of a slightly different kind are considered. It should be observed that it is only certain adjectives with which the use is idiomatic; for instunce, He did tt contrary to my wishes, but neither opposite to nor different from them. A few of the adjectives concerned are: according & pursuant; contrary; preliminary, preparatory, previous, ‘& prior; irrespectwe & regardless. Another pair of adjectives exhibiting the same arbitrary distinction of idiom as that between contrary & opposite is DUE & OWING.

quassia. The pronunciation likely to prevail is kw6’sha.

quater-centenary. The form recommended is quadringenary; see CENTENARY.

quaternarius.See TECHNICALTERMS.

quatorzain. See -sTicu. Pronounce ka’terziin.

quatrain. See -sTIcH. Pronounce kw0O’tran.

quatrefoll. Pron. ka’ter- or ki’tre-.

quattrocento. Pronounce -ché’nt6 ; see ITALIAN SOUNDS, & TRECENTO.

quaver makcs -ered &c.; -R-, -ER-.

queen. For the Q. of the Adriatic see SOBRIQUETS.

queenly. For the adverb, see -LILY.

quenelle. See FRENCH WORDs.

querist. The form queryist would
