page: 479

+ be better (see -1sT, & cf. accompanyist), but qg. seems established.

querulous. Pronounce -roo-.

query, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

question. 1. For LEADING QUES- TION, see that article. 2. For previous qg., see PREVIOUS 8. 8. For order of words in indirect questions (He asked what was he to do &c.), see INDIRECT QUESTION. 4. For the question mark wrongly & rightly used, see Stops. 5. For beg the question, see TECHNICAL TERMS. 6. Question as to. This ugly & needless but now common formula is discussed & illustrated under as 8; but it is worth while to repeat here that it is at its worst when question has the, as in:—When the nation repudiated Papal authority, the question naturally arose as to who were to have the endowments./From time to time there appears in the weekly Revenue Statement an item on the expenditure side of ‘ War Loans & Exchequer Bonds’, & the question has cropped up as to its meaning. The reason is that you do not say the instead of a question unless either it is already known what q. is meant or you are about to supply that information at once; the function of the as to phrase is to fulfil expectation of the latter procedure; that is, you explain in it what the q. zs, not what it concerns; & to do that you must use an interrogative clause in simple apposition with g. (the g. who was to have), or, if a noun is to be used instead of such a clause, attach that noun to q. by of (the q. of its meaning); of is the preposition that expresses identity, as in the city of Exeter, the crime of murder.

question, vb, makes -oned &c.; see -N-, -NN-,

question(n)aire is too recent an importation to be in the OED (1904). It should be treated like commissionaire, lose an n, & be called kwéschonar’, not késti6nar’. But is the noun questionary (‘ rare’

479

+ —OED, but quoted from 16th & 19th cc.) too far gone to be resuscitated? Commentary, glossary, dictionary, & vocabulary, with many less common words would keep it well in countenance, & the success of closure (see REVIVALS) lends hope to the attempt. Cf. also, under INTENDED, the case Betrothed v. Fiancé(e).

queue. Pronounce ki.

quid (sovereign). With plural numbers, use quid, not quids.

quiescence, -cy. The former is best; see -CE, -Cy.

quiet, adj., makes -er, -est.

quiet, n., quietness, quietude. The first is much more used than the others; it is possible to distinguish roughly the senses to which each is more appropriate, but often there is a legitimate choice between two points of view. Quiet is a state of things or an atmosphere: A period of quiet followed; Seeking quiet & rest. Quietness is a quality exhibited by something: The quietness of his manner, of rubber tires. Quictude is a habit or practice: Quietude is out of fashion in these days. An example of each follows in which (if what has been said above is true) one of the others would have been preferable:—How becomingly that self-respecting quiet sat upon their high-bred figures (quietude); Enjoying the fruit of his victory, peace & quietness (quict); The quietude of the meadows made them his favourite resorts (quietness or quiet).

quieten, whether as transitive or as intransitive, is a SUPERFLUOUS worD. Whether that can be attributcd to genuine American support or to a quietening down of the speculative position ts a matter of some doubt./ GERMAN OPINION EXCITED: War Correspondents’ Altempts to Quieten It./Real Prussianism would soon quieten Ireland. It is perhaps used chiefly not in preference to quiet, but by writers who are hardly aware that there is such a verb as quiet; at any rate, while good
