page: 483

ranunculus. Pl. -luses or -li (-I);

see LATIN PLURALS 1.

ranz-des-vaches. FRENCH worps.

rape, vb, makes -pable; see MUTE E.

Raphaelesque, Raffael(l)esque. For

the change from the established

English Raphael &c. to unfamiliar

forms with -f- or -{f-, see Dipacric-

1sM, MAHOMET.

rapid makes -est; see -ER & -EST 4.

rapport, formerly common enough

to be regarded & pronounced as

English (rapor’t), may now perhaps

be called again a Frencu WORD, &

will not be missed in English.

paper ocnewent: See FRENCH worps.

rapt, meaning originally carried off,

raped, snatched away, but now usually absorbed or intensely concentrated, has perhaps been affected by the identical sound of wrapped or wrapt, though ravish is enough to show that such an explanation is not necessary. The best known passage (Thy rapt soul sitting in thine eyes) has doubtless helped. A concordance to Milton supplics also:—Wrapped in a pleasing fit of melancholy/Thus wrapped in mist of midnight/Rapt in a balmy cloud.

rapture. For pronunciation see PICTURE,

rara avis is seldom an improvement on rarity; IRRELEVANT ALLUSION,

rarebit. See Wes.

rarefaction, not -fication, is the correct as well as the usual form, the Latin verb being rarefacere (not -ficare) rarefaction, rarefy. So spelt (in contrast with rarity), but pronounced rafi- (in contrast with rarely). rase. See RAZE. raspberry. Pron. with -z- for -8p-. rate,n. For some synonyms in the sense impost, see TAX. rate, vb, makes ratable; see MUTE E. rather. 1. R.is it &c. 2. R. superb &c. 8. IThadr. 4, Dying 7. than surrender. ; 1. R. ts it &c. ‘Towards the end of the long article InveRsION will be found a section headed Yet, especi-

RATIOCINATE

The following examples

should be rid of inversion as in-

dicated:—Mr Dooley seldom makes

kes laugh aloud; rather does he

ep his readers continually in a state’

of the ‘ dry grins’ (r. he keeps, or he

keeps his readers, r.,)./I do not feel

like one who after a day of storm d:

rain ts glad to creep indoors, & crouch

hopelessly over the ast-dying embers

on the hearth; rather do I Seel like

one who... (r. I feel). /The respon-

sible leaders of the Opposition have

abandoned the view ‘that another

General Election would ‘ probably but

stereotype the last verdict’; rather

is it felt that... (r. it is felt, or it is

felts r.,). It should be remembered,

however, with r., that care is needed,

in mending or avoiding the inver-

sion, not to put r. where it might be

interpreted as somewhat; to write

Ir. feel or it is r. feltin the second &

third examples would be worse than

the inversion itself,

2. R. superb &. There is something

rather delicious in the way in which

some of these inventors ignore previous achievements./This was rather a revelation./ While exercising generosity & kindliness more than most the doctor rather loved a quarrel. What is the use of fine warm words like delicious & revelation & love if the cold water of r. is to be thrown over them? ‘R. agreeable ’ if you will; ‘©. surprising’ by all means; ‘r. enjoyed ” certainly; but away with T. delicious, r. a revelation, & 1. loved! Cf. somEWuarT.

38. I had r. is as idiomatic as I would r.; had is the old subjunctive, = I should hold or find, & is used with rT. on the analogy of I had liefer = I should hold it dearer; see HAD 1, 4 Dying r. than surrender, He re- — signed r. than stifle his conscience, &c. The use of the infinitive after 7. than in such contexts is discussed in -ING 5. ratify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6. ratio. Pl. -os; see -o(r)s 4. 483 ally, rather. ratiocinate & its derivatives, as
