page: 484

+ exclusively learned words, may fairly be pronounced rati- rather than radshi-; cf. GREEK Gc; the OED, however, gives only rashi-.

ration. Pronounce ra- or ra-. But the army says ra-, & the military use is the prevalent one.

rationale is the neuter of the Latin adjective rationalis, & should therefore be pronounced rashona‘lI; but confusion with such French words as morale & locale (there is no French rationale) naturally leads to its being sometimes mispronounced.

rationalize makes -zable; MUTE E.

ratlin, ratline, ratling. The derivation is uncertain; but the last syllable Nair area contains neither the word line nor the participle termination -ing. The spelling ratlin is perhaps, thercfore, the best.

Fat(tjan. The double ¢ is usual.

ravage makes -geable; see -ABLE 1.

ravel makes -lled, -lling, &c.; see eLL-, -L-. The verb is curiously applied both to the tangling & the disentangling process. The verbs that can mean either to deprive of or to provide with what is expressed by the noun of the same spelling (compare will but skin & film the ulcerous place with skin "em alive) are not parallel, because with them the noun is the starting-point.

ray, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., l.

Rayah. Pronounce ri’a.

raze, rase. Rase is the older spelling, but raze now prevails. There is some tendency to use rase still for senses, such as erase or scrape off, that are now archaic; but the distinction corresponds to no difference of etymology, & raze should be the only form.

razzia. See FRENCH WORDS.

re. For the use of this telltale little word see ILLITERACIES, & POPULARIZED TECHNICALITIES. A quotation or two follow:—Dear Sir,—I am glad to see that you have taken a strong line re the Irish railway sttuation./Why not agree to submtt

484

+ the decision of the Conference re the proposed readjustment to the people so that they alone can decide? /Sir,— I have had sent me a cutting from your tissue of the 14th inst., from which I gather that reference had been made in a former issue to some alleged statements of mine re the use of the military during the recent railway dispute. /Sir,—There is another fact re above. Twice with, & twice without, italics.

re(-). In re(-) compounds, the hyphen is usual before e (re-entrant, re-examine, &c.); not uncommon before other vowels (re-armament or rearmament, reiterate or re-tteralte, reorganize or re-organize, re-urge or reurge), especially when the look of the word, as in the first & fourth examples, is deceptive or puzzling without it; common when the compound is used after the simple word (make & re-make, discussion d&: re-discussion); & necessary when a modern compound such as re-cover = put a new cover upon, re-pair= pair afresh, or re-count = count again, is to be distinguished from a better known & differently pronounced old word (recover get back, repair mend, recount narratc).

reaction. Mr Darwin’s observations upon the breeds of pigeons have had a reaction on the structure of European Society./Any apparent divisions tn this country, even the threat of a vole of censure, might have had its reaction on public opinion in Italy. R., owing to its use in Chemistry, has become a POPULARIZED TECH- NICALITY liable like other such terms to be used by SLipsHOD EXTENSION where it is not wanted, e.g. where nothing more is meant than effect or influence or the simple action. This misuse is betrayed in the quotations by the word on, which suits action &c., but does not suit r. except in senses in which it means more than any of those three. The senses of r. may be distinguished thus: 1. The process of reversing what has been done or going back to the
