page: 489

RECRUITAL

done that their reappearance should

bear.? Nothing, except fallinto the

hands of journalists who like Popvu-

LARIZED TECHNICALITIES & SLIPSHOD

EXTENSION. This disgusting use is

apparently of the twentieth century

only; the recrudescences inthe OED

quotations are of * abuses ’, ‘ calumny

& malignity ’, ‘ Paganism’, ‘the epi-

demic’, ‘the wound *, °@ Varicose

ulcer’, & that is all.

recruital. See -aL nouns.

rectify. For inflexions see VERBS

IN -IE &c., 6.

rectilinear, -neal. There is no

objection to either in itself; but -ar is 80 much commoner that, as there is no difference of meaning, -al should be abandoned as a NEEDLESS VARIANT,

recto. Pl. -os; see -0(r)s 3.

rector. See vicar,

recuperate makes -rable; -aBe }.

recur. Pronounce the participle riker’Ing; see PRONUNCIATION, 8.f.

recurve makes -cable; see MUTE E.

recusancy, -ce. The second is much less common, & should be dropped as a NEEDLESS VARIANT.

red. Red heat & red tape; HYPHENS 3B. Red-hot; Hypuens 8 D.

redact, -or, -ion. See Gau.icisms.

reddle. See RUDDLE.

reddy is often preferred to reddish in compound colour words (reddybrown &c.), but is now rare as a separate word.

rede. See Warpour STREET, & REeEvIvALs, -

redingote. See FRENCH WoRDs. redintegrate makes -rable; -aBLe 1. reduce makes -cible; see -ABLE 2. After r. to & be reduced to the gerund, not the infinitive, is idiomatic: He toas reduced to retracting (not to retract) his statement; see GERUND 8. reductio ad absurdum. See Trcu- NICAL TERMS, reduit. See FRENCH worDs. redundancy, -ce. As RECUSANCY; & see -CK, -cy. reduplicate makes -cable; -aBLE 1. reduplication. TECHNICAL TERMS. re-enforce. See REINFORCE.

® R3 -

REFLECTION

reeve makes rove or reeved both in

past & in p.p.

refection (meal). A Formar WORD.

refectory. The pronunciation ré’.

common now than

formerly, & RECESSIVE ACCENT is

not likely to prevail,

refer makes -rred, “TTiNg; -R-, -RR-.

referable. Pronounce ré’ferabl. For the irregular form (cf. -R-, -RR-), see

CONFER(R)ABLE.

reference. For Synonyms in the

Sense scope or purview, see FIELD.

By SLipsHop EXTENSION, the word

is often now made to mean a person

to whom r. is permitted as a witness

to character, & even a written

testimonial.

referendum, properly meaning a

question to be referred (to the

people), has been appropriated as

a name for the system of so referring

questions & for any particular occa-

sion of its exercise; the normal

form would have been reference, but

referendum has the advantage over

that of not bearing several other

senses. The plural -da is better

avoided as too suggestive (cf. memo-

randa, agenda, &c.) of the correct

sense——questions to be referred— ;

use -ms.

refill. Verb réfi‘l, noun ré’fll; see Noun & VERB ACCENT.

refine makes -nable; see MUTE E. Refinedly is a bad form 3; see -EDLY,.

reflect makes -ior.

reflectable, -exible. The first, from

referable ‘to the second, from the obs. verb to reflex; -ABLE 2.

reflection, reflexion. Though the second is ‘the etymological spelling ’ (OED), the first is in general senses (thought, remark, censure, &c.) almost invariable, & even in the physical senses (casting back of light &c.) at least as common as -zxton. A clear differentiation being out of the question, & the variation of form being without essential significance, the best thing to do is to use the commoner spelling, reflection, in all senses. For the change from older reflexion see -XION, 489 fiktor! is less reflect, is
