page: 491

+ REGARD & one that is here irrelevant (to r. his position under another aspect). A strong preponderance, at any rate, against the modern journalist’s trick of treating regard as the exact equivalent of consider—a trick that the OLD, if the regard articles had been dated 1920 instead of 1905, would have had either to recognize nore fully or to condemn.

A large number of examples will be given, in the hope that when they ure seen in the mass their badness will be glaring enough to repel. R. to be (or do) is as unidiomatic as rT. it monstrous &c., but far less common & therefore less in need of attention. First will come examples of it, secondly ordinary ones in which as should have been inserted, & thirdly some in which, since an as serving another purpose makes r. as undesirable, consider should be substituted.

A. R. to be (or do), & r. that. In all consider, or think, & in the second & third r. as, would do.

Dr Leonard Schmitz regards it to indicate the looseness of popular opinion./Some County Associations r. it to be their first duty to accumulate large invested funds./Montenegro regards this treaty to be worthless because she was not previously informed of tis existence./Ile regards Spiritism as practised today to be full of the gravest dangers./But or a long time it scemed to be regarded that the heads of important trade departments could be relegated to any gentleman of influence who happened to want a billet.

B. Unprovoked omission of as. Insert as, or use consider or think.

Nations who may r. the ex-Katser's nearness to his former dominions a menace to them./The present rulers of Germany will r. themselves free to pile up armaments./Ie regards it beyond question that Moses wrote practically the whole of the Pentateuch./But the Generals present regercee. the remedy worse than the evil,

C. Omission of as not excused, but 491

REGIMENT perhaps caused, by proximity of another as, or by abnormal order otf ahs Consider is the remedy in all.

It had regarded ttself as certainly out of the war as a great city could be./ We in Ireland regard no insult so supreme as the insult that we are tntolerant./Mr Mazse, so far from regarding the Hedging & Ditching controversy as remote as the authorship of the Letters of Junius, put down a motion saying .../The man who regards the postal system as siable as the solar system./We 1. this attempt to create enthusiasm for the Union Jack by statutory enactment as ill-advised as the policy of ‘ Say Suzerain’./Most people would r. Butler's ingenious theories about the connexion between memory & heredity quite as much contribution to literature as to science./Pufendorf went so jar as to r. ratification superfluous. / Showing how fundamental they re- Sarded the need of establishing the independence of the judiciary./So serious is the position regarded in some parts of Natal that . . ./Both these mansions were designed by the same architect, the late Louis Vulliamy, whose masterpieces they are generally regarded. To block a side-issue, let it be said that two or three of the picces might be technically defended on the ground that sound as a bell means the same as as sound as a bell, & that the as before remote, stadle, & ill-advised, may therefore be the one that belongs to the phrase regard as, & not correlative to the later as. It is obviously not so, & anyone who takes that line & omits those examples has still the others on his hands.

regardless. See QUASI-ADVERBS.

regenerate. Verb -at, adjective -at or -it; see ParticipLes 5B. The verb makes -rable, -tor; -ABLE 1, -OR.

Reggy, -fe. See -EY, -IE, -Y.

régie, régime. See FRENCH WoRDs.

ent. Pronounce the noun in the current sense ré’jment; but in | derivatives (regimental &c.), & per-
