page: 493

+ RELATION (SHIP) relationship the being a relation— with the extension (due to the generalizing sense, of relation) into “the being this, that, or the other relation,’ or * degrec of relatedness ’, To that use of relationship, then, there is no objection. But to affix -ship to relation in any of its other, or abstract, senses is against all analogy; the use of -ship is to provide concretes (friend, horseman, clerk, lord) with corresponding abstracts; but relation, except when it means related person, is already abstract, & one might as well make connexionship, correspondenceship, or associationship, as relationship from relation in abstract senses. Of the following extracts the first shows how relationship, when it is justifiable, may lend precision to the meaning; the second suggests, by the writer’s shifting from one to the other, that relationship in the improper sense has no superiority whatever to relation or relations; | & the rest show how necdlessly the LONG VARIANT is often resorted to:— The king was therefore not necessarily of royal blood, though usually he was

son of the previous Pharaoh; the relation of Tut-ankh-Amen to his predecessor is not known./Why not leave the relations of landlord & gabourers, to the boner: effects of Jarmers, as well as those of farmers & the policy? Why ts a tribunal necessary in the one case & not in the other af mutual frankness will adjust all relationships?/A state of things may be created which is altogether inconsistent with the relationship which should properly exist between police & public./A step which must have great effect on the commercial relationship between America & Europe./ By creating, if such be possible, a relationship of mutual amity between Britain & Russia./The most probable result of persistence in the present ambiguous relationship with Russia 48 thal. ../She declared that she & her husband had no business relationships./His attacks upon the Napoiconic tradition are well known, but

498

+ we are not aware that his relationship to it has ever been so carefully traced. / Already a wholesome change has begun to operate in the relationship between this country & France.

relatival(ly). Grammar words only; see ADJECTIVALLY.

relative. For the use in J wrote to him r. to renewing the lease, see QUASI-ADVEBBS.

RELATIVE PRONOUNS. See the separate words—who, which, what, that, such as, as.

release makes -sable; see MUTE E.

relegate makes -gable; see -ABLE 1. The large terrace, usually a diningroom, has also been relegated to the King’s use, & will be adorned with groups of Alpine plants. Devoted? relegated is not very polite to His Majesty; has the writer looked up assign in a synonym dictionary & decided that r. is the least familiar of the list? familiar to him it does not seem to be; see NOVELTyY- HUNTING.

relevance, -cy. The OED treats -cy as the standard form; -CE, -cy.

relevé. See FRENCH WORDS.

reliable, -bility. Another essential of successful aerial transport Mr Thomas describes by the term ‘ reliability’, or the not less doubtful word * dependability’. As this extract is from The Times in 1920, it is clear that the purists have not yet reconciled themselves to the inevitable. The OED quotes 16th, 17th, 18th, & 19th century passages for reliable, but states that it first became common 70 years ago. The objection common to it & several other words is obvious, & the kind of understanding that finds different to indefensible will listen to nothing in favour of reliable. Those who have an open mind on the point will find a full discussion in -ABLE 4.

relict. The OED pronounces ré’- Ifkt. Now that the word is hardly used except as a semi-legal term, or a FORMAL WORD, for widow, & is more often seen than heard, it may be questioned whether most people
