page: 494

+ do not think of it as riil’kt, & whether the avoidance of confusion between it & relic is not worth securing by that pronunciation.

relieve makes -vable; see MUTE E. Relievedly is a bad form; see -EDLY.

relievo. Pl. -os; sec -0(E)s 6. But the form might well be dropped as a needless mixture between the Italian rilievo (rélya’v5) & the English relicf; cf. ALTO-RELIEVO, BAS-RELIEF, MEZZO-RILIEVO.

religious. For dim r. light, see IRRELEVANT ALLUSION,

relume. For pronunciation, sec LU.

rely. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

remain. 1. There remain(s). 2. Continue tor. 3.1 7.

1. There remains to be said a few words on the excellence of M. Vallery Radot’s book. Thc usc of a singular verb before a plural subject is discussed in NuMBER, 7. The present example is perhaps due to confusion between It remains to say & There remain to be said.

2. Continue to r. R. (in the sense that concerns us) means in itself ‘continue to be’; to continue to continue to be is, except in some hardly imaginable context, a ridiculous tautology, & would not call for mention if it were not surprisingly common; see HazINESS, PLEONASM. The counsellors of the Sultan continue to remain sceptical./And yet through it all Ic. t. 7. cheerful./It is expected that very soon order will be restored,

although the people c. t. 7. restive.

3.17. For this sec LETTER FORMS.

remark, vb, has as one of its senses

‘to say by way of comment’ or

‘say incidentally’. It would be

absurd pedantry to insist that it

should never be used for say except

when ‘by way of comment’ is

clearly justified, & often very diffi-

cult to decide whether it is justified

or not. Nevertheless, it is well to

remember the qualification, & be

thereby saved from two bad uses of r., (1) as a mere FoRMAL WORD, &

{2) as a word relied on to give by its

ae

ye 4104

+ incongruity a mildly facetious touch —one of the forms of WorwN-ovuT HUMOUR: You may drive out Nature with a pitchfork but she will always return, as Horace remarked in a language no longer quoted in the House of Commons.

remarkable. See PosITIVE WORDs.

remedy. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6. Remediable & remedial are pronounced rimé’-, but remediless either rimé‘dilis (‘ the original stressing °—OED) or ré’midilis.

remember. See RECOLLECT for the distinction. R. makes -berable or (now rarely) -brable.

Pro-

remise (stabling, fencing). nounce rimé’z.

remise (law vb). Pronounce rimi’z. R. makes -sable; see MUTE E.

remit makes -tted, -tting, &c.; see -T-, -TT- ; but remissible; see -ABLE 2, Of the nouns remission & remitial, the first is better in all senses but one, viz ‘ the act of referring a case from one court to another’; see -AL NOUNS,

remonetize. For -dn- or -tin-, see PRONUNCIATION.

remonstrate is pronounced (in contrast with demonstrate) rim6’nstrat, perhaps because the current noun is remonstrance. The other noun, -ation, is now rare, & should not be used: A hk every attempt is made at this office to save people from being misled, our remonstrations have not hitherto met with success.

remote makes -er, -est; sec -ER &

-EsT 1. FR. is not one of the adjec-

tives that can be used as Quwuasi-

ADVERBS;;s it must have a noun

with which it can be more reasonably

conceived to agree than it can with

knowledge in the following extract;

read Even some distance from ...

Even somewhat remote from the main

tourist routes the knowledge of Eng-

lish in shops ts remarkable.

remove makes -vable; see MuTE 5k.

For r. one's hat, the cloth, &c., see |

FORMAL WORDS.

remunerate makes -rable; see
