page: 495

+ “ABLE l. R&., -atton, & -alive, are, as compared with pay(ing), FORMAL worpbs, & should not be preferred, as often, without good reason.

renaissance. See FRENCH WORDS. R. was so far established as the Knglish word for the thing before it was latinized or anglicized into __-renascence that it is still the more intelligible of the two, & may well be left in possession. Pronounce as English—rin4é’sns.

rencontre, rencounter. The verb is now rare, & for the noun, also much less used than formerly, the first or French spelling is more usual, pronounced réngk6’nter.

rendezvous. Pronounce ré’ndiv6o, but in the plural of the noun -606z. The verb makes -vouses (pron. -Vv60z), -voused (pron. -v00d), -vousing (pron. -vo0ing).

renegade, -ado. The lattcr, of which the plural when it was current was -oes, is archaic.

renounce makes -ceable; see -ABLE 1. Between renouncement & renunciation there is no such differentiation as that which preserves the two nouns of pronounce, & renouncement is accordingly passing out of use.

renovate makes -vable; see -ABLE 1.

rente, rentier. See FRENCH WORDS.

renunciation. For pronunciation see -CIATION. Renuncialive, renunciatory, pron. -shativ, -shatorl.

rep. The OED treats this, not repp or reps, as the right form of the textile name.

repa(i)rable. Reparable (ré’pa-) is used almost only of abstracts such as loss, injury, mistake, which are to be made up for or to have their e ‘tects neutralized; repairable sometimes in that way also, but chiefl of material things that need mending. The negatives are irreparable, but unrepatrable; see -ABLE 8.

repatriate makes -riable; -ABLE 1.

repel makes -lled &c. ; see -LL-, -L-.

repellent, repulsive. That is repellent which keeps one at arm's length;

495

+ that is repulsive from which one recoils; that is, the second is a much stronger word.

repertoire. See FRENCH WORDS.

REPETITION OF WORDS OR SOUNDS. The first thing to be said is that a dozen sentences are spoilt by ill-advised uvoidance of repetition for every one that is spoilt by illadvised repetition. Faulty repetition results from want of care; faulty avoidance results from incapacity to tell good from bad, or servile submission to a rule of thumb—far graver defects than carelessness. This article is accordingly of slight importance compared with that in which the other side of the matter is presented; sec ELEGANT VARIATION, where the rule of thumb against repetition is shown to have the most disastrous consequences,

The fact remains, however, that repetition of certain kinds is bad; &, though the bad repetitions are almost always unintentional, & due to nothing worse than carelessness, & such as their authors would not for a moment defend, yet it is well that writers should realize how common this particular form of carelessness is; the moral of the many examples that will be given is the extremely simple onc—read what you have written before printing it. The examples are divided into batches under headings, & little comment need be added.

DEPENDENT SEQUENCES, i.c., several of phrases, or two or more which clauses or that clauses or -ly words, each of which is not parallel or opposed, but has a dependent relation, to the one before or after it. For the point of the distinction between dependent & parallel scquences, see -LY 3.

The founders of the study of the origin of human nature./The atmosphere of mutuality must be created which will make ti possible to discuss proposals which would have seemed ampracticable./Taken up with war-
