page: 497

+ for the autumn sitting, the Mines Bill, the Shops Bill, & the Insurance Bill./Of the octogenarians twentythree died in the first, & thirty-three in the second half of the century; while tf we add the nonagenarians twenty-five ancients died in the more ancient, & thirty-cight in the modern time./ Anonymity seems to be a peculiar delight to writers on naval matters, though perhaps necessity has something to do with the matter./ I agreed with Mr Rawlinson’s statement that the evidence at the inquest disagreed with the account of the riots as given by Mr Keir Hardie.

ASSONANCE, RHYME, &c.

*‘ Worser & worser’” grows the plight of the Globe over the oversea trade figures./If no such Council existed, the Secretary of State would have to form an informal one if not a formal one./The features which the present Government in this country presents in Sa with a digit & responsible government are few & JSormal./. .. by committing embezzlement—an action too imbecile in the circumstances to deserve censure.

REPETITION OF A NAME INSTEAD OF He &c. For this see the Lord Dudley example near the beginning of ELE- GANT VARIATION.

repetitional, repetitio » repetitious, repetitive. P With all hese on record, repetition would seem to have a good stock of adjectives at need; but few writers have the hardihood to use any of them. Repetitious is said to ‘common in_ recent American use’; repetitive is perhaps the least avoided in England.

makes -ceable; see -ABLE 1. There is the literal sense of put (thing or person) back in the same

lace as before; & there are,

roadly different from this, various uses in which substitution is the idea—return an equivalent for, fill or take the place of, find a substitute for, supersede, & so forth. All the dictionaries, or certainly most of them, give the substitute uses without comment, & they are estab-

497

+ lished in the language; but some wise men of Gotham have lately discovered that, if one is perversely ingenious enough, one can so use r. that it shall not be elear whether literal putting back or substitution is meant. This is true; here is an example in which a little thought is required: We do not regard the Situation as a simple one; a large

dle alle of the men on strike have

n replaced, & as complete reinstatement is one of the demands of the union, there are obvious difficultics to be overcome. To use r. there was foolish; ‘have had their places filled > was the way to put it. But the wise men of Gotham are so proud of a discovery that ordinary people have made about hundreds of other words that they have issued a decree against using fr. at all in the substitute senses. The conscequences, in over-use & misuse of the verb SUBSTITUTE & the noun substitution, have been lamentable, but need not be set forth here; it is enough to state that the objections to the secondary senses of replace & replacement are idle, & that only the same kind of care is required that is taken not to use trip in the special sense stumble, or mustress in the special sense female paramour, where the context makes confusion likely with the unspecialized senses.

Hh eigenen letion. The first is the process of filling something up or the amount of matter that effects the process; the second is the filledup condition. See -10N & -MENT.

replete. No teacher’s bookcase is replete without it. Everyone at once rightly corrects to complete; but why not r.? you can say ‘a bookcase r. with works of genius’. Bcecause quite full (r.) is not the same as adequately filled (complete).

replica. The ‘ Devil” over the gateway, a copy of the grotesque on Lincoln cathedral, which gave rise to the proverb * As sure as the Devil looks over Lincoln’. The present
