page: 498

+ * Devil” is a mere modern replica of the original imp erected by the founder, ° Properly one made by the original artist ° says the OED, after defining r. as a copy or duplicate of a work of art. Properly, therefore, there is no such thing as a modern r. of an ancient original; & it is this proper sense that alone makes the foreign word r. worth maintaining in English by the side of the abundant English synonyms. EXLEGANT VARIATION & NOVELTY- HUNTING account between them for much destruction of what is valuable in words.

reply. For inflexions see VERBS IN “1K &c., 6.

répondez s'il vous plait. See Frencu WORDS.

repose makes -sable; see MUTE E.

repouss6é. See FRENCH WORDS,

repp. See rep.

reprehend makes -hensible; -aBLE 2.

repress makes -ssible; see -ABLE 2.

reprieve makes -vable; sec MUTE FE.

reprimand. Noun ré’primahnd, verb réprimah’nd; see Noun & VERB ACCENT.

reprobate. Verb -at, noun -it or eat; see ParRTICIPLES 5 B.

reproduce makes -cible; see -ABLE 2.

reprove makcs -vable; see MUTE E.

reps. See REP.

republicanize has -zable; MUTE E.

repudiate mukes -diable; -aBLE 1.

repugn(ant). Pronounce ripii’n, but ript’gnant.

repulse makes -sable; see MUTE E.

repulsive. See REPELLENT.

request. The German Commission requested the Allied Commission for information as to whether an extension of the Armistice could be relied upon. R. information from the A. C., r. to be informed by the A.C., r. that the A.C. would inform; any of these will do, but the form in the text is unidiomatic, & due to the ANALOGY of ask,

require makcs -rable; see MUTE E.

requirement)(requisite n. The two are so far synonyms that in some contexts either will do: The require-

498

+ ments, or The requisites, are courage @& callousness. But requirement means properly a need, & requisite a needed thing: That sum will meet my requirements, never my requisites; but, just as the abstract need is often used for the concrete needed thing, so requirement may perhaps always be substituted for requisite: Sponge, toothbrush, & other requirements will pass, though requisites is better & more usual.

requisite, adj. For essential, necessary, & ¥r., see ESSENTIAL.

requisition, vb, has -oned &c.; -N-, -NN-.

requite makcs -fable; see MUTE E.

reredos. Two syllables (rér’dés).

res judicata. Pl. res judicatae.

rescind has rescission, pron. ris!’zhn.

rescue makes -uable; see Mure e£.

resentment. May I, as one in complete sympathy with the general policy of the Government, give expression to the strong resentment I feel to the proposed Bill. R. of, at, against, never to. Repugnance? see ANA- LoGy, & CAST-IRON IDIOM.

reserve makes -vable; see MUTE E.

reservedly. Four syllables; -EpDLY.

re-set, reset. The verb meaning sct again is perhaps better with the hyphen (see RE-), though the other reset (reccive stolen goods &c.) is not now common enough to make confusion likely.

residence, -cy. See -cr, -cy.

residue, -uum, -ual, -uary. There are two special uses, to each of which one noun & one adjective are appropriated—the Icgal sense concerned with what remains of an estate after payment of charges, debts, & bequests; & the mathcmatical, chemical, & physical sense of what remains after subtraction, combustion, evaporation, &c. The legal noun & adjective are residue & residuary, the chemical &c. are residuum & residual, lle the differentiation is occasionally infringed in both directions. In more general use, residuum implies depreciation, differing from residue as
