page: 499

leavings or sweepings from remainder.

Residuum has plural -dua.

resignedly. Four syllables; -EDLy.

resilience, -cy. ronounce with

-zfl-. The very slight difference of

sense—that -ce can & -cy cannot

mean an act of rebounding—does

not, since there is no chance of -ce’s

being confined to that special sense,

make the existence of the two any-

thing better than an inconvenience; it is therefore best to use -ce always; SEE -CE, -CY.

resist makes -tible; see -aABLE 2. For resisiless see -LESS.

resistance. You have likened the r. of Ulster Unionists to be driven out of the Constitution .. . to the opposition... Read to being driven; see GERUND 8.

resoluble, resolvable. Both are in use without distinction of meaning, the first being more a literary, & the other more a colloquial word. The negatives should be irresoluble, but wnresoloable; see -ABLE 8; in The number of irresolvable difficulties is relatively small, correct either the prefix or the suffix.

resolute, -tion, -ble.

For pronun-

499 Ciation see LU.

resolution (in prosody). See Tecu- NICAL TERMS,

resolution)(motion. As names for @ proposition that is passed or to be passed by the votes of an assembly, the two differ in that the passing of @ motion results in action, & a m. is that something be done: while a resolution is not necessarily more than an expression of the opinion that something is true or desirable. Since, however, opinion often becomes operative, & since also resolutions as well as motions are moved, i.e. are at least in one sense motions, the distinction is elusive; it is nevertheless, if not too rigidly applied, of some value.

resolvedly. Four syllables, if used; see -EDLY, & use resolutely or other synonym.

resort)(re-sort. See RE(-).

resort, resource, recourse. Confu-

sion between these three is very

frequent, &, since in some senses

each is really synonymous with each,

the confusion is, if not excusable, at

least natural. The usual mistake

is to say resource when one of the

others is required. Of the following

examples, the first four are unques-

tionably wrong; in the other two,

the most idiomatic expression has

not been chosen:—Such ships of the

German Navy as remain in the

Southern Seas must now have resource

to the many sparsely-inhabited islands

(recourse)./She will not be able to do so, in Dr Dillon’s opinion, without resource to the sword (recourse, resorting, resort)./Surely he was better employed in plying the trades of tinker & smith than in having resource to vice (recourse)./. . . should an autonomous ae for Macedonia have been agreed to by Turkey without resource to war (recourse, resort)./ - - . binding all Powers to apply an economic boycott, or, in the last resource, international force, against any Power which . . . (resort)./The question of having to send troops to Teheran is only considered as a last resort (resource).

The words are chicfly used in certain established phrases, given below; when alternatives appear in brackets, they are to be taken as less idiomatic. To resort to; to have recourse (resort) to; without recourse (resort, resorting) to. Without resources; at the end of his resources; had no other resource left; the only resource (resort); as a last resource; in the last resort. Ilis usual resource was lying; his usual recourse (resort) was to lying; his usual resort wus Brighton. A man of great or no resource; a man of many or no resources. Golf is a great resource; Hoylake is a great resort.

ithout resource in the sense ‘irreparably ’, though it has been used by good writers, ia rather a Gatuicism than an English idiom.
