page: 501

its author’s name)./In the Preus-

sische Jahrbiicher for May the most | noteworthy articles are those respec-

tively by Werner Weisbach, who

writes on Germany in modern Italian

political criticism, & by Professor

Hans Delbriick, who contributes an

extremely interesting comparison be-

éwocen .. . (as in the last).

D. UNINTELLIGIBLE rf,

The writing-room, Silence-room, &

recreation-room, have respectively blue

& red arm-chairs./A certain estate

és for sale; its grounds border three

main road3, namely, Queen’s, Bel-

mont, & King’s respectively.

E. r. FOR ANOTHER woRD

The writers of these mean no more

than both (to be placed in the second

after Fellow). The two nurses’ asso-

Ctations respectively organized in

Scotland make no secret of their membership./He was a Fellow of

Balliol College, Oxford, & of the

University of London respective Yy.

F. REVERSAL OF SENSE

It is recognized that far too little is known by Englishmen & Americans about their r. countries; in this Country there is only one lectureship on American history, & that is at King’s College, Strand. This can only mean that Englishmen know teo little of England, & Americans know too little of America—which ig no doubt true, but is not the truth that the writer wished to convey; ‘ about each other’s countries’ would have served both writer & reader.

The simple fact is that respective(ly) are words seldom needed, but that pretentious writers drag them in at every opportunity for the air of thoroughness & precision they are supposed to give to a sentence. one makes respirable (rispit’abl is the pronunciation preferred by the OED); see Mure z,

ite, vb, makes -table ( r¢’spitabl); Ste MUTE E.

resplendence, -cy. The first is re-

commended; see -cE, -cy,

restaurant, restaurateur.

See

FRENCH WORDS,

restore makes -rable; see MUTE Fr.

restrain)(re-strain. See RE(-).

restrainedly. Four syllables; -EpLY.

resume makes -mable; see MUTE E,

résumé. See FRENCH worDs.

resurrect. See Back-FORMATION,

resuscitate makes -itable; -ABLE 1,

retable (eccl.n.). Pronounce rita’bl,

retail, Verb ritd‘/l, noun ré’tal;

see NOUN & VERB ACCENT,

retaliate makes -iable: see -ABLE 1.

retenue. See FRENCH worDs.

retina. Pl. -as or -ae; see LATIN

PLURALS, 1.

retire makes -rable; see MUTE Fr.

For retired admiral &c., see INTRAN-

SITIVE P,P,

retrace makes -ceable; see -ABLE 1.

retract makes -for; see -or. Of the

two nouns retrac(ta)tion, the shorter

is used in all senses, the longer only

in the secondary or non-literal ones,

i.e., where the meaning is not ‘ pull-

ing backwards’, but ‘ apologizing

for’ or ‘cancelling’ or * revoking ’,

Protrusion & retraction of the tongue;

Offer & retrac(ta)tion of terms; Publication & retrac(ta)tion of a libel.

retrieve makes -vable; see MUTE E. Of the nouns retrieve & retrieval, the first is used in particular phrases (beyond, past, retrieve), & the other elsewhere (for the retrieval of his fortunes &c.).

retro-. In most words the usual pronunciation is rétro; but in the commonest of all, retrospect & retro- 8rade, it is rétro; in words derived from or allied with these two (retrospective, retrospection, retrogression, retrogresstve, retrogradation) it varies, the tendency being to say rétro if the stress is shifted, as it is by most speakers in all these words, & by all in retrogradation, to the third or fourth syllable. retrograd-, retro -). There are two series: (1) adj. & vb retrograde, n. retrogradation; (2) vb retrogress, n. retrogression, adj. retrogressive.
