page: 502

+ But, as most of us have a preference for retrograde as the adj. & retrogression as the noun, & no great liking for cither verb, there is unfortunately little prospect that one scrics will oust the other.

retroussé. See FRENCH worDs.

return. For the returned exile &c. see INTRANSITIVE P.P.

rev. See REVEREND.

revellle. See FRENCH WORDS.

revel: -licd, -lling, -ller; see -LL-, -L-.

Revelation(s). ‘Though the Bible title is The Revelation of St John the Divine, the plural Revelations is quite established in ordinary speech, «& to take exception to it is PEDANtry; but The Revelations is a confusion of the correct The Revelation with the popular Itcvelations.

revenant. See Frencu worps. The book is thronged, too, with revenants & echoes; old familiar faces reappear, on whom years ago the reader closed the cover with a sigh. One of the literary critics’ necdless GALLICISMS.

revenge. For r. vb & avenge, r. n. & vengeance, see AVENGE. RR. makes -geable; see -ABLE 1.

revenue. Pronounce ré’vini. * The stressing revc’nue, common or usual during the 17th & 18th centuries & until recently in lIegal & parliamentary usage, is now obsolescent’ —OED.

reverberate makes -rable, -tor; see “ABLE I], -OR.

revere. The adjective, if used, should be -rable; see MUTE E.

reverend, rev., reverent(ial). Reverend means deserving reverence, & reverent feeling or showing it.

Reverend is abbreviated Revd or now usually Rev. For ILLITERACIES like Rev. Smith, instead of Rev. J. Smith or the Rev. Mr or Dr Smith, see HON. Reporters giving lists of clergy have difficulties with the plural of the abbreviation; but, since reverend is an adjective (& not, like parson in the now disused ‘ Parsons Jones & Smith’, a noun), there is neither occasion for nor correctness 502

REVISAL in such forms as Revs & Revds; the Rev. J. Smith, W. Hl. Jones, P. Brown, & others is the way to put it; if the initials, or some of them, are not known, it should run The Rev. J. Smith, Messrs Jones & Brown, Dr Robinson, & other clergy.

Between reverent & reverential the difference is much the same as that between PRUDENT & prudential, reverential being as applicable to what apes reverence as to what is truly instinct with it, while reverené has only the laudatory sense; but reverential is often wrongly chosen merely as a LONG VARIANT; when reverent would not be out of place, reverential is a substitute as much weaker as it is longer.

revers. See FRENCH WORDS.

reverse, n. Such phrases as ° remarks the r. of complimentary ’, meaning uncomplimentary remarks, are cumbrous specimens of Worn- OUT HUMOUR,

reverse, vb. For the adjective, -sable is recommended rather than -sible on general principles; see -ABLE 2; negative unreversable, or irreversible; see -ABLE 8. But -sible is the prevalent form.

reversion has various senses, chiefly legal or biological, to be found in any dictionary, & not needing to be set forth here. It suffices to say that they all correspond to the verb revert, & not to the verb reverse, whose noun is reversal. In the following extracts it has _ been wrongly given the meaning of reversal:—The reversion of our Free Trade policy would, we are convinced, be a great reverse for the working class./But to undertake a complete reversion of the Bolshevik policy is beyond their powers.

revert makes -fible; see -ABLE 2.

revet makes -fting, -tted; -T-, -TT-.

reviewal. See -aAL NouNS, & use review n.

revile makes -lable; see Mure E.

revisal. See -AL NOUNS. The Union demands a ‘ thorough revisal
