page: 503

+ of the whole tariff’; why not the established revision?

revise makes -sable; see MUTE E

REVIVALS. When some half-century ago a method of curtailing debate in the House of Commons was found necessary, there was much talk of the French ciélure, & it seemed for some years as if the French name would have to be taken over with the French thing; the old English word closure had become so unfamiliar that it did not suggest itself readily, & when pro-

ed was not cordially received. * Moving the closure ’ is now familiar enough; but, though the word had not become strictly obsolete, it was so rare as to strike most of us as either a new formation or a revival, & it is at once a good specimen of the kind of revival that justifies the reviver & a good proof of how effectually a more or less disused word may come to life again. To anyone below fifty ycars of age it would hardly occur that closure was on a different footing from budget or motion or dissolution or division or any other parliamentary term; &, as to ‘the kind of revival’, the occasion may be defined as one on which a name has to be found for @ new thing, & a question ariscs between a foreign word & a disused English one that might well have served if the thing & the word had been alive together.

It is by no means uncommon for very ordinary words to remain latent for long periods. To take only some notable cases in the lettcr B, the OED records such disappearances of balsam (600 years), bloom ' (the iron-foundry word; 600 years), bosk (5Q0 years), braze (to make of brass; 550 years); but the reappearance of these, except perhaps of bosk, was not so much a deliberate revival‘as a re-emergence out of the obscurity of talk into the light of literature. It is only with deliberate revivals, however, that it is worth while to concern ourselves here—

503

+ words like carven (carved), childly, dispiteous, & dole (grief), or uses of words in obsolete senses such as egregious meaning excellent or enormity meaning hugeness. Carven seems to have been disused for 800 years, childly for 250; dispiteous (formerly despite/ous full of despite, now dis/piteous unpitying; see MUTE E) for 200; dole for a long time in England at least. Revivals like these, & those of obsolete senses, not to fill gaps in a deficient vocabulary as closure did, but to impart the charm of quaintness to matter that perhaps needs adornment, are of doubtful benefit either to the language or to those who experiment in them. Is it absurdly optimistic to suppose that what the stream of language leaves stranded as it flows along consists mainly of what can well be done without, & that going back to rake among the debris, except for very special needs, is unprofitable? At any rate, the simple referring of any word to this article is intended to dissuade the reader from using it.

revive makes -vable; see MUTE E.

revivify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

revoke makes revocable (ré’vokabl), revocation.

revolt. For revolted= insurgent, see INTRANSITIVE P.P.

revolute. See BACK-FORMATION.

revolve makes -vable; see MUTE E.

revue. See TECUNICAL TERMS,

Reynard, anthus. See SOBRIQUETS.

rhapsodic(al). The short form is now usually limited to the original sense ‘of the Greek rhapsodes ’, while -ical has usually & might well have only the secondary sense of ecstatically expressed or highflown; see -IC(AL).

Rhenish. Pronounce rén-.

rhetorical question. See TrEcH- NICAL TERMS.

rhino=rhinoceros. PI. -os, see -O(E)s 5, or (see COLLECTIVES 4+) -0. See also CURTAILED WORDS.
