page: 506

& wept: é& as he went, thus he said:

O my son Absalom, my son, my son

Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!

rhythmic(al). Both forms are too common to justify any expectation of either’s disappearance; yet there is no marked differentiation; what there is perhaps amounts to this, that -al is the more ordinary pedestrian term, & therefore better suited for the merely classifying use (& other rhythmical devices: cf. so rhythmic a style), See -1c(Au).

rilant. See FRENCH worps.

ribbon, riband. The second is ‘ now archaic ’"—OED.

ribes. Pronounce ri’béz.

riches. But the promoters will certainly not need to go back to ancient history for it; they will have an embarrassment of riches from the immediate past. See GALLIcIsMs.

rick (twist, sprain). See wrick.

rickety, not -ity; see -T-, -TT-.

ricochet. The spelling, accent, & pronunciation recommended are: ricochet (ri’‘kosh&);_ ricocheted (ri’koshad); ricocheting (rikoshié‘ing). Cf. CROCHET, CROQUET.

rictus. PI. -wses or -is, not -i; see LATIN PLURALS.

rid. There is no clear line between rid & ridded in past inflexions, but the prevailing usage is: past tense, ridded (When he ridded, sometimes rid, the tborld of his presence); p.p. as active, ridded (We have ridded, or rid, the land of robbers); p.p. as passive, rid (I thought myself well rid, rarely ridded, of him).

ride makes -dable; see MUTE E.

rider (corollary). TECHNICAL TERMS.

ridge makes -gy; see -ry & -y.

ridicule, vb, his -lable; MuTE E.

rifacimento. Pronounce -fahchl-. Pl. -os, see -o(E)s 6, or -ti (-€).

right. 1, R. away in the sense ‘ at once ’, *‘ without delay ’, comes from America, & is still far from comfortablein England. 2. Right) (righten, vv. See -EN VERBS. 8. Right- (fy). advv. The adverb right, in the

+ senses ‘properly’, ‘ correctly’, is being squeezed out by the tendency to UnipromatTic -Ly. It is well, before using rightly in these senses, to consider whether right is not better, though usage is much less decided than with many alternative adverbs of the kind. In all the following pee rightly is possible, but right is better:—He guessed or answered right (cf. Ile rightly guessed that it was safe or answered trwentyseven); You did right in apologizing or to apologize (cf. You rightly apologized); If I remember right (cf. I cannot rightly recollect); I hope we are going right; If it was tied right, it will hold; Teach him to hold his pen right. Correct accordingly: Mr Lloyd George does rightly in calling them to the aid of a larger conception.

righteous. Pron. ri’chus (or ri’tyus).

rigid makes -est; see -ER & -EST 4.

rigour, but rigorous; see -ouR & -OR, -OUR- & -oRr-.

rile makes -lable; see MUTE E.

rilievo. See RELIEFVO.

rime. See RHYME.

rinderpest. Pronounce rin-.

ring, vb. Both rang & rung are still used for the past tense, but rang is much commoner, & likely, to become universal.

ringlet makes -cfcd, -ety; -T-, -TT-.

rinse makes -sable; see MUTE FE.

riot makes -ofed, -oting; -T-, -TT-.

riposte. Scc FRENCH WoRDs.

ripply, not -ley; see -ry & -y.

rise. 1. For the riscn sun &c. see INTRANSITIVE P.P. 2. It is hoped that the Joint Committee will r. equal to the occasion, & give India a constitution which... Either r. to or be equal to; CAST-IRON IDIOM.

risible. 1. Pronounce riz’fbl. 2. R. is very liable to MisPprinting as visible. 3. Were I to send my library of sixty specimens to auction I really expect some risible bid of, say, ten or jifteen pounds would be offered. The word has nearly perished cxcept in the special sense ‘of laughter’ (r. faculty, nerves, muscles, &c.). To
