page: 507

+ ‘use it in the sense ° ridiculous ’, correct enough, but now unfamiliar, is a REVIVAL not to be recommended; the word that has taken its place is DERISORY.

risky, for French risqué, is an undesirable GALLICISM.

risqué, rissole. See FRENCH WORDS.

ritardando. Pl. -os; see -0(E)s 6.

rival, vb, has -lled, -lling; -LL-, -L-.

rive. Past tense rived; p.p. riven, rarely rived.

rivel makes -lled, -lling; -LL-, -L-.

rivet has -eted, -eting, -eter; -T-,-TT-.

riviére. See FRENCH worRDs.

roast. 1. The use of the p.p. roast is very narrowly limited: roast beef or hare, but roasted coffee-berries or cheeks; a roast joint, but a well roasted joint; is better roast(ed) than boiled, but should certainly be roasted. 2. For rule the r., see RULE.

Robby, -ie. See -EY, -IE, -y.

robe, vb, makes -bable; see MUTE E.

robe-de-chambre. FRENCH worDs.

robust makes -er, -cst; -ER & -EST.

robustious. One of the words whose continued existence depends upon a quotation (JIamlet 111. ii. 10).

rococo. See TECHNICAL TERNS,

rodomontade, not rho-.

role, réle. Though the word is etymologically the same as roll, meaning the roll of MS. that contained an actor’s part, the differentiation is too useful to be sacrificed by spelling always roll. But, there being no other word role from which it has to be kept distinct, both the italics & the accent might well be abandoned. As to the sanctity of the French form, see MORALE.

Roman-Catholic, Roman Catholic. Ile is a Roman Catholic; the Roman- Catholic faith; in Roman-Catholic countries. In the noun there is no need of or justificatron for the hyphen (see HyPuEens 3 B); in the compound adjective it is necessary or desirable (see HyPHEens 3 D).

Romanes, Romany, (gypsy language). Pronounce r6’manéz, «nl.

Romansh, Roumansh, Rumans(c)h.

507

+ The OED treats the first as the standard form.

Rome makes Romish; sec MUTE F.

rondeau, rondel. See TEcHNICAL TERMS; &, for pl. of rondeau, -x.

rondo. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 6.

Rontgen. Pronounce ri’ntyen.

roof, Pl. -fs; see -vE(pD).

roomful. Pl. -ls; see -FUL.

root (philol.). See TrcsanicaL TERMS.

root, rout, (poke about). The second form is called by the OED an ‘irregular variant of’ the first. The two, with the other verb root directly connected with the noun, naturally cause some difficulty. It would be a convenient differentiation if the spelling roof could be confined to contexts in which the notion of roots is cssential, & rout were adopted where search or bringing to light is the point. So we should get rooting up trees, rooting out weeds or sedition, but routing about in a lumber-room or among papers, routing out secrets, routing a person out of bed, routing up a recluse or a reference. Pigs, being equally intent on roots & search, may root or rout indifferently.

rope makes -pable, -py; sec MUTE E.

roquefort. See FRENCH WORDS.

roquet. For spelling & pronunciation of inflexions see CROCHET.

rosary, -ery, (rose-garden). The first is the old word (from 15th c, in OED), direct from Latin rosarium. The second is a 19th-c. formation made presumably, from rose & -ery, by someone not aware that rosary has this sense. Rose-garden or -bed is recommended for ordinary use, & rosary for verse.

Rosicrucians, or Brethren of the Rosy Cross, much talked of in the 17th c., paid homage by their name not to ni bara symbolized by cross or rose, but to an alleged 15th-c. founder named Rosenkreuz (= cross of roses). ‘ The writers who posed as Rosicrucians were moral & religious reformers, & utilized the technicalities of chemistry(alchemy),
