page: 509

ring but entering, abhorrent but

motoring. Exception: confer, infer,

prefer, refer, & transfer, though

accented on the last, give adjectives

in -erable, & shift the accent to the

first syllable: pré’ferable &c.; see

CONFER(R)ABLE.

rubefy, -bify. The first is better,

on the analogy of liquefy, putrefy,

stupefy, than the second on the

analogy of horrify, terrify, especially

in view of rubefacient & rubefaction

always so spelt.

rubricate makes -cable, -tor; see

-ABLE 1, -OR,

ruche. See FRENCH WORDS.

rucksack

- Pronounce roo’ksik.

ruddie (red ochre, &, as verb,

colour with this) has the two vari-

ants raddle & reddle, of which raddle

is the form usually preferred as a

contemptuous synonym for rouge

& rouging, & reddle is occasional

instead of ruddle. Ruddle itself is

applied chiefly to sheep-marking.

rude makes rudish; see MUTE E.

ruff (bird) has fem. reeve.

ruination is not, like flirtation, floatation, & botheration, a Hysrip DERIVATIVE, being regularly formed from ruinate; but it now has the effect of a slangy emphatic lengthening of the noun ruin; this is only because the parent verb ruinate, which was common in serious use 1550-1700, is no longer heard;_ but the result is that ruination is better avoided except in facetious contexts.

rule. 1. The verb makes -lable; see MUTE BE. 2. R. of three & r. of thumb should not be hyphened except when used as compound adjectives; see HYPHENS (*Rule of thumb). 3. Rule the roast (roost). The OED gives no countenance to roost, & does not even recognize that the phrase ever takes that form; but most unliterary persons say roost & not roast; have just inquires of three such, & been informed that they never heard of rule the roast, & that the reference is to a cock keeping his hens in order.

509 "S

Against this tempting piece of

popular etymology the OED offers

us nothing more succulent than

* None of the early examples throw

any light on the precise origin of the

expression’. In seven out of the

eight pre-18th-c. examples quoted

the spelling is not roast but rost or

roste; but the OED philologists

would doubtless tell us that rost(e)

could represent Old-French _rost

(roast), & could not represent Old-

English hrést (roost). Writers should

take warning, at any rate, that rule

the roast is the orthodox spelling, &

that when they have written it the

compositor must be watched.

rumbustious. See FaceTious FORMA- TIONS.

ruminate makes -nable, -tor; see -ABLE 1, -OR.

rumour. See -our & -or.

run. For fresh-run salmon &c., see INTRANSITIVE P.P.

rune. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

rung (past tense). See rIN«a.

rupture makes -rable; see MUTE FE.

ruridecanal. Pron. rooridika‘nal.

ruse, rusé. See FRENCH WoRDs.

rush ring (I’°ll marry thee with a &c.). No hyphen; Hypuens 3 B.

russety, not -tty; see -t-, -TT-.

rusticate makes -cable, -tor; see “ABLE 1, -OR.

ruthless. For the war-time use as translation of German riicksichtslos (regardless or reckless, not r.), see FRIGHTFULNESS.

"8. 1. For for conscience’ sake &c., see SAKE.

2. For Achilles’, Jones’s, &c., sec POSSESSIVE PUZZLES.

8. For England’s &c. & of England &c., see ’S INCONGRUOUS, & PER- SONIFICATION 1. In no part of the world, says Ontario’s Prime Minister, will the returned soldier find a more appreciative public than in this province. 4. For such corrections as to use a word of Coleridge instead of of Coleridge’s, see OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN.
