page: 510

Sabbath day. HiypHens 3 B. ;

Sabbatic(al). The long form is now rare; see -1C(AL).

sabot makes -oted, pron. -6d.

sabotage. See FRENCH WORDS.

sabre, -ber. See -RE & -ER.

sabretache, sabreur. See FRENCH WORDS.

sac is a medical & biological word, not a dressmaker’s or tailor’s; see SAC(QUE).

saccharin(e). See -IN & -INE; there is, however, some convenience in using saccharin for the noun & saccharine for the adjective.

sacerdotage. See FACETIOUS FOR- MATIONS.

sachem. The OED puts first the pronunciation sa’chim.

sachet. See FRENCH WORDS.

sack, dismiss(al), having been on record for a hun rears, may claim promotion from the slang to the colloquial class.

sac(que). For the garment, sack is the right form. The other spcllings are pseudo-French, wrong in different degrees: there is no French word sacque; there is a French word sac, but it is not, as the English sack is or has been, the name for a particular garment.

sacrarium. PI. -ia.

sacred makes -est; sec -ER & -EST 4.

sacrifice makes -ceable; scc -ABLE 1. For the supreme &c. 8., see STOCK PATHOs.

sacrilegious. So spelt, & pronounced -é’jus. It is often both mis-spelt & mispronounced from confusion with religious.

saga. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

sage. For the s. of Chelsea, see SOBRIQUETS.

sago. Pl. -os; see -0(E)s 3.

Sahib. Pronounce sah’-ib. Fem. (European lady), Memsahib.

said. 1. S.=aforesaid. 2. S. he & had s. he. 3. Substitutes for 6. he.

1. (The) said. In legal documents, phrases like ‘ the s. Robinson’, ‘s. dwelling-house’, are traditional. 510 No hyphen; see

SAINT Jocose imitation of this use (regaling themselves on half-pints at the 6. village hostelries), still not uncommon, though no longer indulged in by writers not desperately anxious to relieve conscious dullness, is to be classed with WorN-OUT HUMOUR.

2. S. he, 8. N. or M., placed after the words spoken, is entirely unobjectionable;_ the ingenuity displayed by some writers (see 3) in avoiding what they needlessly fear will bore their readers is superfluous. But two points should be noticed: the sprightliness of Said N. or M. placed before instead of after the words said, & the ponderousness of had said &c. instead of plain said, are alike intolerable. Said a Minister:—‘ American interests are not large enough tn Morocco to induce us to... /‘I won't plot anything extra against Tom’, had said Isaac. And see INVERSION s.f.

8. Substitutes for s. he. Many verbs, such as whispered, cried, shouted, asked, answered, continued, groaned, imply or suggest the use of words, & are naturally used after what is uttered, as equivalents of said with an adverb. With these (asked Jones &c.) to relieve the monotony of said he, no writer need be afraid of boring; he may safely abstain from the very tiresome MANNERISM initiated rhaps by Meredith (‘Ah’, fluted. Fenellan), & now staled by imitation:-—‘Iland on heart?’ she doubted./‘ Need any help?’ husked A./‘They’re our best revenue’, defended B./‘I know his kind’, fondly remembered C./*‘Why Shouldn't he?’ scorned D./'It’s a lie’, perfunctorily denied E./‘He can win her love’, she faintly surrendered./* Does it never occur to you’ I probed, ‘ that all your labour may be in vain?’.

sall. For plain sailing, see PLAIN. By the side of the usual but abnormal sailor, the normal agent-noun sailer exists for use in such contexts as She (ship) is a slow sailer,

Saint. Stis better than St. for the
