page: 512

+ tion of t. s./The atmospheric engine, by which work was done by the heating & expanding of atmospheric pressure air by the combustion of hydrocarbons in 8./Sir,—aving in mind the approaching General Election, it appears to me that the result of s. ts likely to be as much a farce as the last./I again withdraw the statements, d& express my regret for having made t.s./Sir,—Mr Asquith, in his speech at the West Indian Club dinner, & you tn your comments on s., make reference to the Parliamentary grants. / Mr Lloyd George has, by this time, considered almost every oalid objection or grievance, & has promised amendments or favourable consideration touching t. 8./I consider this question as already settled, & consequently any further discussion on 8. ts pure waste of time./When ts a majority a Coalition majority?—When the parties composing s. refuse to unite with the Opposition. /I can only confirm the statement of the transfer, but t. 8. will be made slowly.

samiel. See wixp, n.

samite. Pronounce s&’mit.

Samson. So spelt in Judges, and as u generic pame.

samurai. Pron.si’moori. Pl. same.

sanat-, sanit-. The chief words, as they should be spelt, are:—sanatorium a healing-place; sanative & sanalory curative; sanitary conducive to wholesomeness; saniiation ete: tas wholesomeness; sanitarian a iever in sanitation. Sanitarium is a possible but now undesirable equivalent of sanatorium; sanitorium, sanatarium, & sanitory, are wrong.

sanbenito. Pronounce -é’té. PI. -08; see -O(E)s 6.

sanctify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -lE &c., 6.

sanction, n. The popular sense (permission, authorization, countenance, consent) has so far prevailed over the more original senses still current especially in Law & Ethics that it is worth while to draw

| attention to these. The s. of a rule

+ or a system is the consideration that operates to enforce or induce compliance with it; the death penalty is the s. of'the law against murder. The OED quotes from T. Fowler: * Physical ss. are the pleasures & pains which follow naturally on the observance or violation of physical laws, the ss. employed by society are praise & blame, the moral gs. . .. are... the approval & disapproval of conscience; lastly, the religious ss. are either the fear of future punishment, & the nope of future reward, or, to the higher religious sense, simply the love of God, & the dread of displeasing Him ’.

sanction, vb, makes -oned &c.; gee -N-, -NN-.

sandal makes -iled; see -LL-, -L-.

sand-blind is neither (like, say, purblind) a current word, nor (like, say, bat-blind) intelligible at sight. Its modern existence depends on one passage (M. of V. 11. ii. 35-80), & it can rank only as an ARCHAISM.

Sandy. So spelt; see -EY, -1E, -y.

sang-de-bosuf, sang-froid. See FRENCH WORDS.

sanguine is in danger of being superseded bythe very inferior OPTIMISTIC. Candour, however, compels the admission that optimistic, optimism, & optimist, have the advantage in mechanical convenience over sanguine, sanguineness, & sanguine person.

Sanhedrim, -in. ‘The incorrect form sanhedrin ... has always been in England (from the 17th c.) the only form in popular use ’—OED.

sans. As an English word, pronounce sanz; but it is at WARDOUR-STREET English: The poet whom he met sans hat & coat one four-o’clock-in-the-morning. For s. cérémonie, sansculolte(rie), 8. doute, facon, géne, peur &c., phrase, -souci, see FRENCH WORDS.

Sanskrit. So spelt.

Santa Claus. Pronounce -aws; not a feminine name, but from a Dutchdialect form of Saint (Ni)cholas.
