page: 515

+ which are purely English limited his vocabulary & was s0 drawback to his sentences’, The truth is perhaps that conscious deliberate Saxonism is folly, that the choice or rejection of particular words should depend not on their descent but on considerations of expressiveness, intelligibility, brevity, euphony, or ease of handling, & yet that any writer who becomes aware that the Saxon or native English element in what he writes is small will do well to take the fact as a danger signal. But the way to act on that signal is not to translate his Romance words into Saxon ones; it is to avoid abstract & roundabout & bookish phrasing whenever the nature of the thing to be said does not require it. We can almost see the writer of the following sentence striking out tm-

Seagal (which did not clash with

a few words later) & inserting his Saxon betterment in its place: Instead of breaking heads over a betterment of Anglo-German relations, it would be better to study British finance. But betterment has no single advantage over improvement except its Saxonism. It was once, indeed, a current English word, but that was as long ago as the 17th century. In recent times it has come back to us from America as a technicality in the tenant-&landlord business, & now the Saxonists are making their readers uncomfortable by thrusting it into sentences like the one quoted.

saying. ‘ As the s. is’, or ‘ goes’, is often used by simple people, speaking or writing, who would fain assure us that the phrase they have allowed to proceed from their lips or pen is by no means typical of their taste in language; no; it only happens to be ‘so expressive’ that one may surely condescend to it for once. Well, qui s’excuse s’accuse; if the rest of their behaviour does mot secure them from insulting

icions, certainly the apology

ili not. See SuPERIORITY.

sbirro. Pl. -ri (-é).

scabies. Three syllables (ska’biéz).

scalawag. See SCALLYWAG.

scald (poet). See SKALD.

scaldino. Pronounce skahlidé’nd. Pl. -nz (-é).

scale. The verbs make -lable; see Mute £. The adjective from one of the nouns is scaly; see -EY & -yY.

seallawag. See SCALLYWAG.

scallop, sco-. The spelling is usually with -a-, but the pronunciation with -d5-. The verb makes -oping, -oped; see -P-, -PP-.

scallywag, -ala-, -alla-. The first spelling is that preferred by the OED.

seandal. For distinctions between this, libel, slander, & other synonyms, see LIBEL.

seandalize makes -zable; MUTE E.

scandalum magnatum. The second word is the genitive plural of Latin magnas a Magnate, not a p.p. agreeing with scandalum. e phrase means the offence of uttering a malicious report against some high official, & the use of it in such senses as ‘a crying scandal’ is a blunder.

scant, adj., is a LITERARY WORD, preferred in ordinary contexts to scanty, small, few, short, &c. (The attendance was so scant as to suggest that many members must have anticipated the holiday) only by those who have no sense of incongruity. It survives as a current word, however, m some isolated phrases, as s. courtesy, 8. of breath.

scarce, adv., used instead of scarcely, is a LITERARY WORD. It is true that the OED says: ‘ Before adverbs in -ly the form scarce is often adopted instead of scarcely, to avoid the iteration of the suffix ’. On that iteration, see -Ly; but such avoidance is a case of OuT OF THE FRYING-PAN.

2. Noi

scarcely. 1. S.... than. &e.... 8.

1. S.... than. S. was the nice new drain finished than several of the children sickened with diphtheria. For this construction, condemned
