page: 517

+ it is not so used by th or have been at the A s. at schools is one who holds a scholarship, & the use of it in the other sense implies that the user is unacquainted with school idiom. While he was a 8. at Marlborough Grammar School he took part in a riot which broke out in consequence of the prohibition of a firework display one

Guy Fawkes day ’./It ts the sincere hope of the council that its endeavour to poe the * > in the schools will be recognized by the masters, & that they will bring the proposed championships to the notice of their scholars. See also GENTEELISM.

scholium. Pl. -ia; see -UM.

schoolhouse, school-house, school house. The name of the building in which a school is carried on is one word, with or without hyphen. The name of the h rs as distinguished from the other boarding-houses of a large school should be two words unhyphened, since house bears the accent. See Hy- PHENS 8 B.

school (of fish &c.), shoal. The two words are etymologically one, & equally unconnected with the ordinary word school; both are also current, & without difference of sense. The form school has the disadvantage of being liable to be taken for a figurative use of the other school.

sclagraphy &c., ski-, The regular representative in English of Greek sk- (here skia shadow) is sc-; but it is legitimate (see GREEK @G) to pronounce c as k, cf. sceptic. is particular set of words has been taken into English twice—in the 16th c. as terms in perspective, usually with the spelling sc-, & in the 19th = alee to radio-

hy (production of Réntgen-ray Cictures} &c., usually with the spelling sk-. To maintain both the sc- & the sk- forms is very unsatisfactory, &, with radiography in existence, also needless. It is best to abandon the Réntgen-ray sense,

517

+ restrict the words to their older use in perspective, spell only sc-, & pronounce sk-.

sciamachy, sclametry. See GREEK a.

science & art. S. knows, a. does; a s. is a body of connected facts, an a. is a set of directions; the facts of s. (errors not being such) are the same for all people, circumstances, & occasions; the directions of a. vary with the artist & the task. But, as there is much traffic between s. & a., &, especially, a. is often based on s., the distinction is not always clear; the a. of self-defence, & the boxer’s s.—are they the same or different? The OED, on s. * contradistinguished from art ’, says: ‘ The distinction as commonly apprehended is that a s. is concerned with theoretic truth, & an a. with methods for effecting certain results. Sometimes, however, the term s. is extended to denote a department of practical work which depends on the knowledge & conscious application of principles; an a., on the other hand, ing understood to require merely knowledge of traditional rules & skill acquired by habit’.

scllicet, usually shortened to scil. or sc., is Latin (scire licet you may know) for ‘to wit’. It is not so often misused as e.g. & if.e., not having been popularized to the same extent. Its function is to introduce: (a) a more intelligible or definite substitute, sometimes the English, for an expression alread used: The policy of the I.W.W. (sc. Independent orkers of the World); The ee as Paraciete (scil. advocate): (b) a word &c. that was omitted in the original as unnecessary, but is thought to require specifying for the present audience: Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard (sc. the intent of God).

scimitar, -etar. The OED gives the first as the standard form.

scintilla. Pl. -lae.

sciolto. Pronounce shd-; ITALIAN SOUNDS.
