page: 518

sciroceo. See sIROcco.

scission. Pron. si’shn, not si’zhn.

Sclav(onic) &c. See Suav.

scleroma, sclerosis. Fl. -6’mata, -6’ses (-€z); see LATIN PLURALS 2.

sconce, vb, makes -ceable; -aABLE 1.

scon(e). The spelling scone, & the pronunciation sk6n, are given preference by the OED; but the sound sk6n is perhaps oftener heard.

scope. For synonyms see FIELD.

score n. (= 20). See COLLECTIVEs 8.

soore, vb, makes -rable; see MUTE E.

scoria is a singular noun, pl. -tae; but, as the meaning of the singular & of the plural is much the same (cf. ash & ashes, clinker & clinkers), it is no wonder that the singular is sometimes wrongly followed b a plural verb (The scoria were sti hot &c.), or that a false singular scortum is on record.

scot. See TAx.

scotch. This verb owes its currency entirely to the sentence in Macbeth—* We have scotch’d the snake, not kill’d it’. The contrast between scotching (or disabling) & killing is expressly drawn in five quotations given in the OED for the correct use, & is understood to be implied even when it is not expressed. S., then, can say in six letters & in one syllable * put temporarily out of action but not destroy ’"—a treasure, surely, that will be jealously guarded by the custodians of the language, viz those who write. But no; ‘ itis the nature of extreme self-lovers as they will set a house on fire and it were but to roast their cggs’; & the journalist self-lover is too much delighted as finding in s. an uncommon substitute for such poor common words as kill or destroy to remember that, if he & his like have their way, the value of a precious word will be not merely scotched, but killed & destroyed, or, as he would put it, ‘ finally scotched ’. Finally or entirely with s. should be, In view of the history of 8., an impossibility; but it is now to be

518

+ met with daily in the newspapers; &, after all, a writer who, like the author of the first extract below, does not know the difference between a rumour & the contradiction of a rumour, can hardly be expected to recognize so supersubtle a distinction as that between wounding & killing:—The contradiction of a rumour affecting any particular company, although it may have a certain effect upon the price of shares at the time, is seldom entirely scotched by directorial statements./It ts well that this legend should be finally scotched./ The idea is so preposterous that by the time this is in print t§ may be definitely scotched./We hope the proposal for a Government news service for the Colonies is finally scotched by the debate.

Scotch, Scots, Scottish. 1 (as adjj.). The third represents most closely the original form, the first and second being the contractions of it usual in England & Scotland respectively. Scottish is still both g English (especially in formal contexts) & good Scotch. The English form Scotch had (OED) ‘ before the end | of the 18th c. been adopted into the northern vernacular; it is used regularly by Burns, & subsequently by Scott. ... Within the last’ half century there has been in Scotland &@ growing tendency to discard this form altogether, Scottish, or less frequently Scots, being substituted ’.

2 (as nn.). For the name of the Scotch dialect, the noun Scottish is little used; Scotch is the English noun, & Scots the usual Scotch noun.

Scot, Scots(wo)man, Scotch(wo)man. Englishmen use the third forms by nature, the first sometimes for brevity or for poetical or rhetorical or jocular effect, & the second occasionally in compliment to a Scotch hearer, Scots- being (OED) ‘the prevalent form now used by Scotch people ’.

scot(t)icé, -cism, -cize. The OED gives preference to -tt- in all. For
