page: 519

+ scotticé see LATINE. Scoflicize makes -zable; see MUTE E. /|

Scottish. See Scorcu,'Scors.

scoundrel has -elism, -elly; -LL-, -L-.

scout, eyp: skip. College servants at Oxford, Cambridge, & T.C.D., respectively.

scrannel. One of the words depending on a single passage (Lycidas 124).

scream, screech, shriek. The first is the ‘dominant word’ for a cry uttered, under emotion, at a higher pitch than that which is normal with the utterer. Those who wish to intensify the pitch & the emotion substitute shriek; those who wish either to add the notion of uncanny effect, or to make fun of the matter, substitute screech.

screw your courage to the stickingplace (not point); MIsQquOTATION.

scrimmage, scru-. The form with -u- is preferred in Rugby football, that with -t- in more general uses.

scrinium, scriptorium. PI. -ia.

scrummage. See SCRIMMAGE.

serumptious. See FAcETIOUS FOR- MATIONS.

scrupulous should have its claims considered before the gallicism METI- CULOUS is substituted for it.

scrutin d’arrondissement, de liste. See FRENCH WORDS. . scrutinize makes -zable; see MUTE E.

scudo. Pl. -di (-é).

scull, skull. The single-handed oar has sc-, the cranium sk-. The notion that the words are ultimately the same is discountenanced bythe OED.

- See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS.

. For inflexions see VERBS

scutum. Pl. -ta.

seyphus. PI. -phi (-I).

scythe, vb, makes -thable; MUTE E.

sea. 1. S. change. 2. Hyphen in compounds.

1. S. change. Suffer a s.c. is one of the most importunate & intrusive of IRRELEVANT ALLUSIONS, & HAcK- NEYED PHRASES. We hope that the Prime Minister will on this occasion stick to his guns, & see that his policy 519

SEAR does not for the third or fourth time suffer a sea change when its execution falls into the hands of his colleagues.

2. Hyphened compounds. Owing to the vast number of phrases or compounds of which sea forms the first part, the word provides a good test of the rulcs laid down in Hy- PHENS 3B. Whether a phrase beginning with sea used attributively should be hyphened or not depends on whether sea or the second word bears the accent; in the latter case no hyphen should be used. Everyone says sea’ fight, sea’ god, sea’ gull. sea’ horse, sea’ mark, sea’ nymph, sea’ piece, sea’ room, sea’ serpent; & these words should therefore (if they are not made into single words —seafight &c.) be given the hyphen:—sea-fight, sea-god, sea-gull, sea-horse, sea-mark, sea-nymph, seapiece, sea-room, sea-serpent. On the other hand, nearly everyone says sea air’, sea ane’mone, sea ba’thing, sea change, sea coa’st, sea fro’nt, sea law’yer, sea le’vel, sea mi’le, sea mo’nster, sea pay’, sea ro’ver, sea shore’, sea si’'de; these, then, should either be made into single words (as seaside) or kept separate & unhyphened. It is true that not all: compounds of sea are thus provided for; there are many in which the accent is not undisputed, but variable, as sea breeze, sea captain, sea kale, sea legs, sea pink, sea salt; & there are others in which sea is not used attributively, but is in some other relation to the second word, as sea-born, sea-borne, seafaring, seagirt, sea-going, seasick, seaworthy. But the object of this article is merely to point out that many sea phrases are given hyphens to which they have no right.

seagreen incorruptible. See Sopri- QUETS.

seal. For some synonyms, see SIGN.

seamstress, semps-. The OED treats the first as the word, & the second as the variant.

séance. See FRENCH WORDS.

sear, sere. Scar for the nouns (part
