page: 522

+ SELF-POSSESSEDLY sometimes means evident without proof, or intuitively certain, which is a valuable sense, & sometimes no more than evident, not implying that proof is needless or has not been given (cf. hence in the extract), & therefore tending to confusion. Other words resembling self-despondent in being never preferable to the simple form without self are selfcollected (calm &c.), self-concett(ed), self-consistent, self-diffidence, selfopinioyated. And others resembling self-evident in having a real sense of their own but being often used when that sense is not in place are selfassurance, self-complacent, self-confidence, self-consequence. But these are samples only; there are scores that a writer should not use without first asking himself whether the self- is pulling its weight. It is not to be supposed that the otiose use of self- is a modern trick; on the contrary, the modern tendency is to abandon many such compounds formerly prevalent, & the object of this article is merely to help on that sensible tendency.

self-possessedly. A badform; -EDLY.

selvedge, -vage. As the derivation is (OED) ‘ apparently f. self+edge’, it is a pity that the significant first form is not universal, & it is here recommended, though the OED 19th & 20th century examples show a slight majority for -age.

semaphore. Pronounce sé-, regardless of FALSE QUANTITY.

semé(e). See FRENCH WORDS.

-. Compounds are innumerable, & restrictions little called for: but the claims of half-, which is often better, should at least be considered;: This would be an tmmense Zain over the existing fashion of a multitude of churches tll-manned & semt-filled.

semicolon. See Srops.

Semite. See HEBREW.

semivowel. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

semplice, sempre. Pronounce sé’mplécha, s¢’mpra; IraL1aNn SOUNDS.

sem . See SEAMSTRESS. 522

\

senarius. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

senatus. FI., if required, -iuses or -tis, not -t { see -US.

senhor (Portuguese title).

Pronounce sanyor’.

senior. or the s.

Service, see SOBRIQUETS.

sennight. So written; but the word is now almost out of use. It might have been, but will now hardly be, utilized as a substitute for week in the formula on Monday &c. week when the reckoning was to be backwards: We start tomorrow week, but It happened yesterday sennight.

sefior, sefora, sefiorita, Spanish titles. Pronounce sényor’, sényor’a, stnyoré’ta.

sense,n. S.of humour, properly the power of finding entertainment in people’s doings, more especially in such of them as are not designed to entertain. But the phrase has in the last half-century received an extension, or perhaps rather. a limitation, that bids fair to supersede the original meaning. When we say nowadays that a person ‘has no s.o.h.’, or ‘lacks humour’, we mean less that he is not alive to the entertainment provided by others’ doings than that he is unaware of elements in his own conduct or character likely to stir the s. o. h. in others—has not, in fact, the power of seeing himself as others see him even in the degree in which it is possessed by the average man.

sense, vb. We sense the tragedy of Anna Wolsky as she steps lightheartedly inio Sylvia Bailey’s life./ The water rail . . . is somewhat unwieldy in flight, & senses so much, for it seems to prefer to run. The verb has been used for some three centuries in philosophic writing as a comprehensive form of ‘ see or/& hear or/& smell or/& taste or/& feel by touch ’, i.e. of ‘have senseperception of’. From that the use illustrated above is distinct, meaning according to the OED definition ‘to perceive, become aware of,
