page: 523

“* feel ” (something ent, a fact,

state of things, etc. t by direct

perception but more orijless vaguely

or instinctively ’. he OED’s

earliest example is dated 1872, & the

meaning is not yet part of ordina

English. It has, no doubt, the

advantage of brevity as compared

With become conscious of, get an

inkling of, & other possibilities; but

whether that brevity is sufficient

compensation for the irritation or

suspicion of preciosity that most

readers feel when confronted with it

is not so certain.

sensibility. Just as ingenuity is not

ingenuousness, but in eniousness,

80 sensibility is not sensibleness, but

sensitiveness; to the familiar con-

trasted pair sense & sensibility

Correspond the adjectives sensible

é sensitive—an absurd atrangement,

& doubtless puzzling to foreigners,

but beyond mending; -ry & -NEss.

sensible, sensitive, le. In

certain uses, in which the point is

the effect produced or producible

on the person &c. qualified, the three words are near, though not identical, in meaning. J am sensible of your kindness, sensitive to ridicule, susceptible to beauty. Formerly sensible could be used in all three types of sentence; but its popu Meaning as the opposite o gous

become so predominant that we are no longer intelligible if we sa @ sensible person as the equivalent of @ sensitive or a susceptible person, & even sensible of is counted among LITERARY worDs. The difference between sensible o » sensitive to, & susceptible to or of, is roughly that sensible of expresses emotional consciousness, sensitive to acute feeling, & susceptible to or of quick reaction to stimulus: profoundly, gratefully, painfully, regretfully, sensible of; acutely, deli Y, excessively, absurdly, sensitive to; readily, often, Scarcely, susceptible to or of. Sensitize is a word made for the needs of photography, & made badly. It should have been sensi-

528 fertile, human, & liberal, &

twvizes one might as well omit the

adjective ending of immortal, signal,

say tm-

mortize, signize, fertize, humize, &

liberize, as leave out the -ive. The

aah Se! a however, have. made

their » & must lie in it; the

longer the rest of us can keep clear,

the better; & extra-photographic

use has not yet gone very far; but

the OED quotes: Education, while

tt sensitizes a man’s fibre, ts incapable

of turning weakness into strength.

Just as, failing pactficist, pacist

would have been better than pacifist

(see -IST), so, failing Sensitivize,

Sensize would have been better than

sensitize.

sensorium. PI. (rare), -ia.

Sensuous is thought to have been

expressly formed by Milton to con-

vey what had originally been con-

veyed by the older sensual (connex-

ion with the senses ag opposed to the

intellect) but had become associated

in that word with the notion of

undue indulgence in the gtosser

Pocus of sense. At any rate

ilton’s own phrase ‘ simple, sensuous, & passionate’ in describing

reat poetry as compared with logic

rhetoric has had much to do with ensuring that sensuous shall remain free from the condemnation now inseparable from sensual.

sentence, in grammar, means a set of words complete in itself, having either expressed or understood in it a subject & a predicate, & conveyin a statement or question or comman or exclamation. If it contains one or more CLAUSES, it is a complez s. ; if its subject consists of more than one parallel noun &c., or its predicate of more than one verb &c., it is a compound s.; if its subject or predicate or verb (or more) is understood, it is an elliptical sentence. One sentence does not contain two or more subjects each with its separate predicate unless all but one of such subjects & predicates are clauses subordinate to the other. Simple sentences: I went (state-
