page: 526

+ parallel or intertwined as might be expected from this original identity, the wonder being that, with a differentiation so vague, each form should have maintained its existence by the side of the other. The OED’s main heads of meaning are three for each, one set hardly distinguishable from the other. For shade: I. Comparative darkness; II. A dark figure ‘cast’ upon a surface by a body intercepting light, a shadow; III. Protection from glare & heat. For shadow: I. Comparative darkness; II. Image cast by a body intercepting light; III. Shelter from light & heat. The most significant point is that, in II of shade, shadow is offered as a definition of shade, without reciprocity in II of shadow, the inference from which is that in division II shadow ig the normal word, & shade exceptional. This almost identity of meaning, however, branches out into a considerable diversity of idiom, one word or the other being more appropriate, or sometimes the only possibility, in certain contexts. The details of this diversity are too many to be catalogued here, but it is a sort of clue to remember that shadow is @ piece of shade, related to it as, e.g., pool to water. So it is that shade is a state—viz partial absence of light—, & not thought of as having a shape, nor usually as an appendage of some opaque object, both which notions do attach themselves to shadow. So too we say aght & shade but lights & shadows, in the shade but under a shadow; & so too shady means full of shade, but shadowy like a shadow.

Shake makes -kable; see MUTE E.

shako. Pronounce sh&’ké. Pi. -08; see -O(E)s 6.

§ » Shakes e), -erian,

hakspere -earian, -ean, &c. The forms preferred by the OED are Shakspere, Shaksperian. It is a matter on which unanimity is desirable, & on which, in view of the conflicting arguments, it will never be reached 526

; unless an E thoritative decision is

: ry ° e LJ accepted as<uch. Shakspere, Shaksperzan, are therefore recommended.

|

Shaky, shaly. So spelt 3 -EY & -Y.

shall &. will, should & would. 1. Plain future & conditional. 2. I would like. 38. Indefinite future & relative. 4. Elegant variation. 5. That-clauses. 6. Decorative & prophetic shall. ;

‘To use will in these cases is now a mark of Scottish, Irish, provincial, or extra-British idiom ’—Dr Henry Bradley in the OED. ‘ These cases ’ are of the type most fully illustrated below (see 1), & the words of so high an authority are here quoted because there is an inclination, among those who are not to the manner born, to question the existence, besides denying the need, of distinctions between sh. & w. The distinctions are elaborate; they are fully set forth in the OED; & no formal grammar or dictionary can be held to have done its duty if it has not laid down the ne rules. It will therefore be assumed here that the reader is aware of the normal usage so far as abstract statement can bring it home to him; & the object will be to make the dry bones live by exhibiting groups of sentences, all from newspapers of the better sort, in which one or other principle of idiom has been

he ‘ Scotch, Irish, provincial, or extra-British ’ writer will thus have before him a conspectus of the pitfalls that are most to be feared. =

1. Plain future or conditional statements & questions in the first person * should have shall, showld:; the roman-t wills & woulds in the following examples are wrong:— It ‘is impossible to exaggerate the

le consequences of this proposed act; in Egypt, in India, in every country from the Mediterranean to the frontiers of China, we will teack the lesson that no reliance cafi be placed on the word of England./This outraged. ts pleasant reading;. but we won't
