page: 527

+ SHALL get our £2,000 this year./Perhaps we will soon be surfeited by the unendi stream. of ‘new’ literature, & Wi turn with relief to... ./We might not be able to get all the oil we wanted from our coal, but we would always get enough to prevent . . ./What ezactly was the original total of the Turkish forces in this area we do not know—d& probably never will./He roag plain to read from the beginning, & could hardly, we would have supposed, have made an appeal to a girl of this characier./But the late King Edward brushed aside all such nonsense; & where would we be today without the French ‘ entente >? /If we traced tt back far enough we would find that the origin was .. ./If we permit our contribution to be substituted for a part of the building programme, we will be casting our vote with the ‘ little navy’ people./If we compare these two statements, we will see that so far as this point goes they agree./I would not be doing right if I were to anticipate that communication./If it were true the Germans would be right, d& we would be wrong./ If British trade interesis are to be reotved, we will stand in need of these men who know Russia./But if the re-shuffling of the world goes on producing new ‘issues’, I will, I fear, catch the fecer again./To the average citizen it would appear that in forestalling this plot we would in fact be pasate the German people no less service than . . ./I think I would be a knave tf I announced my tntention of Rane oer my * to...

t is quite clear that when Home R is being fought in the Commons I will have to devote all my time to it./ Reports of fighting in China are as conflicting as we would expect./I am pe aie oa ara three years we employers wi reaping benefit from i./We have collected more in nT than we would have done without it./We never know when we take up the morning er, some of us, which side we will be on nezt./The whole story of the rescue of the men from

527

~ SHALL, 2 Kerrig Island is a heroism of the sea which we will do well to realize./ Mr J. H. Thomas’s vision of the Utopia in which we will live ‘ When Labour Rules’. In all these the idea of intention, volition, choice, &c., which goes with will or would in the first person, is plainly out of the question. Two examples follow in which such an idea is precluded not by the actual words quoted, but by the unquoted context; in such cases the offence against idiom is aggravated by the possibility of misinterpretation:—We would thus get at once the thing wanted; an opera open practically all the year round (idiomatic sense, We aim at getting thus: intended sense, This, if it were not unfortunately impossible, would give us)./‘ Who’s Who’ is entirely withouf a competitor; & there is perhaps no book on our reference shelves that we would miss sooner (idiomatic sense, There is no book we should be so glad to be rid of: intended sense, There is no book we should so quickly feel the want of). Two other examples will provide for a common exception to the rule as given absolutely above. -In sentences that are, actually’ or virtually, reported, a verb that as reported is in the first person but | was Originally in the second or third often keeps will or would. :—People have underrated us, some even going so far as to say that we would not win a single test match (the people said You, or They, will not, which justifies, though it by no means necessitates, We would not in eye epee He need not fear that will be * sated’ by narratives like his (his fear was They, or You, will be sated, which makes we will not indeed advisable, but defensible).

2.° The verbs like, prefer, care, be glad, be inclined, -» are very common in-fifst-person conditional statements (I should like to know &c.). In these should, not would, is the right form. ‘I would like to say ’ is no more idiomatic English than ‘ I would find it hard to say ° ;
