page: 528

+ SHALL, 3 but hundreds of people who would be horrified by the latter are ready to write the former. The explanation is to be found in confusion between two possible ways of speaking, the modern ‘I should like to say ’, & the archaic ‘I would say’ ; in the modern form the desire is expressed in the verb like & requires no other expression; in the archaic form the desire had to be given in would because otherwise it was not expressed at all. The roman-type woulds & willis, then, are all wrong:— In regard to the general question, I would like fo speak today with a certain amount of reserve./The other argument upon which I would like to comment ts as follows./We must shut our ears to the tales of some of the lame dogs we would like to help over a sttle./We cannot go into de-. tails, & would prefer to postpone criticism until . ./Nor has he furnished me with one thing with which I would care to sit down in my little room & think./I, as Chief Liberal Whip, will be very glad to place them tn touch with the local weg! geld we should take a wider view, I would be inclined to say that .. ./In this month of ‘ grey rain & silver mist’ we will be eo eae within our average rainfall of a litt over 2in. An example less patently wrong is: We would be the last to argue that publication in this form’ commits our contemporary to agreement with the views expressed. This is defensible if the writer will assure , us that his meaning was We should wish to be the last, instead of, as it aa was, We should be the

ast.

8. In clauses of indefinite future time, & indefinite relative clauses in future time, will is entirely unidiomatic; either shall is used, chiefly in formal contexts, or, much more often, futurity is allowed to be inferred from context & a present is used:—Whatever sum c& whatever 800ds will be received from German will be shared among the Allies (shall be received)./Germany will have to 528

SHALL, &

eee give back all kinds of property which

been taken from the ‘invaded countries, & which will be traced in German territory (shall be traced). / ..- has now had to go clean out of the county to find employment, leaving his wife with her mother until he will be able to make another home for her (until he can make)./So long as this will not be made clear, the discussion will go on bearing lateral issues (is not made)./When this will be perceived by public opinion the solution will immediately become obvious (is

rceived)./When the Irish vote has

reduced by Home Rule, & the remaining Irish members will no

er have any reason to oppose a Suffrage Bill, Votes for Women will once more have a chance (members have no longer any reason) .. ./The farmers were expecting lo get increased prices, & they will naturally be ‘ considerably annoyed’ if they do not get them, especially when they will be called u to pay increased prices for all they have to buy (when they are called upon). Here also a less undeniably wrong example may be of service: We have strong faith that a rally to the defence of the Act will be a featur of next year’s politics, if the Tory Party will have the courage to come tnto the open é& declare war upon it. An assurance from the writer that by will have the courage he meant chooses to have the courage would be received, indeed, with incredulity, but would secure him a grudging acquittal; has the courage is what he should have written.

4. The time-honoured ‘I will be drowned, no-one shall save me’, so much too good to be true, is less convincing as a proof that there are people to whom the English distinctions mean nothing than the discovery that shall & will, should & would, are sometimes re ed as good raw material for elegant variation; I said should in the last clause; the one now to come is sadly simiiar to it; go to! I will write down would:—If we found the
