page: 529

+ tnstances invariably in mutual support we would be content with but a few, but if we found even one in contradiction we should require a large body of evidence./We should ° have been exposed to the full power of his guns, &, while adding to our own losses, would have forgone the advantage of inflaming his./The control of Bessarabia, until such time as #tussia shall be restored & the people will be free to pronounce for their return to Russia, by the ue of Nations./You shall not find two leaves of a tree exactly alike, nor will you be able to examine two hands that are exactly similar./Words requiring the local authority to see that when wacancies occurred the appointments should be consistent with the terms of the trust & the teachers chosen would be qualified to give the special religious instruction. But the follies to which EELEGANT VARIATION gives rise are without number.

5. That-clauses after intend or intention, desire, demand, be anztous, &c., have shall & should for all

rsons. Among the éc. are not included hope, anticipate, & the like; but the drawing of the line is not easy; roughly, shall & should are used when the word on which the that-clause depends expresses an influence that affects the result, as a demand does, but a hope or a fear does not; a serviceable illustration is expect; mistresses expect (i.e. demand) that their maids shall wear Cape; but we expect (i.e. are of ra that tomorrow will be fine.

xamples of the wrong will are:—

I am anxious that, when permanently

erected, the right site will be selected. /

And it is intended that this will be

extended to every division & impor-

tant branch./The desire that

the relations of the English-speaking

peoples will be so consolidated that

they may act as one people. /One of the

conditions of improvement is that the

help given to the deserving poor will

be removed from the taint of Poor Law

associations.

, 6. The decorative second or third

rson shall as in the quotation

ollowing is an archaism, before using which, as before using other archaisms, a writer should ve sure that his style in general will stand comparison with that of thefew who have archaized to good purpose:— You shall have watched, . at may be, the ways of birds & beasts in a garden or wood for a lifetime; & your friend,[the first time that you show him your preserves] shall straightway walk up the leverets, or point out the gold crest’s nest which ~ have always wanted to find.

o-one will suggest that that is a maliciously chosen specimen; it is better than nine out of ten that one comes upon in the newspapers; but one who has a real right to this shall would have put otherwise ‘ the first time that you show him your preserves’ & the ‘ nest which you have always wanted to find’. Distin-

shed from this, far less conscious

artificial, but also better avoided. is the use of second or third person shali that may be called the oracularseins:—It has already found an

red place in our national col-

3 there will come a time when collectors shall fight for tt. ,

shallow has -er, -es$; -ER & -EST 1.

sham. S. fight should not be hyphened; &te HyPHEns 8 B.

shame, vb, makes -mable; MUTE E.

shamefaced, -fast. It is true that the second is the original form, that -faced is due to a mistake, & that the notion attached to the word is necessarily affected in some slight degree by the change. But those who, in the flush of this discovery, would revert to -fast in ordinary use are rightly rewarded with the name of pedants; see PRIDE OF KNOW- LEDGE. To use shamefast as an acknowledged archaism in verse is another matter.

shamefacedly. Four syllables; see -EDLY.

shampoo. Past -poo’d or_-pooed; see -ED & ’D.

™=--:
