page: 530

+ shanghal. Pronounce -hi; for past & p.p. -aied or -ai'd, see -ED & ’D. shanty, sailors’ song. See CHANTY. shape. For in any 8. or form see Pieonasm 2; Lord A— states that ‘he is absolutely unconnected i. a. 8. o.f. with the matter’. The verb makes -pable; see MuTE E. The p.p. is -ed, & -en is archaic.

shapely. For the adv., see -LILY.

shard. In the sense fragment of pottery, the OED treats shard as the norma! form & sherd as the variant; on the other hand, the greater familiarity of potsherd tends to keep sherd in being. In the well-known phrase ‘the shard-borne beetle ’, the interpretation ‘ borne through the air on shards” (i.e. the wing-cases), which has so far prevailed as to set up shard as an entomological term for wingcase, appears to be an error; the real meaning was ‘ born in shard ’, there being another word shard, now obsolete except in dialects, meaning cowdung.

share makes -rable; see MUTE E.

sharp, adv. In such phrases as

Lup s., turn s. round, at eight o’clock 8., sharp is preferable to sharply; see UNIDIOMATIC -LY.

shave makes -vable; see MUTE E.

she. 1. For she & her in bad per-

sonifications (e.g. The world wants

that America can give her), see

PERSONIFICATION 1, 2.

2. Case. A few violations of ordinary

, omaarpas rules may be given; cf. HE.

want no angel, only she (read her). /

When such as her die (read she)./She

found cee attention directed to

Mary, & she herself entirely overlooked

(omit she)./But to behold her mother—

she to whom she owed her being (read

her)./It és himself that he cheers rather

than her (doubtful; see Cases). /J saw

@ yo girl whom I guessed to be she

whom I had come to meet (read her)./

Nothing must remain that will remind

us of that hated siren, the visible world,

she who by her allurements is always

tempting the artist away (read her).

sheaf. The noun has pl. -ves. For

the verb, -ve or -f, see -vE(D). 580

+ sheep yesterday; . the bar into foot-lengths, the nap quit short; This pressure sheared the rwets), shore in archaic & poetical use (shore

+ moner in most senses than sheared, * but is not used in the technical sense through the cutrass, his plume away, &c.). Forthe p.p.,shorn remains com . ™ § of distorted by mechanical shear, nor usually in that of divided with metalcutting shears.

shear-hulk, shearlegs, sheer-. The spelling sheer is due to & perpetuates a mistake. Shears or shearlegs are two (or more) poles with tops joined & feet straddled (& so resembling shear-blades), used in hoisting great weights. A shear-hulk is an old ship utilized for hoisting & provided with shearlegs. The spelling sheer hulk results from confusion with the adjective sheer \ e. mere), & the omission of the hyphen & shifting of the accent from shear to hulk naturally follows, assisted by the rhythm of the line in Tom Bowling. It would be well to restore shear-hulk & make shearlegs (already often so spelt) invariable.

sheath(e). The noun (-th) is pro-

nounced in sing. -th, but in pl. dha

see -TH & -DH. For noun (-th, 50

pronounced) & verb cn pron. -dh)

see Noun & VERB 2 LK.

sheave, vb. See SHEAF.

sheep. Pl.same; see COLLECTIVES.

sheer hulk. See SHEAR-HULE.

sheer(ly). They would say the money

, to the present, been sheerly

wasted./A. collection of brief pieces in

which the sheerly poetical quality ts

seldom looked for & seldom occurs.

The economic condition of the peop

in Germany is sheerly desperate.

Perhaps owing to the adverbial use

of sheer (fell sheer down &c.), the

adverb sheerly is usually avoided,

& always gives the reader a shock;

though the OED quotes it from

Burns, Scott, & Stevenson, it may fairly be called unidiomatic; posa- |

bly it is current in Scotland; at any
