page: 532

shove makes -vable; see MUTE E.

abba 1. The verb makes -lled, -lling; see -LL-, -L-. 2. Shovel hat, not shovel-hat; see HyPHEnNs 8 B.

show. For spelling see sH—ew. The p.p. is usu. shown, rarely showed.

» vb. In the Pe ee & shred are both old th extant; the longer is recommended.

shriek. See SCREAM.

shrievalty. See SHERIFFALTY.

cand Pronounce the adjective (poetic by-form of shrill) shri’li, the advert shri’]-li.

shrink has past shrank (arch. shrunk), p.p. Rape shrunk as verb or pred. adj., & shrunken as attrib. adj.: has shrunk, ts shrunk or shrunken, her shrunken or shrunk cheeks.

shrivel makes -lled &c.; -LL-, -L-.

shy. The adj. makes shyer, ‘shyest, shyly, shyness, shyish. The vb makes shter (shying horse). See pry, & VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

ean fe vac eee TERMS.

sibyl(line e spelling (not sybishould be noted; see ve I. cans

(sic), Latin for so, is inserted after @ quoted word or phrase to confirm its accuracy as a quotation, or occasionally after the writer’s own word to emphasize it as giving his deliberate meaning; it amounts to Yes, he did say that, or Yes, I do mean that, in spite of your natural doubts. It should be used only when doubt ts natural; but reviewers & controversialists are tempted to pretend that it is, because (sic) provides them with a neat & compendious form of sneer. The industrialist organ is inclined to regret that the league did not fix some definite date such as the year 1910 (sic) or the year 1912. (sic), because the reader might naturally wonder whether 1910 was meant & not rather 1911 ; a right use. /The Boersen Courier maintains that ‘ nothing remains for M. Delcassé but to cry Pater peccavi to Germany & to retrieve as quickly as possible his diplomatic mistake (sic)’. Mistake is the natural term

582

+ for the quoted newspaper;) 0, in orc? BE used; the quoting one very , 7, sipefluously repudiates it with (acl. An Irish peer has tssued a ct » der members in the House, with an ae for funds to carry on the

* enlightening (sic) the people o country as to the condition o IrePY ood What impudence! says (ey: ; bu: t, as no-one would doubt the authen-' ticity of enlightening, the proper appeal to attention was not (stc), but inverted commas./‘ A junior subaliern, with pronounced military & litical views, with no false modesty in expressing them, & who (sic) Aisa the ear of the public

a uoter means ‘ Observe by the a wn fellow’s ignorance of grammar; & who without a preceding who! ; as the sentence is one of those in which the &-who rule of thumb is a blind guide (see WHIcH), & is in fact blameless, the (sic) recoils, as often, & convicts its user of error.

Sice, size, syoe. For the six at dice &c., sice is better than size; for the Indian groom, syce is better than sice.

sick. The S. Man; see SOBRIQUETS.

sick, ill, The original & more

neral sense of sick, which has now

n transferred for the most part to tl, was suffering from any bodily disorder. That sense remains to it in attributive use (s. people, a 8. child, &c.), but is now uncommon in predicative use (be, feel, s.), in which it Means vomiting or ready to vomit. In U.S. & Scotch use the wider sense is still common, & cf. go sick as the army phrase for declaring oneself ill. Instead of either tller or sicker, more ill or more 8., worse is the comparative wherever it would not be ambiguous.

sick headache. No hyphen; see Hypsens 8 B.

sickly. For adverb see -LiLy.

SIDE-SLIP. The grammatical accident to which a name is here given is most often brought about by the
