page: 533

+ word of, & in the article oF its nature been so fully explained that nothing more is now required than some examples of the same accident not caused by of. In the first half-dozen quotations, other preposvon play the part of of; in the

ater ones the mistakes, though due also to the disturbing influence of what has been said on what is to be said, are not of quite the same pattern, & will need slightly more comment:—... possessing full initiative after its success, & at will to expend a minimum force in defending ttself against one half of the defeated body, a mazimum effort against destroying the other half (in, for the second against). /But there is one that deserves special mention because it lies at the root of the nation’s con ce in the Navy & in the Navy’s own cohesion as a loyal & united service (read of for the second in)./Their tnierest lies in getting through as quickly as possible in order to put am an extra journey, & consequently to avoid waiting for passengers (read in avoiding for to avoid)./In a plea for the setting aside of this accord, or at least for certain parts of the accord, by the Conference, the ‘Temps’ intimates that ... (read of for the second for)./The Independents would then be in the position tn which the pledged Liberals now are of being

to appear on a platform or helping any Liberal movements in

Miscellaneous

Today we can but be thankful that the nerve of Fisher proved cool at the crisis, & that to him we mainly owe o a we ied ais record a vihasrds of almost historical importancé in history of the rai . Who is Fisher, that we should prefer him as saviour to other signalmen? The

+ second thaf is there only because the first has sent the writer off at a tangent. To mend, a, omit the second that; or, 6, insert feel before it; or, c, omit ‘to him we mainly owe it that ’./It would not be surprising if this limit were reduced to £125, the German limit, while voluntary insurance were still allowed for persons with incomes up to {£160 a year. The legitimate & normal (but not necessary) subjunctive were reduced draws the writer into the abnormal & almost illegitimate were (instead of was) allowed; for the perils of subjunctive-using, see Sus- JUNCTIVE./If it can be done, & only if it can be done, shall we be in the

sition to re-establish cwitlization.

e intervention of the parenthesis with its only is allowed to upset the order of words, viz we 8 be, rei by the start of the sentence; this variety of side-slip is further illustrated in INVERSION in parallel clauses./Whether the cessation of rioting, looting, & burning which has been secured largely by the declaration of martial law & rigorous shooting of leaders of the rabble is merely temporary or has been put an end to for good remains to seen. If the cessation of rioting has been put an end to for good, a lively time is coming. To mend, read permanent instead of the words just italicized; & for this variety see Haziness./ He therefore came round to the view that simple Bible-teaching were better abolished altogether & the open door for ali religions were established in its place. The deadly subjunctive again; if the writer had been content with would be in place of the first were, he would certainly not have been trapped into thinking that would be gave the right sense where the second were stands; but venturing on dangerous ground, which the subjunctive always is except to skilled performers, he sideslips. See SUBJUNCTIVE.

sidle makes -dling; see MUTE E.

sidy (swaggering), not -dey; -EY &-y.
