page: 538

+ observer facing, the shield. For bar, baton, bend, 8., see BAR.

sink, vb. 1. Past tense sank or sunk, the former now prevailing, especially in intransitive senses. 2. Sunk(en). The longer form is no longer used as part of a compound passive verb: the ship would have been, will be, was, sunk, not sunken. But sunken has not a corresponding monopoly of the adjectival uses: sunken eyes; a sunken (or sunk) rock; a sunk or sunken ship; a sunk (or sunken) fence; sunk carving; a sunk panel, shelf, storey. Roughly, sunken is used of what has sunk or is (without reference to the agency) in the position that results from sinking, I.e. it is an INTRANSITIVE P.P.; & sunk is used of what has becn sunk esp. by human agency.

sinus. Pl. -uses, or (see LATIN PLURALS) sinus (-iis).

Sioux. Pronounce 806 or sii. Pi. spelt Sioux & pronounced like sing., or with final z sound.

sipahee, -hi. For the use of these instead of the established sepoy see MAHOMET, DIDACTICISM.

siphon, not sy-. See y & I.

sir (as prefix). To say Str Jones is, more than to say Hon. or Rev. Jones, a mistake peculiar to foreigners. But newspaper writers often (1) forget, as with HON., that a doublebarrelled surname will not do instead of Christian name & surname, & (2) play foolish games of elegant variation when a knight or baronet

has two Christian names, ringing the

changes between Sir William Jones,

Sir Henry Jones, Sir William Henry

Jones, Sir William, & Sir Henry;

Sir William Jones, Sir W. Jones, &

Sir William, are surely enough to _ provide relief.

siren, not sy-. See y & I.

Sirius. The OED pronounces sl-,

not si-; for neglect of classical

quantities see FALSE QUANTITY.

sirloin. The knighting of the loin

attributed to various kings seems

to have been suggested by, & not to

+ have suggested, the compound word; it has, however, so far affected the spelling (which should have shown French sur=upper) that sir- may now be taken as fixed.

sirocco, sci-. Both forms exist in Italian. The OED gives the first for the standard English spelling.

sirup. See SYRUP.

sirvente. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

sister, in hospital use, is applied properly to one in charge of a ward &c., or in authority over other nurses— matron, sisters, nurses, wardmaids, being the hierarchy. But s. is often substituted, especially by soldiers in hospital, as a courtesy title, for nurse.

sisterly. For the adv., see -LILY.

situate(d). The short form is still common in house-agents’ advertisements, but elsewhere out of favour.

sixain. For these words see -8TICH.

sixteenmo. See FOLIO. Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 6.

sixth. Often mispronounced sikth.

sixties, sixties. See TWENTIES.

sixtyfourmo, 64mo. See FOLIO, Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 6.

sizable. So spelt; see MUTE E.

sizy (stiff with size). So spelt; see MUTE E.

The OED pronounces

sjambok. sham-.

skald, sc-, Scandinavian poct. The OED preferred form is sk-.

skate makes -table; see MUTE E.

skedaddle. FAcETIOUS FORMATIONS.

See SKI.

skene, skean, skian, skain. The OED preferred form is skene.

skeptic(al), skepsis, &c. The established pronunciation (see SCEPTIC) is sk-, whatever the spelling; &, with the frequent modern use of septic & sepsis (the latter a 19th-c. word only), it is well that it should be so for fear of confusion; but to spell sc- & pronounce sk- is to put

a needless difficulty in the way of

the unlearned. America spells sk-;

we might pocket our pride & copy.

skew, adj., though still current

technically, e.g. in architecture,
