page: 545

+ SO, 3 @ study of an elderly widower who, | on approaching sizty, finds that he knows hardly anything of his three daughters, & sets out to do so. For similar absurdities, which are too ge ier see DO 3b, c.

e appealing so. The t is Cricket is so uncertain. The apealer has a conviction borne in pe him, & in stating it appeals, with his so, to general experience to confirm him; it means as you, or az we all, know. A natural use, but more suitable for conversation, where the responsive nod of confirmation can be awaited, than for most kinds of writing. In print, outside dialogue, it has a certain air of silliness, even when the context is favourable, i.e. when the sentence is of the shortest

& simplest kind, & the experience

appealed to is really general. Read-

ers will probably agree that in all

the following extracts the context is

not favourable; & the only object

of emetic yy Brg cng of them is to

give proof that the r of yield-

ing to this weakness (‘ feminine ’ it

would have been called before the

ladies had learnt to write) is a real

one. The principle underlying the

restriction to short simple sentences

is perhaps that this use of so is _exclamatory. The examples arc

‘ranged from bad to worse:—Zn the

case of hthalmology in the tropics

@ work o ee

due./Mr Stephen Walsh is, like so

many of the miners’ leaders, a man

alge shea audits she sald bes

them ingeniously, though in instanct

this very real power we feel that tt

might have been so much more satis-

factorily expended./May I venture to

otha out that % would be so much

to make them freely & willingly

than to have them wrung from her?/

Beyond what so many people regard

as the consoling fact that it was not

destined for the cabinets or shelves of

an American millionaire, it was not

1351 545

+ known until now who was the happy purchaser./The book is written in a simple style which is foreign to so many lawyers./He was always kind, considerate, & courteous to his witnesses, this being so contrary to what we are led to expect from his successors. / Constant betel-chewing, he thinks, may be ‘the predisposing factor producing a condition of nervous irritability that so easily might degenerate info latah ’./The periodical discussions incidentally serve to show how tn Scotland as in England so ty of those interested in matters of this kind are town-dwellers.

4 The Paterine so. This is a

ial form of the appealing so:

n the midst of that aesthetically so brilliant world of Greater Greece is an example. The so is deliberately inserted before a descriptive adjective, & is a way of saying, at once urbancly & conciscly, Has it ever

to you how brilliant &c. it was?; it differs from the sos in 8, that is, in being not careless & natural, but didactic & highly artificial. Effective enough on occasion, it is among the idioms that should never be allowed to remind the reader, by being repeated, that he has already met them in the last hundred pages or so. See MANNER- 1sms for more examples from Pater himself; & here, from imitators, are others:—Here an Englishman has set himself to follow in outline the very distinctive genius of Russia through the centuries of tts difficult but always so attractive development./And still no one came to open that huge, contemptuous door with tls so Menacing, 80 tile air.

5. So (& such) in repetition. From the artificial to the entirely artless. So is a much used word, but not indispensable enough to justify such repetitions of it as the following:— The pity is that for so many men who can s0 hardly keep pace with rising prices tt should become so difficult to follow the sport./It would do away with any suggestion of State purchase of which the country is at the present
