page: 546

+ time so nervous, as it would necessitate such large borrowing of money, which, in the present financial condition of the country, is so inadvisable. / The situation was well in hand, but wu had so far developed so little that nothing useful can be said about it, save that so far the Commander-in-Chief was satisfied.

6. So with p.p. The distinction usually recognized with vERyY between a truly verbal & an adjectival p-p. is not applicable to so; but it is well worth while, before writing plain so, to decide between it & so much, so well, &c. The insertion of much in the first & well in the second quotation after so is certainly desirable:—Admiral Faracelli reports that Tripoli batteries have been so damaged that Turkish soldiers have been forced to retire into town. /Ireland being mainly an agricultural country, é& England industrial, the Bill is not so suited to Ireland as to this country.

7. The explanatory so. Type: He could not move, he was so cold. The second member is equivalent to a sentence beginning with for, & the idiom is mainly, but not solely, colloquial. What requires notice is that, when it is used in formal writing, it is spoilt if for, whose work is being done for it by so, is allowed to remain as a supernumerary. Two examples follow, the first right, the second wrong:—The dangers of the situation seem to us very real & menacing; both sides, in maintaining a firm attitude, may so easily find themselves bluffing over the edge into the precipice./It would seem particularly fitting that an American professor of literature should discuss the subject of Convention & Revolt, for en that country the two tendencies are at present so curiously & incongruously mingled.

8. So with superlatives & absolutes. So, when it qualifies adjectives & adverbs, meuns to such a degree or extent; it is therefore not to be applied to a superlative, as in The difficult & anxious negotiations in which he kas taken so foremost a part

546

+ in Paris. Nor to words that are felt not to admit of degrees (* absolutes ’, for convenience), including, besidesessential positives like unique, such indefinites as some, several. Among the latter is oft-times, though often is not, & ‘so oft-times’ is as wrong, though not as unlikely, as ‘so sometimes ’:—And now, as it so ofttimes happens, the pupil well may claim to have out-passed the master.

sober makes soberer, -est; see -ER & -EsT 1 b.

sobriquet, sou-. The first is much longer established in English, besides being the only modern French form. Pron. s0’‘brika.

SOBRIQUETS. Under this heading, for want of a better, are here collected a hundred or so out of the thousands of secondary names that have become so specially attached to particular persons, places, or things, as to be intelligible when used instead of the primary names, each of which is thus provided with a deputy or a private pronoun. The deputy use is seen in ‘ It was carried to the ears of that famous hero & warrior, the Philosopher of Sans Souci’, where ‘t. P. 0. S. S.” acts for Frederick the Great; & the private-pronoun use in ‘* He employed his creative faculty for about twenty years, which is as much, I suppose, as Shakspere did; the Bard of Avon is another example .. .’, where *t. B. o. A.” means Shakspere or the latter. Some names have a large retinue of sobriquets; Rome, e.g., may be the Eternal City, the City of the Seven Hills, the Papal City, the Scarlet Woman, the Scarlet Whore, the Empress of the Ancient World, the Western Babylon; Mr Warner may be Plum, or P. F., or the Middlesex Captain, or the Recoverer of the Ashes; & neither’s list of sobriquets is half told.

Now the sobriquet habit is not a thing to be acquired, but a thing to be avoided; & the selection that follows is compiled for the purpose not of assisting but of discouraging
