page: 547

+ it. The writers most of all addicted to it are the sporting reporters; games & contests are exciting to take part in, interesting or even exciting also to watch, Sut essentially (i.e. as bare facts) dull to read about, insomuch that most intelligent people abandon such reading; the reporter, conscious that his matter & his audience are both dull enough to require enlivening, thinks that the needful fillip may be given if he calis fishing the gentle craft, a ball the pill or the leather, a captain the skipper, or a saddle the pigskin, & so makes his description a@ series of momentary puzzies that shall pleasantly titillate inactive minds. Here is a Times reviewer, who sighs over ‘ One sad fault, which runs through this, &, alas! a good many other excellent books—the habit of seldom calli a spade a spade. Does it really help, or is it really humorous, to call the fox ** Charles James’, a hare ‘“‘ Madam”, @ nose a “ proboscis”, & Wales

** Taffyland ’’’ ? Of course, a sporting book will tend to use sporting

expressions; but a good deal of this irritating circumlocution is unnecespath & might well be left for

colloquial use ’.

It is by no means true, however,

that the use of sobriquets is confined

to this, or to any, class of writers;

the Philosopher of Sans Souci & the

Bard of Avon quoted above are

from Thackeray & Conan Doyle,

though they are unfavourable speci-

mens of those authors’ styles. And,

moreover, the sobriquet deputy has

its true uses; just us Bacon knows

of ‘things graceful in a friend’s

mouth, which are blushing in a

man’s own’, so the sobriquet may

often in a particular context be

more efficient than the proper name;

though ‘the Papal City’ means

Rome, its substitution may be a

serviceable reminder, when that is

appropriate, that Rome in one of

its aspects only is intended. Again, many sobriquets have succeeded, -

like mayors of the palace, in usurp- 547

+ ing all or some of their principals’ functions; the Young Pretender is actually more intelligible, & therefore rightly more used, than Charles Edward, & to insist on ‘ came over with William I’ in preference to ‘with the Conqueror’ would be absurd.

No universal condemnation of sobriquets, therefore, is possible; but even the better sort of journalist, seldom guilty of such excesses as the sporting reporter, is much tempted to use them without considering whether they tend to illuminate or to obscure; ‘ the exile of Ferney ’, he feels, at once exhibits his own easy familiarity with Voltaire the man (Voltaire the word, by the way, is itself one of the mayorof-the-palace sobriquets) & gratifies such of his readers as know who is meant; as for those who may not know, it will be good for them to realize that their newspaper is more cultured than they. The sobriquet style, developed on these lines, is very distasteful to all readers of discretion. Those who may become aware, in glancing through the following alphabetical selection, that these & similar substitutes are apt to occur frequently in their own writing should regard it as a very serious symptom of perverted taste for cheap ornament. In most of the expressions an initial the is to be supplied:—Abigail (lady’s-maid); Albion (Great Britain); Alma Mater (university); Black Watch (Royal Highlanders); Bruin(bear); Chanticleer (cock); Coeur de Lion (Richard I); Conqueror (William I); Cousin Jack (Cornishman); dismal science

Political Economy); Emerald Isle

Ireland); Empire City (New York); Erin(Ireland); Eternal City (Rome); Eton of the North (any northern public school); Father of History (Herodotus); Father of Lies (Satan); First Gentleman of Europe (Geor IV); gamp (umbrella); Ganymede (waiter); Garden of England (Kent); Gaul (France); Gilded Chamber (House of Lords); G.O.M. (Glad-
