page: 554

+ that most reformers are so much more awake to the obvious advantages of change than to its less obvious evils that we cannot trust them with the disposal of so vastly important a matter; & finally that English had better be treated in the English way, & its spelling not be revolutionized but amended in detail, here a little & there a little as absurdities become intolerable, till a result is attained that shall neither overburden schoolboys nor stultify intelligence nor outrage the scholar. In this book some modest attempts are made at cleaning up the more obtrusive untidinesses; certain inconsistencies have been regarded as, in the present diffusion of literacy, no longer required of us. known type theoretic-radical practical-conservative covers perhaps a majority of our population, & its influence is as sound & sane in the sphere of spelling as elsewhere.

2. Double & single consonants. If a list were made of the many thousands of words whose spelling cannot be safely inferred from their sound, the doubtful point in perhaps*nine tenths of them would be whether some single consonantal sound was given by a single cansonant, as m or t or c, a double consonant, as mm or tt, or two or more, 1s sc or cq or sch; committee & comity, science & silence, tic & tick, harass & embarrass & Paris, leveled & unparalleled, personify & personnel, Britain & Brittany, bivouac & bivouacking, acquiesce & aqueduct, schist & ship, are examples enough. The use of double consonants (tt &c.) or two consonants (ck &c.) to give a single sound is due sometimes to the composition of a word, as when in- not & nocens harmful are combined to make innocent, sometimes to the convention by which the sound of a preceding vowel tends to be of one kind (4 € 16 &) before one consonant & of another (& € J 5 tj) before two, & sometimes to factors in wordformation philologically explicable, or inexplicable, but less obvious The well-

554

+ than in compounds like innocent. Of these causes the only one that has @ meaning for anyone who knows no language but English is the convention of vowel sounds; he is aware that much more often than not a distinction analogous to that between holy & holly exists; but the interference of the other causes is so incalculable & so frequent that he soon finds it hopeless to rely upon the principle in doubtful cases. Hence a large proportion of the tears shed over spelling. Little relief can be given; the words in which sound is no guide to whether there is one consonant or two are not a score or so of which a list could be made & Icarnt, but thousands; nothing short of a complete spelling-book will serve the turn of a really weak speller, though it is true that a short list can be made of words in which mi are especially common, & that some classes of mistuke can be guarded against by rules. Such a list is best made by each person who finds himself in need of it, out of his own experience & to suit his own requirements; a few words that will usually be included are harass, embarrass, disappoint, disappear, unparalleled, accommodate, Britain, Brittany, Britannta, committec, abbreviate, all right, banister, battalion, bilious, Boniface, Buddha, bulrush, bunion, camellia, canonical, chicory, clef, desiccated, moccasin, exaggerate, woollen, saddler, skilful; it is worth remark that words presenting two opportunities for mistake like disappoint (dissap-, disapp-, dissapp-, disap-), or three like unparalleled, are more than two or three times as dangerous as others, temptations to assimilate or dissimilate the two or more treatments being added to the doubled or trebled opportunity.

The rules referred to above are those that govern the doubling or not of a word’s final consonant when suffixes are added in inflexion or word-formation. Directions are given for the various consonants
