page: 560

+ SPLIT INFINITIVE, 5 deliberately rejecting the trammels of convention & announcing that he means to do as he will with his own infinitives. But, as the following examples are from newspapers of high repute, & high newspaper tradition is strong against splitting, it is perhaps fair to assume that each specimen is a manifesto of indc-

ndence:—It will be found possible

considerably improve the present wages of the miners without jeopardizing the interests of capital./ Always providing that the Imperialists do not feel strong enough to decisively assert their power in the revolted provinces. /But even so, he seems to still be allowed to speak at Unionist demonstrations./It is the intention of the Minister of Transport to substantially increase all present rates by means of a gencral percentage./The men_ in many of the largest districts are declared to strongly favour a strike if the minimum wage is not conceded.

It should be noticed that in these the separating adverb could have been placed outside the infinitive with little or in most cascs no damage to the sentence-rhythm (considerably after miners, decisively after vers, still with clear gain after be, substantially after rates, & strongly at some loss after strike), so that protest secms a safe diagnosis.

5. The attitude of those who know & distinguish is something like this: We admit that separation of to from its infinitive (viz be, do, have, stt, doubt, kill, or other verb inflexionally similar) is not in itself desirable, & we shall not gratuitously say either ‘to mortally wound’ or ‘to mortally be wounded’; but we are not foolish enough to confuse the latter with ‘to be mortally wounded’, which is blameless English, nor ‘to just have heard ’ with ‘to have just heard’, which is also blameless. We maintain, however, that a real s.i., though not desirable in itself, is preferable to cither of two things, { to real ambiguity, & to patent artificiality. For the first, we will

560

ok

i

SPLIT INFINITIVE, 5 rather write ‘Our object is to further cement trade relations’ than, by correcting into ‘ Our object is further to cement .. .’, leave it doubtful whether an _ additional object or additional cementing is the point.; And for the second, we take it that such reminders of a tyrannous convention as ‘in not combining to forbid flatly hostilities ’ are far more abnormal than the abnormality they evade. We will split infinitives sooner than be ambiguous or artificial; more than that, we will freely admit that sufficient recasting will get rid of any s.i. without involving either of those faults, & yet reserve to ourselves the right of deciding in each case whether recasting is worth while. Let us take an cxample: ‘ In these circumstances, the Commission, judging from the evidence taken in

ndon, has been feeling its way to modifications intended to better equip successful candidates for careers in India & at the same time to meet reasonable Indian demands’. To betterequip? We refuse * better

equip ’ as a shouted reminder of

tyranny; we refuse ‘to equip better” as ambiguous (better an adjective?); we regard ‘to equip successful candidates better’ as lacking compactness, as _ possibly tolerable from an anti-splitter, but not good enough for us. What then of recasting? ‘intended to make successful candidates fitter for’ is the best we can do if the exact sense is to be kept; it takes some thought to arrive at the correction; was the game worth the candle?

After this inconclusive discussion, in which, however, the author's opinion has perhaps been allowed to appear with indecent plainness, readcrs may like to settle for themselves whether, in the following sentence, ‘cither to secure’ followed by ‘ to resign ’, or ‘to either secure ° followed by ‘resign’, should have been preferred—an issue in which the meaning & the convention are pitted against each other:—The

4

\
