page: 561

+ speech has drawn an_ interesting fetter from Sir Antony MacDonnell, who states that his agreement with Mr Wyndham was never cancelled, & that Mr Long was too weak either to secure the dismissal of Sir Antony or himself to resign office.

It is perhaps hardly fair that this article should have quoted no split infinitives except such as, ing reasonably supposed (as in 4) to be deliberate, are likely to be favourable specimens. Let it therefore conclude with one borrowed from a reviewer, to whose description of it no exception need be taken: ‘ book ... of which the purpose is thus—with a deafening split infinitive—stated by its author:—“ Its main idea is ( historically, even while events 7 are maturing, & divinely—from the Divine point of view—impeach the European system of Church & States ”’.’.

SPLIT VERBS. There can be little doubt that the position of his troops all the way from Berat northward will seriously be imperilled. For questions such as that su by the last four words of this, see Posit1 OF ADVERBS, 4.

splodge, splotch. The second is two centuries older; the first perhaps now more usual & felt to be more descriptive; cf. sLusH, & SMUDGE.

splutter, sputter. Without any clear or constant difference of meaning, it may be said that in sputter the notion of spitting is more insistent, & that it tends on that account to be avoided when that notion is not essential.

spoil. For spoiled, -lt, see -T & -ED.

-spoken. For the curious use in Jair, free, soft, out, &c., -s (where soft-speeched &c. might have been expected), see INTRANSITIVE P.P.

It should be remembered that in these compounds fair- &c. are ad-

verbial as much as out-, & that what is remarkable is not the adverbial

use of the adjective, but the active

use of the participle. 561

spondee. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

sponge makes eable, see -ABLE 1; but sponging & spongy, see MUTE E.

spontaneity,-ousness. -Ty & -NESS.

Kk. Pronounce -66k.

spoondrift. See sP1iNDRIFT.

spoon(e)y. The adjective should be -ny, see -EY & -y; for the noun, in which either is legitimate, & -cy probably more frequent, -Ey, -IE, -y.

spoonful. Pl. fuls; see -FUL.

spouse. For the use in ordinary writing in preference to wife, see ForRMAL WoRDS; but s. is serviceable as short for husband-or-wife in some styles, e.g. in dictionaries or legal documents.

(strain. It is natural to wish for a clear line of distinction between two words that, as applied to bodily injurics, are so near in sense & both so well established; but even in medical books they are often treated as equivalent. Sprain, pérhaps, describes the result rather of a momentary wrench or twist, & strain that of an exertion of muscle too strong or too long foritscapacity.

spray, nn., make sprayey; see -EY & -y, exception 1.

spray, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 1.

g. The past sprang is considerably more frequent than sprung, both in trans. & in intrans. senses.

spring, n. The compounds, like those of sEA, are of interest to the hyphen-fancier. For the principle, see HyPHens 8 B; spring-bed, spring - mattress, ing- gun, are usually forbidden by the accent, & must be changed to two words each; spring -time & spring-board are

lowed by accent, unless ingtime & springboard are preferred; springtide or raids ed can stand only for the season, & the tidal oon must rm cart “ill usually be two eis

ing tide in two words; spring(may be hyphened when all the stress is on spring & a spring-cart is to be distinguished from other carts & not from vehicles in general.
