page: 562

springbok. So spelt. .springe (snare). Pronounce -j. . sprung. Carriages well cushioned & springed./Chotce easy chair, with cane arms, well s;

inged is more reasonable, as formed from the noun; cf. STRINGED.

t. See sTRINGHALT.

The words are to a considerable extent interchangeable; sprint is, at least apart from dialectal use, a 19th-c. word only, spurt goin further back, but the newer wo is displacing the older; a short race, or a run at high speed, is now a sprint, while for a quickening of pace, or a spasmodic effort bodily or mental, spurt is still the more usual term, but is tending to be displaced even in these senses; if that tendency could be checked, the Dirrer- ENTIATION would be useful.

spry makes spryer, spryest, spryly,

, Spryish; see DRY.

spue. See sPEw.

spur. See PRONUNCIATION, 8.f., for spurring.

spurt. For s. & spirt, see SPIRT; for 8. & sprint, see SPRINT.

sputter. See SPLUTTER.

sputum. PI. -ia. Spy. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c¢., 6.

squalid makes -dest; -ER & -EsT, 4.

squalor, not -our; see -ouR & -or.

squandermania(c). A FAcETIOUS FORMATION.

square makes squarable & squarish, see MoTE £; square leg should have no hyphen, see Hypuens 3 B.

squeeze makes -zable; see -aBLE 1.

squib. For synonymy see LAMPOON.

e . Though ‘the spelling with e has been by far the more usual’ (OED), the spelling without it is preferable (see MuTE £), & Sydaey Smith & FitzGerald appear among its patrons in the OED quotations.

-§-,-SS-. The general rules for the doubling or not doubling of final consonants before suffixes can be seen in the articles -N-, -NN-, & -P-, -PP- ; 80 few monosyllables or words

562

.

+ here stated; it will suffice to that: fabric) gives -ases (pl. n.), -ased, too orchises, nimbuses, portcullised, frellised, boluses, bonuses, incubuses, (3) Nonplas St. For the question between Sf Peter & St. Peter &c., see PERtiop atlases, cutlases, &c. makes nonplussed. IN ABBREVIATIONS stable, adj., makes stably, stability, stabilize, so spelt.

stadium. PI. -dta. staff. 1. Pl. in music & in archaic senses staves, see -vF(D); in modern 2. For s. of life see senses staffs. SOBRIQUETS.

stag. See HART. stage makes stageable (see -ABLE 1), stagy (see -EY & -y); of the chief compounds, stage-craft & stage-struck should be hyphened or coalesce, s. coach & 8. manager should be hyphened or separated (usually the latter) according to the stregs re- quired, & most others should be two words each—stage direction, stage door, stage effect, stage fever, stage fright, stage whisper; for the principle see HyPHEns 3 B.

Stagirite. The S.; see SoOBRIQUETS.

stake, vb, makes stakable; MuTEE.

stalactite, stalagmite. Stress on the first, not the second, syllables is recommended; RECESSIVE ACCENT.

stale makes staiable, stalish, stalety; see MUTE E.

stalk, stem, trunk. Séalk is the stem of a plant less than tree or shrub; trunk is the stem of a large STALK accented on the last syllable end in a single -s that rules need not be 1) The plural of ogg A usually es; this irregularity is explained by the fact that buses is still regarded as an abbreviation of the regular omnibuses; when that is forgotten (& bus is now more usual than ’bus), doubtless buses will become, as it should, busses. (2) Biases & focuses, nn. or vv., biased & Seiad are said by the OED te *more regular’ than the -ss- forms that are nevertheless common in England; similarly canvas sae 80
