page: 568

+ sense. /Sttuated, as we are, with our vast & varied overseas possessions, our gigantic foreign trade, & our unapproachable mercantile marine, we at any rate can gain nothing by war fread Situated as). We should write not ‘ How, are we situated?’, but ‘ How are we situated?’; the as clause is exactly parallel to, & as essential as, how./We are assured that the Prime Minister will, in no circumstances & on no consideration whatever, consent to... (read will tn no circumstances . . . whatever consent). The words that negative will must not be cut off from it. Similarly: The principals were, neither of them, of a class that ordinarily appears in the dock of the Old Bailey (read were neither of them of).

D. In confluences, i.e. when alternatives &c. finish their course together, the necessary comma after the second is apt to be forgotten.

As regards the form of the festival, many, if not most of the customs popularly associated with it may, perhaps, be traced to . . . (read most, of)./His craftsmanship, again, was superb—more refined, more intellectual than that of Frith (read intellectual, than).

EK. In compound appendages to names. Mr F. Haverfield has collected & edited a volume of * Essays by Henry Francis Pelham, Late President of Trinity College, Ozford & Camden Professor of History’ (read Ozford, &).

¥F. In ambiguous appositions. Insertion or omission of commas is seldom a sufficient remedy, & indeed is usually impossible. The thing is to remember that arrangements in which apposition commas & enumeration commas are mixed up are dangerous & should be avoided.

To the expanded ‘ Life of Shakespeare ’, first published in 1915, & to be issued shortly in a third edition by Mr Murray, the atthor, Sir Sidney Lee, besides bringing the text up to date, has contributed a new preface. Which is the author?/ Some high officials of the Headquarter

568

+ Staff, including the officer who is primus inter pares, the Director of Military Operations, & the Director of Staff duties.... How many were there going to St Ives?/Lord Curzon, Sir Edmond Elles, rardl dbie sent Military Member, & the Civilian Members of Council traverse the most material of Lord Kitchener's statements. as Sir Edmond the Military Member?

G. Omitted between connected but independent sentences, or used instead of semicolon between ynconnected sentences.

When the Motor Cars Act was before the House tt was suggested that these authorities should be given the right to make recommendations to the central authorities & that right was conceded (read authorities, <&). [ Will the mighty Times aid us in this historic struggle?’ Dear to the heart of an editor must be such an appeal, we wish someone would seck for our aid in so flattering a formula (read appeal; we).

SEMICOLON

The use of semicolons to scparate parallel expressions that would normally be se ted by commas is not in itself illegitimate; but it must not be done when the expressions so separated form a group that is to be separated by nothing more than a comma, or even not separated at all, from another part of the sentence; to do it is to make the Icss include the greater, which is absurd.

And therein lies a guarantee of peace & ultimate security, such, perhaps, as none of the States of South America; such as not even Mexico herself can boast (read America, such as not even Mexico herself, can)./If you say with the enemy pinned upon the West, suffering passively blow upon blow, c& never able to restore himself after each blow, or to recover what he has lost; with his territory blockaded; his youngest boys drawn into the struggle, that your victory is impossible; if you say... (read lost,
