page: 569

+ with his territory blockaded, his)./ If, as Mr Gibson Bowles contends,

Law of Nations is ali plain sailing; if it is a thing of certainties & plain definitions, tt would be strange that a conference of jurists shou have... (read sailing, tf).

COLON

As long as the Prayer-Book version of the Psalms continues to be read, the colon is not likely to pass quite out of use as a stop, chiefly as one preferred by individuals, or in impressive contexts, to the semicolon: but the time when it was second member of the hierarchy, full stop, colon, semicolon, comma, is past; in general usage, it is not now a stop of a certain power available in any situation demanding such a power, but has acquired a inca unction, that of deliverin the goods that have been invoice in the preceding words; it is a substitute for such verbal harbingers as viz, scil., that is to say, t.¢., &c.

FULL STOP

In abbreviations. For the use as a symbol of abbreviation, as in #.e. for id est, Capt. for Captain, & less reasonably in Mr. for Mister or Master, cwt. for hundredweighi, sec PERIOD IN ABBREVIATIONS.

In the spot plague. The style that

has been so labelled, the essence of

which is that the matter should be divided into as short lengths as

possible separated by full stops,

with few commas & no semicolons or

conjunctions, is tiring to the reader,

on whom it imposes the task of

supplying the connexion, & corrupt-

ing to the writer, whose craving for

brevity gba him that any-

thing will pass for a sentence:—

It was now clear. The light was that

of late evening. The air hardly more

than cool./They demand long years of

accurate study—even when the student

has the necessary aptitude for such

things. Which three students out of

every four have not. 569

EXCLAMATION

Not to use a mark of exclamation is sometimes wrong: How they laughed., instead of How they laughed J, is not English. Excessive use of exclamation marks is, like that of Irauics, one of the things that betray the uncducated or unpractised writer: You surprise me, How dare you?, Don’t tell such lies, are mere statement, question, & command, not converted into exclamations by the fact that those who say them are excited, nor to be decorated into You surprise me!, How dare you!, Don’t tell such lies!. It is, indeed, stated in a well-known grammar that ‘ A note of exclamation is used after words or sentences which express cmotion’, with, as example, How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! Iam distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan!. The second half of this quotation clearly violates the rule laid down above, being, however full of emotion, a simple statement, & yct having an exclamation mark. But anyone who will refer to 2 Sam. i. 26 will find that mark to be not the Bible’s, but the grammarian’s; the earlier one of verse 25 is right. So far, the inference seems obvious _& simple—to confine the exclamation to what grammar recognizes as exclamations, & refuse it to statements, questions, & commands. Exclamations in grammar are (1) interjections, as oh! ; (2) words or phrases uscd as interjections, as Heavens!, hell!, by Jove!, my God!,

reat Scott!; (8) sentences containing the exclamatory what or how, as

What a difference tt makes!, What I suffered!, How I love you!, How pretty she is!; (4) wishes propcr, as Confound you!, May we live to see it!, God forbid!; (5) Ellipses & inversions due to emotion, as Not another word!, If only I could!,

That it should have come to this!,

Much care you!, Pop goes the weasel!, A fine friend you have been! ; (6) apostrophes, as You miserable
