page: 570

+ coward!, You little dear!. It is true that the exclamation mark should be given to all expressions answering to the above types, & also that it should not be given to ordinary fully expressed statements, questions, or commands; but the matter is not quite so simple as that. Though a sentence is not to be exclamation-marked to show that it has the excited tone that its contents imply, it may & sometimes must be so marked to convey that the tone is not merely what would be natural to the words themselves, but is that suitable to scornful quotation, to the unexpected, the amusing, the disgusting, or something that needs the comment of special intonation to secure that the words shall be taken as they are meant. So: You thought tt didn’t matter!, He learnt at last that the enemy was—himself!, Each is as bad as the other, only more so!, He puts his knife in his mouth!. But not: That is a lie!, My heart was in my mouth!, Who cares!, I wish you would be quiet!, Beggars must not be choosers/!; in all these the words themselves suffice to show the tone, & the exclamation mark shows only that the writer docs not know his business.

QUESTION MARK

The chief danger is that of forgetting that whether a sct of words is a question or not, & consequently requires or repudiates the question mark, is decided not by its practical effect or sense, but by its grammatical form & relations. Those who scorn grammar are apt to take Ask him who said so for a question, & Will you please stand back for a request, & to wrongly give the first the question mark that they wrongly fail to give the second. But the first is in fact a command containing an INDIRECT QUESTION, & the question mark belongs to direct questions only, while the second is in fact a direct question, though it happens to be equivalent in sense 570

+ to a request. When the natural confusion caused by the conveying, for instance, of what is in sense @ statement in the grammatical form of a question is aggravated by the sentence’s being of considerable length—e.g. when Will tt be beliewed that is followed by several lines setting forth the incredible fact—, the question mark at the end is often, but should never be, omitted. Still more fatal is a type of sentence that may be put either as an exclamation or as a question, but must have its stop adapted to the exclamatory or interrogative nature of the what or how whose double possibilities cause the difficulty. Ilow seldom does tt happen can only be an exclamation, & must have happen!; but How often does tt happen may be either a question (answer, Once a month &c.) requiring happen?, or an exclamation (meaning, Its frequency is surprising) requiring happen!. In_ that interval what had I not lost! (either lost! should be changed to lost?, or not should be omitted)./A streak of blue below the hanging alders is certainly @ characteristic introduction to the kingfisher. How many people first see him so? (read either so! for so?, or otherwise for so).

The archness of the question mark interpolated in brackets infallibly betrays the amateur writer: Sir.— The following instance of the doubtfed advantages (7) of the Labour Ezxchanges as media ... seems to deserve some recognition.

INVERTED COMMAS

There is no universally accepted distinction between the single form (“...’) & the double (“.. .°*). The more sensible practice is to regard the single as the normal, & to resort to the double only when, as fairly often happens, an interior quotation is necessary in the middle of a p that is itself quoted. To reverse this is clearly less reasonable; but, as quotation withia quotation is much less common'thaa
