page: 571

+ the simple kind, & conspicuousness ig desired, the heavy double mark is the favourite. It may be hoped that The man who says ‘I shall write to “* The Times ”’ tonight’ will ultimately prevail over 7'he man who says “* I shall write to * The Times’ tonight”.

Questions of order between inverted commas & stops are illustrated by the following pairs, the first form being usual, but the second right:—

The first genuine ‘*‘ Collected Poems”’ admitted his stately *“*‘ Sonnet on the Nile”? only on the inducement of ** a partial friend,” a few lines from “ The Nymphs,” that fair humanity of old religion, on that same ground alone. The first genuine ‘ Collected Poems’ admitted his stately ‘ Sonnet on the Nile ’ only on the inducement of ‘a partial friend’, a few lines from ‘ The Nymphs ’, that fair humanity of old religion, on that same ground alone./Do you say, ‘© Am r my brother's keeper’? ? Do

ou say my brother’s

eeper?’?/With him it was always, ** Damn the consequences”? { With him it was always ‘ Damn the consequences! ’.

APOSTROPHE

For difficulties with this as sign of the possessive case, sec POSSESSIVE PUZZLES. For its use in avoiding certain bizarre word-forms, see -ED & ’D.

HYPHENS, ITALICS

See those articles. PARENTHESIS BRACKETS &

DOUBLE DASHES

Of these no more necd be said than

that after the second bracket or

dash any stop that would have been

used if the brackets or dashes &

their contents had not been there

should still be used. This is some-

times, but not very often, forgotten

after the second bracket; after the

second dash it is seldom remem-

bered, or rather, perhaps, is deliber-

ately neglected as fussy; but, if it is

571

+ fussy to put a stop after a dash, it is messy to pile two jobs at once upon the dash, & those to whom fussiness is repugnant should eschew the double-dash form of parenthesis except where no stop can be needed. So far as it is true—cé how far it is true does not count for much—it is an unexpected bit of truth (read much—, at). /If he abandons a pursuit it is not because he is conscious of having shot his last bolt—that is never shot— but because ... (read never shot—, but).

store, vb, makes -rable; see MUTE F.

storey. Pi. -eys, adj. -storeyed. For the curious difference in sense between s. & floor, see FLOOR.

storey,story. Whether these names for the floor & the tale are etymologically the same word or not—on which the doctors differ—, there is spellings. It is, for instance, well to know ted windows (illustrating biblical or other stories) from storeyed windows (divided by transoms into storeys). The DiFFErR- ENTIATION, however, is still a probationer, & indeed lacks the support of the OED; that is sadly against it, especially when the 19th-c. quotations are found to show -ry & -ries four times as often as -rey & -reys; but there is yet a chance that it may win through; so may it be!

storm. See WIND, n.

story. For but that is another s., see HACKNEYED PHRASES. It is not mended by variations, such as: Presently it returned. He hoped he was not to be assailed by birds. He had read a story—but never mind that now.

stouten. See -EN VERBS.

stove,=staved. See sTaveE.

Strad. See CurTAILED ube r

straight(ly). Certain members of the Labour poled like Mr Snowden, have spoken very honestly & straightly about the growth of this idea./For once, he did not mince his words on a labour question; would that he had spoken as straightly on previous occa-
