page: 576

+ c& he defies tt he may be imprisoned. / If the history of Christiantty is, as Hoffding suggests, but a world-drama which mythologizes in a passing 8 l the inner Geychological drama. if tt be but a precipitate of the tides or storms of the spiritual tmagination, tf tt be a mere jection of man’s agitated subjectivism, how can tt gi us...?/These bes are not themselves wrong; they are Survival subjunctives; but the fact that the verbs associated with them, which have subjunctives ready for usc just as much as to be, are allowed to remain indicative shows that the use of be too is mechanical & meaningless.

Were in conditionals: The correct type, a common enough *‘ Survival ’, is Were that true there were no more to say; the first were, of the protasis, is right only in combination with the other were, of the apodosis, or with its modern equivalent, would (should) be; & neither of them is applicable to past time any more than would be itself; their reference is to present or to undefincd time, or more truly not to time at all (& especially not to a particular past time) but to utopia, the realm of non-fact. If it is a hard saying that were (singular) in conditionals does not refer to past time, consider some other verb of past form in like case. Such a verb ig Soe: to past time, or it may ong to utopia: If he heard, he gave no sign (heard & Zave, past time); If he heard, how angry he would be! (heard & would be, not past time, but utopia, the realm'of non-fact or the imaginary); the first heard is indicative, the second is subjunctive, though the form happens to be the samc; in the verb be, conveniently enough, there happens to be still a distinguishable form for the subjunctive, & what corresponds for the verb be to the two heard sentences is If it was

never were) so it did not appear,

If it were (or nowadays alternatively was) so how angry we should be!. Were (sing.) is, then, a recognizable subjunctive, & applicable not to

+ past facts, but to present or future non-facts; it is entirely out of place in an tf-clause concerned with past actualities & not answered by a were or would be in the apodosis. It has been necessary to labour this explanation because for the man readers who are not at home wi grammatical technicalities the matter is puzzling. Examples:—Jé is stated that, during the early part of the War of Independence (1821), the Greeks massacred Mussulmans; if this were so, tt was only in selfdefence./If rent were cheap, clothes were dearer than today./If the attitude of the French Government were known to our own Government last week it explains the appeal to the Dominions. / We must not look for any particulars as to that lost work (tf tf were ever written), ‘‘ The Life & Adventures of Joseph Sell’. These four contain if... were (sing.) in protasis—an ‘ Alive’ form if the apodosis is would be or were, i.e. if the conditional is of the utopian kind, but wrong if the time of the were is a

Saale ba past. Read was in each.

xamples in apodosis:—iJt were just & fitting that on such an occasion a Prince of the Royal House & Heirapparent to the Throne should himself have plied the fires of the record warship with - The newspaper is patting the Prince on the back for what he actually did, viz stoke; it means not that it would be right on an imaginary occasion, but t it was on that past oecasion right for him to stoke; read was./The dull winter prospect appeared so quiet & peaceful, it were difficult to imagine the Boches over there—on sentry, in their dugouts, eating, drinking, sleeping, just like the men

me; but, proving their presence, a@ miniewurfer shell passed overhead. Paraphrasing so as to get rid of the glamour of the word were, we get not ‘ I should find it difficult ’, but ‘ I found it difficult ’, as is shown by ‘a shell passed’; read tt was difficult.

Sequence: To those who have had
