page: 579

C. Aliens are substituting Englishmen.

D. The substitution of butter (by margarine) is having bad effects.

E. there be no more substitution of Englishmen (by aliens).

F. Its substitution (by margarine) is lamentable.

One can hardly read those parallels, with the risks of ambiguity that they suggest, without realizing that either the old or the new must go; we surely cannot keep such a treacherously double-edged knife as substitute has become; either its original edge, or the one into which its back has been converted, must be ground off; which is it to be? Another reflection, which may not occur unsuggested to all, is that in the incorrect set the words replace or replacement would have done, whereas in the correct set they would either have been impossible or have changed the meaning. And here, probably, is what accounts for the whole perversion of our words; substitute & substitution have been seized upon by people who failed to apprehend with precision the dictionary definitions & fancied they had found equiyalents in sense for the words replace(ment), which they had been ignorantly taught to regard as solecisms in the required senses (see REPLACE); so they determined (in their lingo) to substitute replace

by substitute, whereas they ought to

have refused (in English) to sub-

stitute substitute for replace or to

replace replace by substitute.

To sum up: The dictionary defini-

tions are right; the new popular

use is wrong & confusing, & is based

upon a superstition; but it has

hitherto, as the dictionaries show,

almost escaped detection, & therefore

it will be necessary to give a con-

vincing array of recent quotations,

to satisfy readers that this article

is not an attack on the negligible.

It is indeed high time that replace

were reinstated & substitute reduced

to its proper function. In going

through the sentences, those who

579

+ are new to the question may observe that nearly all can be mended in two ways, shown for verb & noun in the t two examples—one the change to replace(ment), & the other the turning of the sentence upside down & changing of by to for. One or two exceptional types are placed at the end with special corrections..

The_ ecclesiastical principle was substituted by the national, the Empire & the Pap by the Communes (Either was replaced; or The national principle was substituted for the ecclesiastical, the Communes for the Empire & the Papacy)./Chief among these innovations is the substitution of the large & unwieldy geographical unit by a small & compact local administrative unit (Either its the replacement of; or is the substitution ofa compact local unit for the unwieldy geographical unit)./M. Chicherin also requested that in article VI the word ‘ foment’ should be substituted by the word ‘* prepare’, saying that * foment’ has too vast an acceptation./ Although only a temporary, & liable to be substituted by an exservice man at any time, because I was physically unfit for the army, Iam gladto.../If it 8 successful it will be extended ail along the border; yy it fails it will be substituted by an arbitrary line along the lakes & rivers. /Many words, such as aviation, airship, dirigible, aeroplane, aviator, c&c., have been assailed & substituted by terms which lend themselves to jiner expression. /The * Stampa’ hopes that a definite pledge will be obtained for Greek evacuation, & that regular troops will not be substituted by ‘ sacred battalions’./If a good raw hide gear is substituted a set of laminated gears, they will be found quite as silent./Mr Asquith concluded on a note of high appeal for the substitution of the Supreme Council by the League of Nations./The Greek administration should continue under the supervision of the Allies until the time comes for its substitution by a Turkish administration./The sub- © stitution of the Council by a Com-
