page: 582

+ That there is a votd in a millionaire’s life is not disproved by anyone showing that a number of millionatres do not recognize such void (recognize it, or the or that void)./But when tt comes to us following his life & example, in all its intricate details, all will, I think, agree that such is tmpossible (that that is)./An appeal to philanthropy is hardly necessary, the Zrounds for such being so self-evident (for it being)./If ZI am refused the Sacrament I do not believe that I shall have less chance of entering the Kingdom of God than if I reccived such Sacrament (received it).

5. Such=so. Most people have no hesitation in saying such a small malter, such big apples, with such little justice, such conflicting evidence; others object that it should be so small a matter, apples so big, with so little justice, evidence so conflicting. It must first be admitted that the objectors are (with allowances for phrases of special meaning) entitled to claim the support of grammar. In ‘such a small matter’ it is usually small, not matter or small matter, that is to be modified by such or so, &, small being an adjective, the adverb so is obviously the grammatical word to do the job; at the same time, such a@ small matter, though it usually means so small a matter, may also mean a small matter of the kind that has been described; but, speaking generally, the objectors have grammar on their side. Shall we then be meek & mend our ways at their bidding? Why, no, not wholesale. We will try to say so wherever idiom does not protest or stiffness ensue; for instance, we will give up ‘ with such little justice ° without a murmur; but they cannot expect of us ‘I never saw apples so big’ instead of ‘such big apples’. And they must please to remark that the such idiom has so established itself that the other is often impossible without a change of order that suggests formality or rhetoric; so big apples? 80 convincing evidence? no; the adjective

+ has to be deferred (apples so big) in a clearly artificial way; but we grant that ‘ so small a matter ’ does strictly deserve preference over ‘such a small matter’, &, if so partial a concession is worth their acceptance, let it be made. Other idioms that are no better than they should be, & yet need not be ruthlessly expelled from society, are NICE & long &c., TRY & manage if &c., & perhaps the misplaced ONLy.

6. Such as for as. Even the effects of unfavourable weather can be partially counteracted by artificial treatment such as by the use of phosphates. The repetition of by results in a such as not introducing as it should a@ noun (use), but a preposition (by)— a plain but not uncommon blunder. Omit either such or by./Some are able to help in one way, such as for instance in speaking; some in another, such as organization. The second part is right; the first should be either in one way such as for instance speaking, or in one way as for instance in speaking; such as requires a noun (speaking), not an adverbial phrase (itn speaking), as its completion.

7. Suchlike. That the word is a sort of pleonasm in itself, being ultimately = soltke-like, is nothing to its discredit, such pleonasms being numerous (cf. poulterer= pullet+-er+-er); but, whether as adjective (barley, oats, & suchlike cereals) or as pronoun (schoolmasters, plumbers, & suchlike), it is now usually left to the uneducated, such being used as the adjective & the like as the pronoun. The OED, however, abstains from comment.

Sudan(ese), Soud-. The spelling that prevailed when the name first became familiar about 1875 was Soud-; the ninth edition of the Encycl. Brit. gives its article under that namc; in the tenth & eleventh it has become Sudan, which the OED describes as a ‘ variant of Soudan’. The older form has the advantages (1) of being the same as
