page: 583

+ the French, (2) of precluding the pronunciation si-, (3) of being

| swét. The two words are the same, probably still the more familiar to ordinary people; Sudan has the merit, if it is one, of having the same number of letters (without suggesting the same sound) as the Arabic word, & the other of showing that its user claims to know more than his neighbours. Sou- is recommended; see PRIDE OF KNOWLEDGE.

sudarium, sudatorium. PI. -ia.

suddenness. So spelt.

sue makes suable; see MUTE E.

suéde. So written.

suet makes suety; see -T-, -TT-.

sufficient(ly) & enough. The words are discussed under ENOUGH; for sufficient in the following extracts, see the first paragraph of that article:—So far as the building trade as concerned the complaint we have made to the Government is_ that sufficient has not been done to get materials organized./ And there should be sufficient of a historic conscience left in the Midland capital to evoke a large subscription.

suffix. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

suffocate makes -cable; see -ABLE, 1.

- For the comparative merits of female s. & woman 8., see FEMALE)(WOMAN.

tte. A more regrettable formation than others such as leaderette & flannelette, in that it does not even mean a sort of suffrage as the mean a sort of leader & of flannel, & therefore tends to vitiate the popular conception of the termination’s meaning. The word itself may now be expected to die, having lost its importance; may its influence on word-making die with it!

suffuse makes -sable; -aBLE 1, 2.

re ee: So-. The So- forms are called by the OED obsolete variants.

sugar makes sugared & sugary, see -R-, -RR-; & ar ¢ (unhyphened), see HypHens 8 B.

So spelt; gerundive oft. 9 see -ABLE 2.

falsi. See TECHNICAL TERMS. Pronounce -tl6 fa'ls!.

suit, suite, nn. Suite is pronounced & the differences of usage accidental & variable; but where, the sense being a set, either form would seem admissible, we do say at present a sutt of clothes, a suit of armour, a suit of sails, the four suits at cards, follow suit; & on the other hand a suite (of attendants &c.), a suite cf rooms or apartments, a suite of furniture or chairs.

Sukey. So spelt; see -Ey, -IE, -y.

sullenness. spelt.

sully. For inflexions see VERBS IN Walshe auietaie eal

ureous, Cc, hurous. The last has differentiated papers ciations stilfirus & silfiir’us, so that there are four adjectives to divide the work. Sulphuric & sulphurous (-iif’us) can for general purposes be ignored as technical terms in Chemistry like other -ic & eous pairs. Sulphureous & sulphurous (sti‘l-), which remain, have never been effectively differentiated, & the OED refers the reader for most senses of one to definitions given under the other. Differentiation may be expected to come, & perhaps the likeliest course for it to take & therefore the best to fall in with is that sulphurous, now the more popular word, should take to itself the secondary or extended senses, & sulphureous be restricted to the primary material ones meaning ‘ of or containing sulphur’ without the specific limitations of sulphuric & sulphurous (-(t’us). This would

ive—though naturally the border-

ne is not quite sha lphureous gases, springs, smells, drugs, substances, but sulphurous yellow, light, torments, language, preachers.

sumach, -ac. The OED gives pre. cedence to the first spelling, & pronounces sii’/mak or shdo’mak.

summer. 1. St Luke’s, St Martin’s, S. Each of these is often used when the other would be the right one; St Luke’s day is in October taatby St Martin’s in November (11th).
