page: 584

+ 2. Summer time, summer-time, summertime. The first is the daylightsaving term; 1n other senses either of the others should be used; see HYPHENS, group *business man.

summersault,-set. See SOMERSAULT.

summon(s) 1. For summon & send for, see FORMAL WORDS. 2. Summons, n., has pl. summonses. 3. Summon is the verb in ordinary use; summons should not be used as a verb except in the special sense to serve with a legal summons or issue a summons against, & even in that sense summon is equally good.

Sunday. For the adverbial use (S. for on S.) see FRipAy.

sunk(en). For idiomatic use of the two forms, see SINK.

Sunna, -nah. The first is the received spelling.

super,= supernumerary, superficial measure, or superfine. See Cur- TAILED WORDS.

super-. The use of this as an abbreviation for ‘of a superior kind’, as in superman, super-Dreadnought, supercritic, & scores or hundreds of other words, is so evidently convenient that it is vain to protest when others indulge in it, & so evidently barbarous that it is worth while to circumvent it oneself when one can do so without becoming unintelligible. Super-cinema, meaning merely a cinema of exceptional size or splendour, & not something that transcends & thereby ceases to be a cinema, may serve as a specimen of the worse applications.

superb. See PosiTIVE worps for a caution on contexts to which the word is unsuitable.

supererogation. For a work of s., see HACKNEYED PHRASES.

superficies. Five syllables (-fi’shiéz); pl. the same.

SUPERFLUOUS WORDS. That there are such things in the language is likely to be admitted, & perhaps it might be safe even to hazard the generality that they ought to be put

+ in a black list & cast out; but woe to the miscreant who dares post up the first list of proscriptions! Brevity & timidity will therefore be the marks of our specification; the victims will be mainly such as have no friends, with just one or two of other kinds slipped in to redeem the experiment from utterly negligible insignificance. Indeed, it is more necessary to account for the tameness of the list than to defend its boldness; & for this purpose it must be borne in mind that most of the words naturally thought of as conspicuously suitable for expulsion (say meticulous, asset, protagonist, tndividual, & the like), abominable as they are in their prevalent modern senses, are not superfluous, because each of them has somewhere in the background a sense or senses at least worth preserving, & often of importance; the use of them needs to be mended, but not ended, & they are dealt with clsewhere. The _ list follows; reasons for the condemnation should be looked for under the word concerned, unless a special article is indicated:—dampen (-EN VERBS); elevator; emolive; epopee; faience; (FEMININENESS); filtrate; flamboyant; gentlemanlike; habitude; legitsmatize & legitimize; lithesome; mentality; minify; olden, vb (-EN VEBBS); quieten; righten (-EN VERBS); fotatory; smoothen (-EN VERBS); succedaneum; wun-come-at-able; viceregent; viceroyal.

superior. 1. For has few equals & mo s., see HACKNEYED PHRASES. 2. The patronizing use (a most s. woman), in which one expects it to be understood always that the person one calls s. is nevertheless one’s inferior, resembles the corresponding uses Of honest, worthy, & good, in

roducing on the hearer an un-

avourable impression of the speaker. 8. S. to, not s. than, is required by idiom; but such is the power of ANALOGY that even ple who obviously cannot be described as femineity & femininity:
