page: 586

+ a slang phrase because it suits them, & box the ears of people in general because it is slang; a refinement on the institution of whipping-boys, by

| which they not only have the boy, but do the whipping.

SUPERLATIVES: the naked kind, stripped of its the or a. The problem is not one of Germany alone; many of the other States which were in the Central Alliance are in worst plight for food, so far as can be gathered./ . . . addressed the Senate, declaring that widest diversity of opinion exists regarding the formation of a League of Nations./An extraordinary announcement is made tonight, which is bound to stir profoundest interest among all civilized peoples, & to mark a really new epoch in the story of democracy./But Stoddard did not strike the local note, whereas Stedman could tell of Stuyvesant & the ** Dutch Patrol ’’ in pleasantest fashion & in accordance with the very tone of the Irving tradition./The League of Nations is furnished with a task that will call for utmost watchfulness & probably for the exercise of the full power tt can wield./Mr Vanderlip is, therefore, in closest touch with the affairs of i } finance.

f the reader will be good enough to examine these one by one, he will certainly admit this much—that such superlatives are, for better or worse, departures from custom, & that in each sentence a change from * most > or ‘——est” to ‘(a) very ——’ or ‘the most > or ‘the ——est ’ would be a return to normal English. If he will next try to judge, from the whole of the specimens taken together, what effect is produced by this artifice, it may be nes ie though less confidently, that he will agree with the following view. The writers have no sense of ey (see INCONGRUOUS VOCABULARY), are barbarically adorning contexts of straightforward businesslike matter with detached scraps of poetry or exalted feeling; the impression on sensitive readers

586

+ is merely that of a queer simulated emotionalism.

SUPERSTITIONS. ‘It is wrong to start a sentence with ‘** But’’. I know Macaulay does it, but it is bad English. The word should either be dropped entirely or the sentence altered to contain the word ‘* however’... That ungrammatical piece of nonsense was written by the editor of a scientific periodical to a contributor who had found his English polished up for him in proof, & protested; both parties being men of determination, the article got no further than proof. It is wrong to start a sentence with ‘but! It is wrong to end a sentence with a preposition! It is wrong to split an infinitive! See the article FretisHes for these & other such rules of thumb & for references to articles in which it is shown how misleading their sweet simplicity is; see also the article SUBSTITUTE for an illustration of the havoc that is wrought by unintelligent applications of an unintelligent dogma. The best known of such prohibitions is that of the SPLIT INFINITIVE, & the hold of that upon the journalistic mind is well shown in the following, which may be matched almost daily. The writer is reporting a theatre decree for hat-removal: ‘... the Management relies on the cooperation of the pune to strictly enforce this rule ’.

ven a split infinitive (he comments) may be forgiven in so well-intentioned a@ notice. Theatre-managers are not stylists; the split this manager has perpetrated, is it not a Httle one? & to put him, irrelevantly, in the pillory for it betrays the journalist’s obsession.

Well, beginners may sometimes find that it is as much as their jobs are worth to resist, like the champion of ‘ But ’, their editors’ edicts. On the other hand, to let oneself be so far possessed by conventions whose grounds one has not examined as to take a hand in enforcing them on

s
