page: 587

+ SUPERVACANEOUS other people is to lose the independence of 7 eement that, if not so smothered, would enable one to solve the numerous problems for which there are no rules of thumb.

supervacaneous. A SUPERFLUOUS WORD.

ise, not -vize; see -ISE.

supine. The grammatical noun (see TECHNICAL TERMS) is pronounced sii’pin. For the literary adjective the orthodox pronunciation is sipi’n, & of six verse quotations in the OED five require that accent; Shelley provides one of the five, & also the sixth, in which sii’pin is natural, though not quite necessary. But RECESSIVE ACCENT is likely to eh sooncr or later, as in CANINE &c.

id ag The fine mass of the head, solidly yet supplely modelled, is set in a particularly beautiful convention of the hair. The adverb is supply, not supplely; cf. susTLeE. It is true that the OED has found more instances in print of -plely than of -ply, & therefore on its historical

principles makes supplely the stan-

dard form. But the pronunciation

is undoubtedly sii’pli, not st’pul-li,

& the long spelling has been due to

the wish to distinguish to the cye

from supply (supli’) n. & vb; such

devices are not legitimate except in

the last necessity, as with singeing

& singing; & it is to be observed

that, whereas the -e- in singeing

selects the right of two possible

pronunciations, the -le- in supplely

suggests a wrong one. It is unfor-

tunate that adjectives in -bble,

-ckle, -ddle, -ffle, -ggle, - ple, -ttle,

are few & not provided with adverbs

common enough to settle the ques-

tion; subtly is in fact the best

analogue, & its spelling, though

subtlely has been occasionally used,

is now established.

supplement. Noun _§siti’pliment;

verb siiplimé’nt or sii’plimént; see

Noun & VERB ACCENT C.

. vb. For inflexions see

VERBS IN -IE. &¢., 6.

587

SUPREME

supposal. See -AL NOUNS. ,

supposedly. Four syllables if used; see -EDLY.

suppositious, supposititious. The supposititious elector who imagined that the Parliament Bill was a weapon for show & not for use is, we venture to say, a mythical being. It is often assumed that the first form is no more than an ignorant & wrong variant of the other, like pacifist by the side of pacificist (see -1sT A). Ignorant it oftcn is, no doubt, the user not knowing how to spell or pronounce supposititious; but there is no reason to call it wrong; suppositious & supposititious may as well coexist, if there is work for two words, as factious & factitious; &, if the support of analogy for the shorter form is demanded, there are ambitious, expeditious, seditious, nutritious, cautious, «& oblivious, to supply it. There are moreover two fairly distinct senses to be shared, viz spurious, & hypothetical. Supposititious is directly from the Latin p-p. suppositus= substituted or put in another’s place, & therefore has properly the meanings foisted, counterfeit, spurious, pretended, ostensible. Suppositious is from the English supposttion=hypothesis (cf.

cious similarly formed at an earlier stage, in Latin), & therefore may properly mean supposed, hypothetical, assumed, postulated, imaginary. It does not follow that suppositious is wanted; probably the work it might do is better done by the more familiar synonyms above given; it does follow that supposititious should not be given, as in the quotation at the head, senses proper to the synonyms of suppositious, but should be confined to those implying intent to deceive.

suppress makes suppressible, see “ABLE 2; & suppressor, see -OR.

suppressedly. A bad form; -EDLY.

suppressio veri. See TECHNICAL TERMS. Pronounce -er’-I.

supreme. See PosiTIvE worps, &, for the 8. sacrifice, STOCK PATHOS.
