page: 589

suspicion. For s.=soupcon, see GALLICISMS.

Mr » Master of the —— Hounds, has sustained a broken rib & other injuries through his horse

alling. The very common idiom

ere illustrated is described by the OED as ‘in modern journalistic use’; but with such abstract objects as injury, loss, leak, bruise, &c., instead of broken rib it is as old as the 15th c., & the extension is not a violent one. Nevertheless, sustain as a synonym for suffer or receive or get belongs to the class of FoRMAL worps, & is better avoided both for that reason & for a stronger one: if it is not made to do the work of those more suitable words, it calls up more clearly the other meaning in which it is valuable, viz to bear up against or stand or endure without yielding or perishing, as in * capable of sustaining a siege ’.

sustainedly. Four syllables, if used; see -EDLY.

Susy, -le. See -Ey, -I£, -y.

suttee, satl. Use the first, & see DipacTicisM, MAHOMET, PRIDE OF

KNOWLEDGE.

svelte. See FRENCH WORDS.

Swabian. See SUABIAN. |

Swan of Avon. See SosrRIQuETs.

swap,swop. The OED prefers -ap.

SWAPPING HORSES while crossing

the stream, a notoriously hazardous

od atin is paralleled in speech by

changing a word’s sense in the

middle of a sentence, by vacillating . between two constructions either of

which might follow a word legiti-

mately enough, by starting off with

a subject that fits one verb but

must have something tacitly sub-

stituted for it to fit another, & by

other such rformances. These

lapses are difficult to formulate & to

exemplify, & any exposition of their

nature naturally incurs the charge

of PEpANTRY; nevertheless, the air

of slovenliness given by them is so

fatal to effective writing that atten-

tion must be called to them when-

589

+ ever an opportunity can be made, as by this claptrap heading.

Changing of a word’s sense; interes is peculiarly liable to maltreatment:—Viscount Grey’s promised speech in the House of Lords on

arations & inter-Allied debts furnished all the interest naturally aroused. Interest is here virtually, though not actually, used twice— the speech furnished interest, interest was aroused; but what was furnished was interesting matter, & what was aroused was eager curiosity; interest can bear either sense, but not both in one sentence. / For while the Opposition beat their drums as loudly as ever, it was well known that there was very litile behind all this fuss, & that in the very interests which they so furiously protected they were anzious to meet the Government half-way. Which stands for interests; they furiously protected certain interests, i.e. certain persons or sets of persons or rights or privileges; they were inclined to compromise in some people’s interests, i.e. in their behalf or favour or name; but behalf is not a person or a pee or the like. The difficulty of expressing the _ inconsistency, however, explains why the word interest is often thus abused. For similar treatment of other words than interest, see LEGERDEMAIN.

Shifting from one to another construction. But supposing nothing changed & this Pope, who is made incompetent by the weight at once of his virtues & his ignorances, enjoys a long life, we should look for a great decline in... Supposing is followed first by an object (nothing) & adjectival complement (changed), & secondly by a substantival clause (this et enjoys). Either is right by itself, but to swap one for the other means disaster.

Tacit modification of the subject &c. This barbarism could be stopped in a very short time, if it were made a punishable offence to throw rubbish into the street, & would have the added value of reducing the army of scaven-
