page: 590

+ gers.. It is not the barbarism, but the stoppage of it, that would have the added ve ese per cent o the ight co be knocked o practically every new petrol vehic produced & yet be able to carry exactly the same load. What woul carry the same load is not the 50% knocked off, but either the vehicle without it or the other 50% that remained./Mr A. C. Benson recalls a pleasant fiction, supposed to have happened to Matthew Arnold. A fiction neither happens nor is supposed to happen to anyone; a fiction can be recalled, but before it can be sup d to have happened it must be tacitly develo into a fictitious experience; for it is itself a statement or narrative & not an event. See Haziness for other specimens of similar confusion.

swath(e). The agricultural noun is spelt either way & pronounced swawth or swoth or swadh; sec -TH &-pH; the noun & verb meaning wrap is swathe (swadh). The possible differentiation is easy to see but very unlikely to be accepted.

sweat, sweater. Victims of GEN- TEELISM.

sweet. Sweet brier, sweet oil, sweet pea, sweet sultan, sweet william (or S.W.) should have no hyphens; see HypHeEns 8 B.

sweety. So spelt; see -EY, -IE, -Y.

swell. Swollen is the usual form of the p.p., & that not less, but more, than formerly. The chief use of swelled as p.p. is now in swelled head, in which its supposed irregularity may have been a recommendation as Iending a homely expressiveness.

swim. The past swam & p.p. swum are now almost invariable, though the OED has a he quotation for swam p.p., & a Tennyson for swum past.

swine. Sing. & pl. the same; s. makes eorneae see MUTE E.

swing. Past usually swung, though OED quotes for roang Wordsworth, Tennyson, Gosse, & Belloc.

590

swing(e)ing. At the bottom was tripe, in a swinging tureen—Goldsmith. A capacious one? or one hung on pivots? See MUTE E, & use the -e- in the part. of swinge.

swivei has -Ued, -lling, &c.; -Lx-, -L-.

swop. See swaP.

sybarite. So spelt.

sybil. See sisyt. This wrong spelling (the Greek is Sibulla) is especially common in the modern use as a feminine name.

syce, being So spelt; see SICE.

syllabize &c. A verb & a noun are clearly sometimes needed for the notion of dividing words into syllables. The possible pairs seem to be the following (the number after each word means—1l, that it is in fairly common use; 2, that it is on record; 8, that it is not given in OED):—

syllabate 8 syllabation 2

syllabicate 2 syllabication 1

syllabify 2 syllabification 1

syllabize 1 syllabization 3 One first-class verb, two first-class nouns, but neither of those nouns belonging to that verb. It is absurd enough, & any of several ways out would do; that indeed is why none of them is taken. The best thing would be to accept the most recognized verb syllabize, give it the now non-existent noun syllabization, & relegate all the rest to the Surenr- FLUOUS WORDS; but there is no authority both willing & able to issue such decrees.

syllabub. See sILLABUB.

syllabus. Pl. -di.

syllepsis. See TECHNICAL TERMS. Pl. -psés.

syllogism. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

sylph. See SALAMANDER.

sylvan. See SILVAN.

symbol. For synonyms see sicn.

symbology. For the form, see -1st on pacif(ic)ist. But symbolology is not used.

pathetic. The play, in spite of

lime scenes & poctry, ts an illustration & a warning to artists who deny, or forget, that no powers of
