page: 593

+ monial, certitude, cheerful, classic, clime, commonplace, conciseness, connote, continual, continuance, contrary, countenance, credence, decided, defective, definite, deism, delusion, dower, due, duteous, effective, England, enough, enteric, entity, epistle, especially, essence, essential, exceedingly, explicit, exterior, facile, faience, falsehood, fatalism, faun, female (bis), festal, fir, floor, foam, forceful, foreword, Formal words, frantic, friar, furze, Gallic, garret, ’Genteelism, glossary, gourmand, Grecian, gulf, happening, harmony, Hebrew, horrible, idiosyncrasy, illegible, include, Incongruous vocabulary, innate, intensive, intuition, jargon, jocose, judicial, lampoon, legislation, libel, Literary words, littoral, Long variants, luxuriant, male, malignancy, masterful, maunder, mentality, minify, molecule, monachal, mutual, Needless variants, observance, physician, pigeon, piteous, plenteous, polity, porcelain, practicable, proposition, purport, receipt, requirement, resort, reversion, shall, that (rel. pr.), tint, transparent.

synonymity, synonymy. There is work for both words, the first meaning synonymousness, & the second the subject & supply of synonyms.

synopsis. Pl. -psés.

syntax. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

synthesis. PI. -thesés. The scientific sound of the word often tempts the pretentious to use it instead of

more appropriate words such as

combination, alliance, or union: A flickering gleam on the ra ting may

be found ina | Ps ae called * The

Case against Home Rule’, Pid fas Mr

Amery, which also propou

new tdea of a synthesis between He

tariff & the opposition to Home Rule.

synthetize, not synthesize, is the

right formation.

syphon, syren. See SIPHON, SIREN.

Syriac, Syrian. There is the same

difference in application as between

Arabic & AwABIEAN).

syringe. Pron. sl’rinj, not siri’nj.

598

syringitis. See GREEK G.

syrup, syrupy. So spelt, the first by usage in England; for the second, see -P-, -PP-. Golden syrup is, outside the grocer’s, a GENTEEL- 1sM for treacle.

systemic, as compared with the regular systematic, is excused by its usefulness in distinguishing @ sense required in physiology &c. ‘ of the system or body as a whole’; other wrong formations, systemist, systemtze, &c., have no such excuse, & systematist &c. should be invariable.

systole. Pronounce si’stoll.

syzygy.- Pronounce si’zigi (see GREEK G) or si’ziji.

T

tabes. Pronounce ta’béz.

tableau (vivant), table-d’héte, tabiier. See FRENCH WORDS. ;

taboo. Accent on last syllable; though this accent is English only, it is established English, & to correct it is pedantry; to spell tabu (except in ethnological dissertations) is no better; see PRONUNCIATION, & PRIDE OF KNOWLEDGE. Past & p.p. usu. tabooed, somctimes (see -ED & *p) taboo’d.

tabula (rasa). Pl. -lae (-sae).

tabulate makes -lable; see -ABLE I.

tache. See FRENCH WORDS.

tack. Confusion between the nautical word used figuratively & tact (I think we have been on the wrong tact) is not unknown in speech, though it seldom gets into print.

tactics. See sTRaTEGy for the distinction.

tactile)(tactual. Why two words? And, there being two, is any useful differentiation either established or aipeaipe? The ee of tactile

s sufficiently explained ny, the desire for a form corresponding to a large class of adjectives that mean having the power or quality of doing or suffering some action—contractile, ductile, erectile, fictile, fissile, flexile, pensile, prehensile, protru-
