page: 595

+ most of our list; & it should be added that, if the past tense were distinguished from the p.p., the preponderance of -ed for it would be slightly greater. The figures are arrived at by counting the occurrences in all OED quotations of the 19th & 20th cc.; the first figure for edch word is the number for -ed, the second for -t. 1. toss—28, 8 2. burn—7, 16 (see also BURN)

learn—5, 0

smell—2, 8

spell—4, 4

spill—s8, 17

spoil—9, 5 (see below) 8. bereave—3, 8 (see also BEREAVE)

dream—5, 8 (see also DREAM)

kneel—3, 2

lean—12, 2

leap—7, 5

The figures for spoil are exclusive of examples in which -ed alone is possible; that is so in the older sense strip (as opp: damage). On class 8 it is worth while to remark that there are so many similar verbs in which the -t form is now the only one (creep, deal, feel, keep, leave, mean, sleep, sweep, weep, &c.) that the adoption of dreamt &c. in print need expose no-one to the charge of eccentricity.

tantalize. To the British motor industry Free Trade has become as tantalizing as a red rag to a bull.

See SLIPSHOD EXTENSION. He who is tantalized is usually irritated, but

he who is irritated is comparatively ~ seldom tantalized; & to apply t¢. to

a wrong kind of irritation is to

betray ignorance.

tant soit peu. See FRENCH worRDs.

Taoism. Pronounce tow Izm.

tapis. See FRENCH WORDS.

tar,=sailor. See SOBRIQUETS.

targeted. So spelt; see -T-, -TT-.

- Pl. -ms; see -uM.

tarry, vb. For inflexions see VERBS

IN -IE &c., 6.

tarsus. Pl. -sf.

tarthple. The current distinction

is that a tart contains fruit or sweet

505

+ stuff, & a pie meat or savoury stuff;s but the earlier distinction was that a tart was not, & a pie was, closed in with Lei above; & as relics of the old use we retain mince pie as the only possible form, & apple pie & pie as names of a trap bed & a flower, though more or less superseded by tart in their primary senses.

Tartar, Tatar. The second spelling may well be left to the ethnologists; see PRIDE OF KNOWLEDGE.

tassel makes -lled; see -LL-, -L-.

taste, vb, care tastable; MUTE E.

tasty (so spelt, see MUTE £E) has been as laced, except in uneducated or facetious use, in its primary sense by savoury & in its secondary by tasteful.

Tatar. See TARTAR.

tattler. Now so spelt; formerly, & esp. in the name of the 18th-c. periodical, tatler.

tattoo makes tattooed or tattoo’d; see -ED & 'D.

TAUTOLOGY (lit. ‘saying the same thing ’, i.e. as one has already said) is a term used in various senses. To repeat the words or the substance of a preceding sentence or passage may impressive & a stroke of rhetoric, or wearisome & a sign of incompetence, mainly according as it is done deliberately or unconsciously; in either case it may be called tautology (though the word is in fact seldom used except in reproach), but it is with neither of these kinds that we are here concerned. Another sense is the allowing of a word or phrase to recur without point while its previous occurrence is still unforgotten; this kind of t. will be found fully discussed in the articles REPETITION & ELEGANT VARIATION; it is of great importance as an element in style, but need not here be treated again. Yet another form of t. is that dealt with in PLEONAS™M 2, in . which synonyms, either capable of serving the purpose by itself, are
