page: 597

+ finite sense, i.e. when iaz is not to be taken as contrasted with rate.

levy, exaction from every person concerned of an equal amount or an amount proportional to his property.

octroi, duty charged on articles before they are admitted into a town.

rate, amount of assessment on property for local purposes; see also the note on taz above.

scot & lot, a tax levied by a municipal corporation in proportionate shares upon its members for the defraying of municipal expenses.

toll, fixed charge for access or passage or permission.

tribute, periodical payment made in token of submission or as price of protection by a State or person to another.

taxi. Pl. taxis better than -tes; cf. -O(E)s 5 & 6.

teacheress. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS.

teasel, teazle. The OED treats the first as the standard form.

tec. See CURTAILED WORDS.

TECHNICAL TERMS of rhetoric,

ammar, logic, prosody, diplomacy,

iterature, &c., that a reader may be confronted with or a writer have need of. The list is very far from exhaustive; & the principle of selection has been to omit at one extreme the words of which most

people who are given to reading at

all may be assumed to know the

meaning, & at the other those so

unfamiliar that no sensible writer

would use them unless he were

addressing experts or students. The

design is to give the briefest service-

able definition, & an illustration, of

each term; & they are roughly

classified as Rhet.(orical), Gram.

(matical), Log.(ical), Pros.(odical),

Dipl.(omatic), Lit.(erary), &c. Some

terms are included of which no

account is needed beyond what is

given in their alphabetical place in

the Dictionary; these are printed

in small capitals. Cross references

+ items in this article.

absolute (Gram.); ‘freed’. An adj. or a trans. vb is a. when the adj. has no noun, or the vb no object. Fortune favours the brave; If looks could kill. See also AxBso- LUTE CONSTRUCTION.

acatalectic (Pros.); ‘ not stopping short ’. A verse or metre is a. when its last foot is complete; cf. catalectic below. ‘ Ma’ny/me’n &/ma’‘ny /wo'’men is a trochaic dimeter a.

accidence (Gram.); ‘the things that befall (words)’. The part of grammar concerned with inflexions, or the forms that words can take; a book of paradigms. Cf. syntax below.

ad captandum (Rhet.); ‘ for catching (the common herd’, vulgus). Applied to unsound specious arguments. An a. c. presentation of the

acts.

affiz(Gram.); ‘ thing fastened on’. A term including both prefixes & suffixes. What is the stem when all affixes are removed?

a fortiori (Log.); ° from yet firmer ground’. Introducing a fact that, if one already accepted is true, must also & still more obviously be true. It could not have been finished in a week; a. f. not in a day.

alcaics (Pros.); ‘ verses of Alcaeus ’. A four-line Greek & Latin stanza; ——vu—— /—vuvu-—vuy bis a—VUuevuy—uU-Y Imitated by Tennyson in: O mighty-mouthed inventor of har-

monies, O skilled to sing of time or eternity.

God-gifted organ-voice of Eng-

land,

Milton, a name to resound for

ages |

alezandrine (Pros.); origin doubtful. A six-foot iambic line, i.e. one foot longer than that of blank verse; the normal line in French verse (but see also senarius below), & ending each stanza in Spenserians. (A

needless Alexandrine ends the song) in italics with above or below are to
