page: 598

+ That like/a wound/ed snake/drags tts/slow:

allegory (Rhet.); * other wording ’. A narrative of which the true meaning is to be got by translating its persons & events into others that they are understood to symbolize. The Faerie Queen & The Piigrim’s Progress are aa. For synonymy see SIMILE.

alliteration (Rhet.); ‘ letter-tagging’. The noticeable or effective use in a phrase or sentence of words beginning with or containing the same letter or sound. After life’s fitful fever; In oa summer season wheh soft was the sun.

amphibol(og)y (Log.); ‘ aiming both ways’. A statement so expressed as to admit of two grammatical constructions each yieldin a different sense. Stuff a cold starve a fever appears to be two sentences containing separate directions for two maladies, but may also be a conditional sentence meanin If you are fool enough to stuff a col you will produce & have to starve a fever.

anacoluthon (Gram.); ‘ inconsequent matter’. A sentence in which there is wrongly substituted for the completion of a construction something that presupposes a different beginning. Can I not make you understand that if you don’t get reconciled to your father what is to happen to you Hi (the that construction requires a statement, not a question, to complete it). Pliny speaks of divers engaged in the strategy of ancient warfare, carrying tubes in their mouths & so drew the necessary air down to their lungs.

anacrusis (Pros.); ‘a recoil’. A syllable (or more), in some metres invariable & in some optional, before the point at which the reckoning of the normal feet begins. In the couplet following, each line is a trochaic diineter catalectic, but the first has not & the second has a. :

Clearer /loves sound /other /ways;

I/miss my /little /human /praise

598

+ shufiiing of the letters of a word or

anagram (Lit.); ‘rewriting’. A phrase resulting in a significant combination. Bun telis his readers that John Bunyan anagram’d makes nu hony in a B (new honey in a bee).

analogy (Log., Gram.); ‘ accordance with proportion’. Inference or procedure based on the presumption that things whose likeness in certain respects is known will be found or should be treated as alike also in respects about which knowledge is limited to one of them. The conclusion that a State, because its development in some respects resembles that of a person, must by lapse of time grow feeble & die is analogical. Since opera resembies drama both in being the name of a play & in ending in -a, analogy provides opera with the (incorrect) adj. operatic to match the rightly formed dramatic. For other examples, see ANALOGY.

anapaest (Pros.); ‘struck back’. A metrical foot, w-. And his co/horts were gleam/ing with pur /ple @ gold is an anapaestic dimceter or four aa.

anaphora (Rhet.); ‘ bringing back’. Marked repetition of a word or phrase in successive clauses or sentences. Al her feet he bowed, he fer, he down: at her feet he

d, he

* reversal ’. Upsetting, for effect, of such normal order as preposition before noun or object after verb. No war or battle’s sound Was heard the world around. Me he restored, & him he hanged.

antepenult (Gram.); ‘ before the nearly last’. Last syllable but two of a word. In laboratory the a. is -ra-, penult -to-, & ultima -ry.

anticlimaz (Rhet.); * climax-spoiling’. Annulment of the impressive effect of a climax by a final item of inferior importance. The rest of ail the acts of Asa, & all his might, & the cities which he butlt, are they not
