page: 599

+ written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? Nevertheless a the time of his old age he was diseased in his feet.

antistrophe (Pros.); ‘ counter-turn ’. ‘The part of a Greek chorus chanted in reply to the strophe & exactly reproducing its metre. A_ short specimen (Aesch. P. V. 414 foll., transl. Whitelaw) of strophe & a. is: ae dwellers by the And Aria’s warlike

chian shore, flower of men, Maidens, of battle All they, whose for-

unafraid, tress-city frowns And Scythian hordes Near Caucasus, high-

that range perched; At earth’s remotest Wild host, whose

ve battle-cry Round the Maeotic Shrillsmid the charg-

pool: ing spears.

antithesis (Rhet.); ‘ placing opposite’. Such choice or arrangement of words as emphasizes a contrast. Crafty men contemn studies; simple men admire them; & wise men use them.

aorist (Gram.); ‘ undefined ’. The Greek past tense corresponding to English chose &c. ; so named as not being definitely perfect or imperfect (like had chosen, a perfect tense, or was choosing, an imperfect tense); applied also to any such undefined tense, e.g. to I choose in opposition to I am choosing & I have chosen.

aphaeresis (Gram.); ‘taking away’. The loss of an initial letter, syllable,

&c. Special was formerly especial,

adder naddre, & cute acute. Cf.

syncope, apocope, below.

aphetic (Gram.); ‘letting go’.

An adj. now often used instead of

the rare aphaeretic & meaning ‘ re-

sulting from aphaeresis or aphesis ’”

—the latter a lately coined word to

ed ee gradual & unintentional

aphaeresis as in squire (esquire),

*shun (attention).

apocope (Gram.); ‘cutting off’.

The loss of a final letter or syllable

or more. My, curio, cinema, were

formerly mine, curiosity, cinemato-

graph. Cf. syncope below, & aphae-

resis above.

apodosis (Gram.); * paying back ’. 599

+ The main clause in a conditional sentence, so called as satisfying the expectation raised by the cue protasis, but retaining the name even when the protasis follows. If he would he could; He could if he would; in each form the a. is he could, & the rest the protasis.

aposiopesis (Rhet.); “falling silent’. Significant breaking off so that the hearer must supply the unsaid words. If we should fat Oh, go to l

—z>

e

a Pageant (Log.); from the hinder end’. Working back from effects to causes, i.e. inductively. God ’s in his heaven—all ’s right with the world is an a posteriori inference if it means The world is so clearly cr that there must be a god in

eaven; but an a priori inference if it means that since we know there is a god, the state of the world must be right.

apostrophe (Rhet.); ‘a turning away’. Words addressed to a present or absent person or thing & breaking the thread of discourse. There is not wind enough to twirl The one red leaf, the last of its clan, That dances as often as dance it can, Hanging so light, & hanging so high, On the topmost twig that looks up

at the sky. Hush, beating heart of Christabel! Jesu, Maria, shield her well! She folded her arms beneath her

cloak, And stole to the other side of the

oak.

apposition (Gram.); ‘ D geiaine to’. The oes of a second description side by side with that by which something has first been denoted, the second being treated as grammatically parallel with the first. Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me?

a priori (Log.); ‘* from the earlier part’. Working forward from known or assumed causes to effects, i.e. deductively. For an example, see a posteriori above.

arguing in a circle (Log.). The basing of two conclusions each upon the other. That the world is good
