page: 600

+ follows from the known goodness of God; that God is good is known from the excellence of the world he has made.

(Log.); ‘ argu-

argumentum ad

. aa ment directed to . a. hominem, one calculated to appeal to the individual addressed more than to impartial reason; a.a. crumenam (purse), one touching the hearer’s pocket; a. a. baculum (stick) or argumentum baculinum, threat of force instead of argument; a. a. ignorantiam, one depending for its effect on the hearer’s not knowing something essential; a. a. populum, one pandering to popular passion; a. a. verecundiam (modesty), one to meet which requires the opponent to offend against decorum.

arsis (Pros.); ‘raising’. The more emphatic part of a foot, e.g. the first syllable of a dactyl or trochee, & the last of an anapaest or iambus; opp. thesis. This is the Latin & the prevailing modern use, reversed from the original Greek; since the Greek meanings are still sometimes preferred, confusion is not unknown. The accented syllables are in arsis in Fro’ggy wou'ld a woo'ing go’ Whe'ther his mo’ther would le’t him or no’; And so’ the poor do’g had none.

aspirate (Gram.); ‘ breathed’. Sound of the letter h when not fused with another as in Philip (ph=f) or thin or this or shin or chin or loch, but pure as in hot & greenhouse. Also used loosely of ph, th, & Scotch ch, & of other letters now usually called spirant or fricative.

assimilation (Gram.); ‘ making like’. The changing of a sound into another identical with or nearer to a neighbouring sound, as when the d of godsibb (related in God) becomes s in gossip, or when the dental of in not becomes the labial m before the labial p in impius impious.

(Rhet.); ‘not bound together’. The omission, for effect, of conjunctions by which words or sentences would in normal speech be connected. ‘

+ The first sort by their own sugges-

tion fell, Self-tempted, A self-depraved; A

Man falls, deceived By the other first: Man, therefore,

shall find grace;

AThe other, none.

attraction (Gram.); A_ tendency less commonly operative in English (except in mere blunders) than in Latin & Greek, by which a word is changed from the correct case, number, or person, to that of an adjacent word. When him [whom] we serve ’s away; The wages of sin is death. And (as a blunder) The small amount of classics which are still held to be necessary.

ballad (Lit.); ‘dancing-song ’. Originally a song as accompaniment to dancing; latcr any simple sentimental song esp. of two or more verses each to the same melody, e.g. Jonson’s Drink to me only—; a separate modern use is as the name of simple narrative poems in short stanzas, such as Cheoy Chase.

ballade (Lit.); ‘ dancing-song ’. An elaborate poem consisting of three eight (or ten) line stanzas & a four Sa five) line envoy, all on three (or

our) rhymes only in the same order in each stanza, & with the same line ending each stanza & the envoy. An old French form, revived in France & England in the 19th c.

The Pompadour’s Fan (ballade, by

Austin Dobson) Chicken-skin, delicate, white,

Painted by Carlo Vanloo, Loves in a riot of light,

Roses & vaporous blue;

Hark to the dainty frou-frou! Picture above, if you can,

Eyes that could melt as the dew,— This was the Pompadour’s fan! See how they rise at the sight,

Throngingthe Gilde Baeufthrougb, Courtiers as butterflies bright,

Beauties that Fragonard drew,

Talon-rouge, falbala, queue, Cardinal, Duke, to a man,

Eager to sigh or to sue,— This was the Pompadour’s fan!
