page: 606

+ science of interpreting them &c. Cf. the original sense of epigram above.

epode (Lit.); ‘additional song’. In Greek choruses, the epode is a concluding part, distinct in metre, chanted after the antistrophe (see above). In Horace’s Epodes, the name is a loose one, given because the metre chiefly used in the book is one in which a full iambic line is followed by a shorter one regarded metrically as a mere appendage or * added verse ’.

EPOPEE (Lit.); ‘ epic-making ’.

equivocation (Log.); ° calling alike’. A fallacy consisting in the use of a word in different senses at different nt i of the reasoning. If we conclude from Jones’s having a thick head (i.e. being a dullard) that he is proof against concussion, we take thick head to mean first dull brain & afterwards solid skull, which is an equivocation.

etacism (Gram.); ‘saying eta’. Pronounce &’tasizm. The preserving of the original 4 sound of eta; cf. itacism below.

ethic dative (Gram.); ‘dative of emotion’. In Latin & Greek a person indirectly or vaguely concerned in the matter stated &c. is sometimes introduced into the sentence in the dative; thus, in Quid mthi Celsus agit?, the word mthi (lit., to or for me) amounts to a parenthetic ‘I wonder’. Me in Elizabethan English was often so used, as See how this river comes me crank-

ing in And cuts me from the best of all my

land A h half-moon, a monstrous

cantle out.

EUPHEMISM (Rhet.); ‘ decorous speech ’.

EUPHUISM (Lit.); ‘ giftedness ’.

explosive (Gram.); * clapping off ’. A name given to those consonant sounds (b, hard g, d, p, k, t) which are produced by a sudden parting of the lips or other organs, & can

606

+ therefore not be prolonged; cf.

icative below.

( : ‘of making’. Verbs of making, calling, & thinking (i.e., of making by deed, word, or thought) are given this name for the grammarian’s convenience;__ their common attribute is the power of attaching a complement (see above) to the object if they are active Cy call me fool) or to any noun if they are passive (the made rich by him). peck

fallacy (Log.); ‘deception’. A fallacy in logic is ‘an argument which violates the laws of correct demonstration. An argument may be fallacious in matter (i.e. misstatement of facts), in wording (i.e. wrong use of words), or in the process of inference. Fallacies have, therefore been classified as: I. Material. II. Verbal, III. Logical or Formal.’ —Encycl. Brit. Some types of f. are of frequent enough occurrence to have earned names that have passed into ordinary speech, & serve as a short way of announcing to 3 false reasoner that his conscious or unconscious sophistry is detected. Such are arguing in a circle, equivocation, begging the question, ignoratio elenchi, argumentum ad hoiminem — pa principit, non sequitur, pos ergo propter hoc, false analogy, undistributed middle, di of which will be found alphabetically placed in this article.

false analogy (Log.); ‘ erroneous correspondence’. The unfounded assumption that a thing that has certain attributes in common with another will resemble it also in some attribute in which it is not known to do so; e.g., that of a pair of hawks the larger is the male, on the ground that other male animals ar larger than female; or that idiosyncracy is the right spelling because words ending in the sound -krasi are spelt with -cy.

farce (Lit.); ‘stuffing’. See coMEDY. The connexion with the etymological sense lies in the meaning interpolation, the farce having
