page: 609

+ Greek plays is written. The scheme in Greek Tragedy (with further variations in Comedy) is:

v= w= vU=

J on VwVuVluUVY| UUM! UUYU] UUYU] UYU Vue com eh wed

mW These six-foot iambics are in modern use called alexandrines (see above), & rhymed couplets of them are the French dramatic metre.

iambus (Pros.); ‘invective’. The foot u—, named as employed in early Greek satires.

ictus (Pros.); ‘ beat’. The stress laid on particular syllables in marking the rhythm of verse; the part of a foot on which the ictus falls is said to be in arsis (see above), & the other part tn thesis (see below). In the line

Unrespited, unpitied, unreprieved, there is no ictus on the first or the second un- but ictus on the third.

tdola tribus, specus, fori, theatri (Log.); ‘phantoms of the tribe, cave, market, theatre’. Bacon’s classification of fallacies; see IDOLA FORI.

ignoratio elencht (Log.); ‘ignoring of the (required) disproof’. A fallacy consisting in disproving or proving something different from what is strictly in question; called in English the fallacy of irrelevant conclusion. If the question is whether the law allows me to pollute water passing through my garden, & I show instead that it ought to allow me, since the loss to me by abstaining is a hundred times greater than my neighbour’s from the pollution, I am guilty of i.e.

imparisyllabic (Gram.); ‘ unequalsyllabled ’. A name given to those Greek & Latin nouns which have fewer syllables in the nominative than in other cases, as nom. virtus, gen. virtuits.

inceptive, inchoative, (Gram.); * ontaking ’, ‘ beginning’. Names given to verbs meaning ‘to begin to do something’; in Greek -ské & in

1351

+ Latin -sco are the i. terminations, as Exgniss) learn (i.e. come to know), calesco grow warm. The many English words in -esce, -escent, as recrudesce, tridescent, are from Latin ii.

indirect object (Gram.). The person or thing secondarily affected by the action stated in the verb, if expressed by a noun alone (i.e. without to, for, &c.) is called the i.o.; in Latin & Greek it is recognizable, as it once was in English, by being in the dative, while the (direct) object is in the accusative. The English dative now having no separate form, the i. o. must be otherwise identified, viz by the fact that it stands between the verb & the object (Hand me that book), &, if it is to follow the object, must be replaced by & preposition phrase (Hand that book to me). Variations are (1) when no direct object is expressed, as You told me yourself, (2) when the direct object is a mere pronoun & is allowed to precede, as I told it you before (but not I told the story you before), (8) when the i.o. is after & passive verb, as It was told me in confidence.

INDIRECT QUESTION. A question subordinated & serving as object, subject, &c., of a sentence. For some cautions on order of words, see the article; & for punctuation, see question mark in Stops.

induction (Log.); ‘* bringing in’. Reasoning from particular (‘ cited ’) cases to general principles; inferring of a law from observed occurrences. If I argue, from the fact that all the MacGregors I have known are Scotch, that MacGregor is a Scotch name, I make ani. Cf. deduction above.

inflexion (vb inflect) (Gram.); ‘making curved’. The general name, including declension, conjugation, & comparison, for changes made in the form of words to show their grammatical relations to their context or to modify their meaning in certain ways. Cats, him, greater, sued, are formed by i. from, or are ii. of, cat, he, great, & sue.
