page: 610

intensive (Gram.); ‘ tightening up’. Said of words or word-elements that add emphasis; in vastly obliged, perdurable, vasily & per- are ii. Often in contrast with privative (see below); the in- of inctstve (& intensive) is intensive, & that of incivility privative.

IRONY (Lit.); ‘ dissimulation ’.

itacism (Gram.); ‘saying ita’. Pronounce é’tasizm. The use in Greek of the sound é instead of the original 4 for the letter eta; also the tendency in late & modern Greek to reduce many sounds once distinct to é; also the substitution by copyists in MSS. of eta for other letters in consequence of this change in pronunciation. Cf. etacism above.

labial (Gram.); ‘of the lip’. Sounds made by complete or partial closure of the lips are called l1., including the consonants p, b, m, w, & (labiodental) f & v, & the vowels 6 {in no), 66 (in fool), 60 (in full), ow (in how).

legitimate drama (Lit.). A phrase denoting the plays of permanent value such as are Included in repertories & revived from time to time, in contrast with melodrama, musical farce, revue, adaptations of foreign plays, & other fugitive pieces.

liquids (Gram.). The letters! &r, & sometimes also m & n, are so called.

litotes (Rhet.); ‘frugality’. The same as, or a variety of, meiosis Asee below). Sometimes confined to the particular kind of rhetorical understatement in which for the positive notion required is substituted its opposite with a negative. In 1 Cor. xi. 17, 22, I praise you not has the effect of an emphatic I blame; not a few means a great number; Not bad, eh?, after an anecdote, means excellent. But often used, indifferently with metosis, of other understatements meant to impress by moderation.

locative (Gram.); ‘of place’. Nouns in Indo-European languages had a case so called, equivalent in sense to an adverb of place, e.g. Latin domé at home, Romae in Rome.

lyrics (Lit.); ‘of the lyre’. The OED definition (as regards modern usage) is: ‘Short poems (whether or not intended to be sung), usually divided into stanzas or strophes, & directly expressing the poet’s own thoughts & sentiments’. The short pieces between the narrative parts of Tennyson’s Princess (Home they brought her warrior dead, &c.), are typical examples. Wordsworth’s Daffodils, Shelley’s Skylark, Keats’s Grecian Urn, Milton’s Penseroso, Burns’s Field Mouse, MHerrick’s Rosebuds, Lovelace’s Lucasta, Shakspere’s It was a lover, may serve to illustrate; but attempts to distinguish lyric try clearly from other kinds (epic, dramatic, elegiac, didactic, &c.) have not been successful, the classes not being mutually exclusive.

major (Log.). See syllogism below.

majuscule (Palaeography); ‘ somewhat larger’. See uncial below.

masculine rhyme (Pros.). See MALE 2.

meiosis (Rhet.); ‘lessening *. The use of understatement not to deceive, but to enhance the impression on the hearer. Often applied to the negative opposite illustrated under litotes above, but taking many other forms, & contrasted with hyperbole. Very common in colloquial & sl English; the emphatic rather (Di you ever hear Caruso?—Rather!), the American some (This is some war; see SOME 1), the schoolboy decent (=firstrate &c.), the retort Pui see you further (i.e. in hell) first, & the strangely inverted hyperbole didn’t half swear (=swore horribly), are familiar instances.

MELODRAMA (Lit.); ‘music drama’,

metaphor net) *‘ transferring ’. See the article, IMILE. ~

metathesis (Gram.); ‘change of position’. When successive sounds in a word change places, as the s & p in khasp (earlier haepse) & clasp (earlier also clapse), the s & k in ask (vulg., & formerly in equally good use, az), the r & i in third (earlier thridde) & thrill (earlier thirle), the
