page: 612

+ objective genitive. In English the

| primary sequence. In modern gram- : of > genitive is usual, it the

| mar the word is sometimes applied inflected genitive or the possessive adjective also occurs, as in the Tsar's murder, the deep damnation of his taking-off.

oblique complement (Gram.).

See complement (D) above.

octonarius (Pros.); ‘eight each’. An eight-foot iambic line; see senarius below.

octosyllabics (Pros.); ‘ eight-syllable’. The usual name of the 8-syl. rhyming iambic metre used in Hudibras, The Lady of the Lake, &c. The way was long, the wind was cold; The minstrel was infirm & old.

ode (Lit.); ‘song’. The OED definition of the word in its prevailing modern sense may be given: ‘A rimed (rarely unrimed) lyric,often in the form of an address; generally dignified orexalted in subject, feeling, & style, but sometimes(in earlier use) simple & familiar(though less so than a song)’. But what with confusion between this very comprehensive modern sense & the more definite Greek sense (as in choric ode & Pindaric ode), what with the obvious vagueness of the modern sense itself, & what with the fact that ‘elaborate’ & ‘irregular’ are both epithets commonly applied to ode metres, the only possible conception of the ode scems to be that of a Shape If shape it might be called that shape

had none Distinguishable in member, joint, or

limb.

onomatopoeia (adj. -poetc, -poetic) (Gram.); ‘name-making ’. Formation of names or words foni sounds that resemble those associated with the object or action to be named, or that seem suggestive of its qualities; babble, cuckoo, croak, puff-puff, are probable examples.

optative (Gram.); ‘ of wish’. Greek verbs have certain forms called the o. mood, used in expressing wishes (=English would that I were &c.), & also to serve in historic sequence as the Greek subjunctive serves in

+ to whatever verbal form is used in expressing a wish, e.g. So help me God! or Oh that I were young again!

oratto obliqua, oratio recta, (Gram.); ‘bent speech, straight speech ’. Latin names, the second for the actual words used by a speaker, without modification, & the first for the form taken by his words when they are reported & fitted into the reporter’s framework. Thus How are you? I am delighted to see you (recta) becomes in obliqua He asked how I was & said he was delighted to see me; or, if the framework is invisible, How was I? he was delighted to see me. Most newspaper reports of speeches, & all thirdperson letters, are in oratio obliqua or reported speech.

ottava rima (Pros.); ‘octave verse’. The stanza invented by Boccaccio, adopted & made the regular Italian heroic metre by Tasso & Ariosto, & used by Byron in Don Juan. Eight eon iambic lines rhyming abababce. : When Newton saw an apple fall, he

found

In that slight startle from his

contemplation— Tis said (for PU not answer above

ground

For any sage’s creed or calcula-

tion)— A mode of proving that the earth

turn’d round

In a most natural whirl, called

* gravitation ” ; And this is the sole mortal who

could grapple, Since Adam, with a fall, or with an

apple.

oxymoron (Rhet.); ‘ sharp-dull’. The combining in one expression of two terms that are ordinarily contradictory, & whose exceptional coincidence is therefore arresting. A cheerful mist; Harmonioss discord; His honour rooted in dishonour stood, And fatth unfaithfal kept him falsely true.
