page: 615

+ i.e., the man who was afterwards their victim. More ordinary exear are He struck him dead, Fill full the cup, &c.

prosody (Lit.); ‘to song’. The science of versification, including (1) the rules of quantity & accent governing the pronunciation of words in a language, & (2) tables of the various metres showing the number & kind & arrangement of feet, lines, stanzas, &c., in each.

prosopopoeia (Rhet.); ‘ personification ’,. The Greek word of which

Bidar tik dara are the Latin & the

nglish translations, occasionally used instead of the more familiar term. See PERSONIFICATION.

tasis (Gram.); ‘ laying out before. ’, The subordinate elause or condition in a conditional sentence, normally standing before the apodosis or result, but often after it, as If I can come I will, or I will come sf I can, the if-clause being in each the p. Applied also to other subordinate clauses; but both terms are chiefly used in stating rules for the syntax of conditional sentences, especially in Latin & Greek.

pyrrhic (Pros.); ‘of the Pyrrhic (dance)’. The foot vv; in English represented chiefly by double anacrusis (see above), as O my in

O my/Mari/on’s a/bonny /lass (a trochaic dimeter catalectic with double anacrusis).

quaternarius (Pros.); ‘by fours’. A four-foot line, esp. the iambic or trochaic dimeter acatalectic, as in The way was long, the wind was cold. Why so pale & wan, fond lover? Cf. senarius below.

ain, quatrain, (Pros.); ‘fourteener ’, ‘fourer’. See -sTICH.

guinarius (Pros.); ‘ by fives’. A five-foot line, esp. of iambi as in blank verse; cf. senarius below. Old John of Gaunt, time-honour’d Lancaster.

reci (Gram.); ‘ back-forward’. R. pronouns are those used in expressing similar action of A

615

+ upon B & B upon A; r. verb is a term sometimes applied to verbs that can be used with a plural subject to denote mutual action; e.g., we fought, or argued, or corresponded, can imply an unexpressed (with) each other, whereas we shaved, or composed, or dressed, cannot. Cf. reflexive below.

reductio ad absurdum (Lag.); ‘ reducing to absurdity’. The method of disproving a thesis by producing something that is both obviously deducible from it & obviously contrary to admitted truth, or of proving one by showing that its contrary involves a consequence similarly absurd. A r.a.a. of the theory that the less one eats the healthier one is would be ‘ Consequently, to eat nothing at all gives one the best possible health’. The proof, as opp. disproof, by r. a. a. is the form often used by Euclid, e. g. in I. vi, where the contrary of the thing to be proved is assumed, & shown to lead to an absurdity. An extreme case, such as the eating nothing of the instance above, is often called ‘ the r. a. a. of’ a plan.

reduplication (Gram.); ‘ doubling ’. Repetition of a sound as a way of changing a word’s form for inflexional or other purposes; especially the syllable prefixed to Greek verbstems in forming the perfect (luéd, perf. leluka). Mamma, poohpooh, puf[fpuff, &c., are reduplications.

reflexive (Gram.); ‘ back-bent’. R. verbs are those of which the object & the subject are the same

rson or thing. Pride, vb, is re-

exive, since one prides oneself, not someone else; & many verbs that are not solely r. can be used reflexively, e.g. kill oneself. R. pronouns are those serving as object to r. verbs, myself &c.; the personal pronouns me, you, &c., are still rarely used as reflexives, e.g. in He sat him down, I ht me.

resolution (vb, fr ) (Pros.); ‘loosen again’. The substitution in a metrical foot of two shorts for @ normal long; a spondee by reso-
