page: 616

+ lution becomcs a dactyl or ana-

s a resolved iambus or trochee is a tribrach.

revue (Lit.); ‘review’. A loosely constructed play or series of scenes or spectacles satirizing, exhibiting, or referring to, current fashions & events.

rhetorical question (Rhet.). A question is often put not to elicit information, but as a more striking substitute for a statement of contrary effect. The assumption is that only one answer is possible, & that if the | hearer is compelled to make it maT himself it will impress him more than the speaker’s statement. So Who does not know .. .? for Everyone knows, Was ever such nonsense written? for Never was &c.

rhotacism (Gram.); ‘saying r’. Used of two tendencies: (1) abnormal pronunciation of r, as in some English dialects especially in the north; (2) reduction of other consonants to r, especially in Latin when s between two vowels becomes r (corpus, vulnus, genitive corporis, vulneris).

thyme (Pros.); ‘rhythm’. As now understood in English verse, r. is identity of sound between words or lines extending back from the end to the last fully accented vowel & not farther 3; greet & deceit, shepherd & leopard, quality & frivolity, stationery & probationary, are rhymes; seat & deceit, station & crusiacean, visible & invisible, are not. Words that, to judge from spelling, might have been rhymes, but have not in fact the required identity of sound, as phase & race, love & move & cove, are often treated as rhyming, but are called imperfect rhymes. Onesyllable rhymes are called male or masculine or single, two-syllable female or feminine or double, threesyllable & four-sylluble triple & quadruple.

rhyme royal (Pros.). A metre in stanzas of seven five-foot iambic lines rhyming ababbce. Chaucer’s Clerk’s Tale is a well-known example:

+ This sergeant cam unto his lord Pes 32 yn,

of Grisildis wordes and hir chere He tolde him point for point, in

short and playn, And him presenteth with his doghter

dere. Somwhat this lord hath rewthe in

his manere; But natheless his purpose heeld he

stille, As lordes doon, whan they wol han

hir wille.

RHYTHM (Rhet.); * flow’.

rider (Lit.). A clause tacked on to a Bill at a late stage with some addition or restriction or other alteration; a corollary naturally arising out of a more general principle; a problem soluble by means of some principle & used to test a learner’s grasp of it.

rococo (Art); ‘rockwork’. This & baroque are cpithcts applied, somctimes indifferently, sometimes with the distinction noted below, to tendencies prevailing in the architecture & furniture of the early 18th century in France & imitated clsewhere. Departure from the normal or expected, incongruous combinations, bristling surfaces, profuse ornament, strange or broken curves or lines, are the characteristic features. The distinction referred to is that r. is regarded as a form taken by b. when it aimed no longer at astounding the spectator with the marvellous, but rather at amusing him with the ingenious.

rondeau, rondcau of Villon, rondel, roundel, (Pros.); ‘round’. Poems of fixed form (named as ending where they began) with the common characteristics that the opening word, words, line, or two lines, recur at stated places, & that all rhymes are sct by the first two different endings.

In a rondeau, which is of thirteen lines exclusive of refrain, the first half line or less recurs as refrain after the eighth & the last lines.

In a rondeau of Villon, which is of
