page: 618

Ah, who shall help That sweet forgotten, E’en as we doubt With a rush of tears Love comes back to ROUNDEL A roundel is wrought as a ring With craft of delight & with That the heart of the hearer A roundel Its jewel of music is carven of Love, laughter, or That fancy may fashion to hang As a bird’s quick song runs Pause answer to pausc, & again So moves the device whence, A roundel

toot (Gram.). Roots are the ultimate elements of language not admitting of analysis. In the word unhistorically, un-, -ly, -al, -ic, -tor, can all be set aside as successive affixes modifying in recognized ways the meaning of what each was added to. There remains HIS, which would be called the root if unhistorically were an isolated word; investigation shows that the same element, with phonetic variations that are not arbitrary, is present in many other words, e.g. in English wit, in the Latin-derived vision, & in the Greek-derived idea; & that the Indo-European or Aryan root is VID, with the sense sight or knowledge. Cf. stem below.

roundel. See rondeau above.

rune (Lit.); ‘secret’. In the plural, the letters of the earliest ‘Teutonic alphabet, used especially by Scandinavians & Anglo-Saxons, & devcloped peer in the 2nd or 8rd cent y modifying Roman or Greek letters to facilitate the ‘carving of inscriptions. In the singular, & name given to certain

innish (& sometimes incorrectly to old Scandinavian) poems or their cantos.

saga (Lit.); ‘story’. ‘ Any of the Marrative compositions in prose that

SATIRE us from over-spelling forbidden lore! in our hearts once more, to our eyelids welling, his vacant dwelling. OF SWINBURNE or a starbright sphere, cunning of sound unsought, may smile if to pleasure his ear is wrought. all or of aught— mourning—remembrance of rapture or fear— in the ear of thought. round, & the hearts in us hear the same strain caught, round as a pearl or tear, is wrought. were written in Iceland or Norway during the middle ages; in English use often applied spec. to those which embody the traditional history of Icelandic families or of the kings of Norway ’"—OED.

sapphics (Pros.); ‘of Sappho’. A Greek & Latin stanza metre

VU /uvu—u- ler

—Vu-w often imitated, but with grotesque misrepresentation of the rhythm, in English. Hookham Frere, joint author with Canning of the bestknown example, ‘Needy knifegrinder *, illustrates the departure

rom the Latin rhythm by printing an English sapphic with the impossible quantities required:

— = Cold wis thé night wind; drifting

fast thé sndws féll; Wide wére thé downs, and shéltérléss

and nakéd, Whén & poor wand’ rér striggléd dn

hér journ¢éy Wéary ind waysoére. Real sapphics would require a strong accent on the italic syllables, & no accent on drift-, shel-, & strug-, besides minor differences.

SARCASM (Lit.); ‘ flesh-tearing ’.

Satire (Lit.); ‘medley’. See HUMOUR.
