page: 620

A pagan suckled in a creed So might I, standing on this Have glimpses that would Have sight of Proteus rising Or hear old Triton blow his

In the Shaksperian s., though the pause between octave & scstct is present, the structure consists Icss of those two parts than of three

Let me not to the marriage Admit impediments. Love Which alters when it alteration Or bends with the remover O, no! it is an ever-fixed That looks on tempests & is It is the star to every wandering Whose worth ’s unknown, Love ’s not Time’s fool, though Within his bending sickle’s Love alters not with his brief But bears it out even to the If this be error & upon mc I never writ, nor no man quatrains, each with two indepen-

Of the Miltonic s., which follows the Petrarchan in the arrangement of the octave, the peculiarity is that

When I consider how my Ere half my days in this dark And that one talent which is Lodged with me useless, To serve therewith my Maker, My true account, Iest He, . Both God exact day-labour, I fondly ask. But Patience, That murmur, soon replies ‘ Either man’s work or his own Bear his mild yoke, they serve Is kingly; thousands at his And post o’er land & ocean They also serve who only

sorites (Log.); ‘heap’. Applied to two entirely different things. 1. A process by which a predicate is

I’d rather be outworn; pleasant lea, make me less forlorn; from the sea; wreathéd horn. dent rhymes, followed by a couplet again independently rhymed—seven rhymes as compared with the Petrarchan four or five:— of true minds is not love finds, to remove: mark never shaken; bark, although his height be taken. [octave] rosy lips & checks compass come; hours & wecks, edge of doom. proved, ever loved. the octave & the scstct are worked into one whole without the break of sense elsewhere observed:— light is spent world & wide, death to hide though my soul more bent & present returning, chide, light denied? ” to prevent [octave] God doth not necd gifts. Who bcst him best. His state bidding speed, without rest; stand & wait’.

a eee brought into the desired relation to a subject by a series of propositions in which the predicate of one. be-
