page: 621

+ comes the subject of the next, & the conclusion has the first subject & the last predicate. Thus: Schoolmasters are teachers; Teachers are benefactors; Benefactors are praiseworthy; Therefore schoolmasters are praiseworthy. A sorites may be a short way of exhibiting truth, or, as in the above example, may conceal fallacies at each or any step. 2. A logical trick named from the difficulty of deciding how many A gentle Knight was

pricking on the

Ycladd in mightie armes Wherein old dints of deepe The crucl markes of many Yet armes till that time His angry steede did chide As much disdayning to Full jolly knight he scemd, As one for knightly giusts

spirant (Gram.); ‘ breathing’. ‘A consonant which admits of a continued emission of some amount of breath, so that the sound is capable of being prolonged ’—OED. Sometimes confined to f, th, v, as developed from p, t or d, b, followed by h; sometimes including also the sibilants, liquids, nasals, semivowels, & aspirate. Cf. also fricatwe & aspirate above.

spondee (Pros.); ‘libation’. The foot ——, as in gold cup or dry rot.

stanza (Pros.); ‘standing’. Many poems consist of a succession of metrically similar line-groups each of which has the same number & length of lines & the same rhymescheme as the rest. This pattern unit is called, especially when of more than two lines, a stanza. It may be of a generally accepted kind, as the alcaic or Spenserian or rhyme royal s., or one made for the occasion & observed throughout a single poem only.

stem (Gram.). A word’s stem is the part ‘from which its inflexions may be supposed to have been formed by the addition of affixes; in the inflexions it may be found unchanged, or may have been affected by phonetic tendencies; thus the s. of

+ grains of corn make a heap; is a man bald who has 1000, 1001, 1002, &c., hairs on his head? If the Almighty cannot undo the done, where is the line of almightiness to be drawn?

Spenserians (Pros.). The metre of the Faerie Queen, often used by later poets, especially by Byron in Childe Harold; eight five-foot & a ninth six-foot iambic lines, rhyming ababbcbcce.

laine, & silver shielde, wounds did remaine, a bloudy fielde; did he never wield: his foming bitt, the curbe to yicld: & faire did sitt, & ficrce encounters fitt. man is man, giving man’s, men, & men’s. Cf. root above; of the English verb wit the root is VID, but the stem, giving wit, wot, wist, woltest, &c., is wit. Different parts of a ‘word’ may be formed from different stems; there are e.g. several stems in what is called the verb be.

stichomyth (Lit.); ‘line-talk’. In verse plays, interchange of short speeches consisting each of a single line. Common in Greek plays; & modern examples may be found in Les Femmes Savantes 111. vi & Richard III, rv. iv. 342 foll.

stop (Gram.). For punctuation, see Stops. In phonetics, stop is a term equivalent to explosive (see above).

strophe (Pros.); ‘turn’. Part of a Greek choric ode chanted while the chorus proceeded in one direction, to be followed by a metricall exact counterpart as it returned. Number & length & metre of the lines composing it unrestricted. For an example see antistrophe above.

subjective genitive (Gram.). See objective genitive above for the principle. If from the sentence God created man two nouns are taken, God’s creation contains a subjective
