page: 622

+ genitive, & man’s creation (or usually the creation of man) an objective genitive.

suffix (Gram.); ‘ attached below ’. An affiz (see above) at the end of a word or stem to make a derivative, as -cy, -ship, -ful, in tenan(t)cy, lordship, & fearful.

suggestio falsi (Rhet.); ‘ suggestion of the untrue’. The making of a statement from which, though it is not actually false, the natural & intended inference is a false one. E.g., if A, asked whether B is honest, replies, though he in fact knows no harm of B, that his principle is to live & let live & he is not going to give away his old friend, the questioner infers that A knows B to be dishonest. Cf. suppressio veri below.

supine (Gram.); ‘lying face up’.

tin-grammar term for two verbal nouns (or adverbs) ending in -um, -u, of no importance in English

mmar except as an occasional name for the infinitive with to (to go) as distinguished from the infinitive without to (go).

suppressio veri (Rhet.); ‘ suppression of the true’. Intentional withholding of a material fact with a view to affecting a decision &c. ; ef. estio falsi above.

surd (Gram.); ‘ deaf, dumb’. See sonant above.

syllepsis & zeugma (Gram., Rhet.); * taking together’, ‘ yoking’. Two figures distinguished by scholars, but confused in pular use, the second more familiar word bein applied to both. Examples o syllepsis are: Miss Bolo went home an a flood of tears & a sedan chair./ He lost his hat & his temper./The flood of enthusiasm & flowers was terrific. /She was seen washing clothes with happincss & Pears’ soap.

Examples of zeugma are: Kill the boys the luggage!1/The pineapple was _ eaten the apples neglected./With weeping eycs & hearts eee Pan with flocks, with fruits Pomona crowned.

What is common to both figures is

+ that a single word (that italicized in each example) is in relations that seem to be but are not the same with a pair of others. The difference is that syllepsis is ically correct, but requires single word to be understood in a different sense with each of its pair (e.g., in the last with expresses first accompaniment, but secondly instrument), whereas in zeugma the single word actually fails to give sense with one of its

air, & from it the appropriate word hag to be supplied—destroy or plunder the luggage, the apples were negiccted, bleeding hearts, Pan surrounded.

syllogism (Log.); ‘ combined reasoning ’. Deduction, from two propositions containing three terms of which one appears in bath, of a conclusion that is necessarily true if they are truc; as. of the simplest form is; All men are mortal; All Germans are men; Therefore all Germans are mortal. The predicate of the conclusion (here is called the major term, & the preliminary proposition containing it the major premise; the subject of the conclusion (here Germans) is called the minor term, & the preliminary proposition containing it the minor premise. The term common to both premises (here men) is called the middle term.

synaeresis (Gram.); ‘taking to-

ther’. The opposite of diaeresis fees above); i.e., the making of two separate vowel sounds into one, as when aerial is pronounced like Ariel, naive like nave, extraordinary as -trord-, or cocaine (originally three syllables) as -cane.

ha (Pros.); * smearing to-

ther’. The non-sounding of a

nal vowel before an initial vowel, whether indicated by written elision as in Greck verse or left to the reader's perception as in Latin verse. Cf. crasis & prodelision above, & synizesis below.

synaphea (Pros.); ‘ joini together’, In most Latin & Greek
