page: 624

+ TECHNICAL TERMS Oh! more than these The being—& even yet The mortal saviour who And see thy diadem, so By fresh barbarians, on And the sweet sun Thy moral morn, too long And noxious vapours Such as all they must By servitude, & have the tetralogy (Lit.); ‘four pieces’. In

624 illustrious far shall be he may be born— shall set thee free, changed & worn thy brow replaced; replenishing thy morn, with clouds defaced, from Avernus risen, breathe who are debased mind in prison. ancient Athens, a trilogy (see below) with the addition of a satyric drama or comic play with chorus of satyrs, forming the unit offered by cach competitor for the tragic prize. Now, any set of four connected plays or tales.

tetrameter (Pros.). See -meter above.

tetrastich (Pros.). See -sTIcn.

thests (Pros.); ‘putting down’. The unaccented part of a foot. See arsis above; syllables not marked with an accent in the examples there given are said to be in thesis.

tmests (Gram.); ‘ cutting’. Separation of the parts of a compound word by another word inserted between them, as when ‘toward us’ is written fo usward, or ‘ whatsoever things ’ what things socver.

iribrach (Pros.); ‘three short’. The foot Uuvy, chicfly serving as the resolved equivalent of a trochee or iambus, in Greek & Latin verse. English scansion is so loose that any example is of doubtful validity; but the following line may be said to begin with a t.: Travel you/far on,/or are/you at/

the farthest?

trill (Gram.). A Ictter pronounced with vibration of the tongue or uvula, especially r.

trilogy (Lit.); ‘three pieces”. In ancient Athens, there were dramatic competitions at which each dramatist presented three plays, originally giving successive parts of the same

egend; the extant Agamemnon, Choephoroe, & Eumenides, of Aeschylus formed a trilogy, &, with the addition of the lost Proteus, a tetralogy (see above). Later trilogies

+ were connected not necessarily by a common subject, but by none works of the same poet prescntc on the same occasion. In modern use the word is applied to a work such as Shakspere’s Henry IV, comprising three separate plays, or to a novel &c. with two sequels. .

trimeter (Pros.). See -meter above.

triolet (Pros.); ‘ three-picce’; An eight-line poem in which the first line occurs thrice (1, 4, 7) & the second twice (2, 8), & the other lines rhyme with these two. An example (Robert Bridges) is: All women born are so perverse No man need boast their love

possessing. If nought seem better, nothing ’s

worse: All women born are so perverse. From Adam’s wife, that proved a

curse Though God had made her for a

blessing, All women born are so perverse | No man _ need boast their love

possessing.

triplet (Pros.). See -sticn. Applied specially to the occasional use, in rhymed-couplet metres, of three lines instead of two to a rhyme; common in heroic couplets, especially in Dryden; the following example is from Scott: The humble boon was soon obtained; The aged minstrel audience gained. But when he reached the room of

state, Where she, with all her ladies, sate, Perchance he _ wished his boon

denied: For, when to tune his harp he tried,
