page: 626

+ Out of the reddest hell of the

fight I may be snatched and flung Into the everlasting lull, The immortal incommunicable

dream. Because I saw her pass With the flickering candle-light Across her bosom’s curve, A circle on the wall, In which she moved, Alone, Up to her little room. . Within an office whose exterior Resembles an ultra-conservative

mind You battle with the avaricious

words Of a meager, petrified man. Your face is brown stagnation Sometimes astounded by athrust Of chattering wistfulness. Bravery is fear Effectively sneering at itself, And you are forever wavering Upon the edge of this condition. Yet your obscurity Is an important atom In the mysterious march of time. A sonnet, skeletonized to modern ormula—Times] 5.

With running laughter Her cailins came out of the

grassy morning Calling her, and fierce hawks

rose from the trees Around them. Rushing down

the on glenside They sobbed among the grum-

bling kerns and pulled Their tumbling hair about them,

moaning: ‘ Ochone.’ . Messengers, ' Of varied fate, Of pace and toss and gain, Of life and driven time, And the inane Of jesters. Out into a green backyard came

a woman in a blue apron Carrying yellow meal in a bright

tin pail.

The chickens came running;

And those little hungry sparrows

that are my thoughts

All day teasing and quarrelling,

Settled down on the grass among

the plump flock,

Greedy and pleased. 8. Phenix, bird of terrible pride,

ruddy eye and iron beak!

Come, leave the incinerary nest;

spread your red wings.

And soaring in the golden light

survey the world;

hover against the highest sky;

menace men with your strange

phenomena. 0. We stand in the crowd, craning

our necks,

To see in small cages linnets new

caught,

And a puppy of dubious descent

is waved in our faces, and

here

With the daylight dimming his

eyes is an owl, fluffy, solemn

and queer. 10. Jammy-mouth from the feasts

of the gods

From the far crystal cities

We come,

Where in talking trees

The old beast sings

To himself

And his voice

Is terrible to the kings of

cities.

From this globular grey hubble-

bubble

We come.

vicious circle. In logic, circle & vicious circle mean the same—the basing of a conclusion on a premise that is itself based on this conclusion; for an example see arguing in a circle above. The phrase ov. c. is also applied outside logic to the reaction between two evils that aggravate each other: The wrecked sailor’s thirst makes him drink salt water; the salt increases his thirst.

villanelle (Pros.); ‘ country-piece ’. A form of poem in five (or more) tercets & a quatrain, all on two
