page: 627

+ rhymes, one that in the middle line of each tercet & the second line of the quatrain, the other everywhere else. The first line ends the second & the fourth tercet; the third line ends the first, third, & fifth tercets $ & the quatrain ends with the first & third lines. Example, from Austin Dobson:

When I saw you last, Rose,

You were only so high;—

How fast the time goes!

Like a bud ere it blows,

You just peeped at the sky,

en I saw you last, Rose!

Now your petals unclose,

Now your May-time is nigh;—

How fast the time goes!

And a life,—how it grows!

You were scarcely so shy,

When I saw you last, Rose!

In your bosom it shows

There ’s a guest on the sly;

(How fast the time goes!)

Is it Cupid? Who knows!

Yet you used not to sigh,

When I saw you last, Rose;—

How fast the time gocs!

voiced (Gram.). See sonant above.

weak ending (Pros.). Blank-verse lines whose last word is a proclitic (e.g. a preposition with its noun still to come, the if of a clause, the auxiliary have) are said to have weak endings. These are of importance in determining the sequence of Shakspere’s plays, being more frequent in the later. Examples:

You demi-puppets that By moonshine do the green sour ring-

That ‘caifiike th lowi

allowed through? . .

calflik ey om n Tooth’d briers.

Not a relation for a breakfast, nor Befitting this first meeting.

But, howsoe’er you have Been justled from your senses, know

for certain. zeugma. See syllepsis above.

627

techy. See TETCHY.

teens (in one’s t. &c.).

No apos- obsolete by the OED for all senses, though it ap

trophe.

teethe, teething. For the dh sound,

see TH & DH.

teetotaller, but teetotalism; see

-LL-, Le.

telephone, vb, makes -nable; see

UTE E.

temerarious. ‘ Now only literary ’

—OED; see LITERARY worDs.

templet, -plate. The -et form is

better, the other being due to false ne with plate in wall-plate

C.

temptress. See FEMININE DESIG- NATIONS.

tenant. Tenant farmer, & tenant right, should be so written without hyphens; see HyPHens (3 B for the second, & group *Lord Mayor for the first).

tem See wIND, n.

tend (=attend). Dr Hutton has written an interesting account of the Eskimos of Labrador, among whom he has lived for some years past tending to their needs in his hospital. Since this verb tend (unlike the one connected with tendency) is said to be merely an aphetic form of attend, it is remarkable that its construction & that of attend should differ; but they certainly do; tend one’s needs, but attend to one’s needs; see Cast- IRON IDIOM.

tender makes -er, -est; -ER & -EST 2.

tendon of Achilles is the English, & tendo Achillis the Latin; mixtures of these should be avoided, & the only other form should be ‘ the Achilles tendon’ colloquially. tendril makes tendrilled; -Li-, -L-. tenet. Pronounce té’nit. tenor. The form ftenour is called

rs in some of its 19th-c. quotations, esp. in the sense course or procedure or purport; see -OUR & -oR. TENSES &c. Certain points requir- ing care will be found under Sr- QUENCE OF TENSES, SUBJUNCTIVE,
