page: 632

that is justified as meaning ‘the

well-known ’, Compare also: The

world needs peace. You will always

find us at your side to preserve that

peace bought by so much blood. Here

the justification of that is its referring

back to the peace of the previous

sentence.

The misuse here objected to is stil]

commoner in the plural > 8€e THOSE,

that conj. 1. Kinds of clause

attached by ¢. conj. 2. Omission of

é. in substantival clauses. 3.7. &

whether with doubl( ful). 4, Interim

é. 5. & as after (tn) so far. 6.

Non-parallel #.-clauses in combina-

tion.

1. Kinds of clause attached by 1,

conj. In adjectival or relative

clauses that begin with #., it is a

relative Pronoun, nota conjunction;

Sec for these the next article. JT >

conj. attaches a substantival clause

to the verb, noun, &c., to which it

is object (I hear that he is dead),

subject (T. pain exists t$ certain), in

apposition (The fact t. pain exists),

C.; or else an adverbial clause to

the word &c. modified (The heat is

Such that it will boil water). The

only point needing to be insisted on is that in either'case, whether the t.-clause is Substantival or adverbial, the sentence out of Which it is made ment form, not a question, command, or exclamation, Sentences ordinated or turned into clauses, but not by pretixing t. The mistake 1S not made by good writers, but yet occurs often enough to need mention. One way of avoiding it is so to arrange that there iS unsub-

expressly proclaimed?/Sir,—I am ordinated quotation of the question

abashed to see in my notice of Mr &c., & the other 18, before subordinating, to convert the question &c. into a statement giving the same meaning. Of the following

children. /For instance, you state the examples all but the third are of im-

exemption of incomes under £250 possible substantival clauses, & that

from income-tax would reduce taz- (Crises...) adverbial:—ZI should like

payers by siz millions. / The enormous fo point out to Reformer that, had the brave defender of Ladysmith known

rents which would be asked for new

houses would naturally render owners

he could hold out for another Po

months, would he not have tnformed

General Buller of the fact? (a. I should

like to ask R. this: Had ...b. he

would surely have informed)./Your

Correspondent suggests that tf we lend

money let us send it to Canada fer

railways there (a. Suggests: If... b,

we should send)./Crises, international

or national, arise so rapidly in these

days that who can Say what a fee

years may bring forth? (a. arise

rapidly in these ays; who...

b. that none can)./One can only

comment that tf such a refuge was

Open to the Romans, how much more

available is it to our own people, with

their vast territories over the seas,

comprising some of the Suavest climes

& most fertile soils on our planet!

(a. comment: If... b. Romans, it

is much more available).

2. Omission of ¢t. in substantival

clauses. I know that my Redeemer

liveth: I know J can trust you.

These are equally good English; if that were shifted from the first to the second, both would still be grammatically correct, but each less idiomatic than as itis. That is, the use or omission of the ¢. of a substuntival clause depends partly on whether the tone is elevated or colloquial. But a glance at the following examples of obviously Wrong omission will show that there is not free choice after all verbs or in all constructions:<—I assert the feeling in Canada today is such against annexation that . . -/Sir,—iIn reply to Mr Baker, may I point out tn the circular entitled ‘A Word to English Women’ the Opposition of
