page: 633

+ of existing properties restless & envious, with the result they would continually strive to raise their own rents to a similar level./There was much cheering when Mr Balfour blurted out that his own view was the House of Lords was not strong enough. It will be noticed that most of these are from the correspondence columns of newspapers, i.e. are b writers who may be unpractised. It at once occurs to the reader that state, assert, & point out, are words that stand on their dignity & will not dispense with the attendance of ¢. The same idea is not suggested about see in the fourth example, since a moment’s thought assures us that I see, & I see that, Vesuvius is active again are equally good. The reason why 2. is there required is that by omitting it the chance is lost of making plain the arrangement of the sentence & showing that in... Thackeray belongs not to see, but to have credited. The lesson of the last two examples is that omission is unadvisable when the substantival

clause is in apposition to a noun, as

here to result, & view.

It may be useful to give tentative

lists, to which everyone can make

additions for his own use, of verbs

that (1) prefer ¢. expressed, (2) prefer

t. omitted, & (3) vary according to

a ae of the context. (1) 7. is

usuSl with agree, assert, assume,

aver, calculate, conceive, hold, learn,

maintain, reckon, state, suggest; (2)

TZ. is unusual with belicve, presume,

suppose, think; (3) T. is used or

omitted with be told, confess, con-

sider, declare, grant, hear, know, per-

ceive, propose, say, see, understand.

The verbs with which the question

may arise are many more than these

few, which may however be enough

to assist observation.

38. T. & whether with doubt(ful).

It gave him cause for wonder that no

serviceable [petroleum] ‘ pool’ had

been revealed in England; that any

existed, however, seemed doubtful, for

clearly... The choice allowed by

idiom is between Whether any ex- 633

+ tsted seemed doubtful, & That any existed seemed unlikely, according to the shade of meaning required. See DOUBT(FUL).

4. Interim ¢t. It often happens to a writer to embark upon a substantival ¢.-clause, to find that it is carrying him further than he reckoned, & to feel that the reader & he will be lost in a chartless sea unless they can get back to port & make a fresh start. His way of effecting this is to repeat his initial ¢. This relieves his own feeling of being lost; whether it helps the inattentive reader is doubtful; but it is not doubtful that it exasperates the attentive reader, who from _ the moment he saw ¢. has been on the watch for the verb that it tells him to expect, & realizes suddenly, when another #. appears, that his chart is incorrect. These interim thats are definite grammatical blunders, which can often be mended by leaving out the offending ¢ with or without other superfluous words; in the examples below the omittcenda are bracketed. The first two show the most venial form of the mistake, the resumptive ¢. being inserted at the point from which progress to the expected verb is not to be again oe pes by subordinate clauses; the others are worse:—There can be no question that, had the Navy from the very beginning been unhampered by the restrictions volute tarily put upon its activities by the unratified Declaration of London, had neutral traders not been permitied to supply the encmy with things essential to war—c& in vast quantities—([that] the end of the war would have come much sooner. /He must have astonished the ‘* First Gentleman in Europe’ when he wrote to him that if he did not adopt the new principles, as laid down in his *‘ Grammar of the Siz Senses’,

ounded on Space, Time, & Eternity,

that] neither he nor his subjects could possibly hope to be saved./Is there any man of sane judgement in the Unionist Party who does not know in his heart that, if the Unionist Party were free
