page: 636

+ & which, of verbatim extracts from newspapers;_ the originals, corresponcang’y lettered, are reproduced below, the reader is invited to compare the two versions & to say whether, even apart from the grammatical theory here maintained, the re-writings do not offer him a more natural & easy English than the others:—

a. It examines the rat that carries the flea that harbours the germ that infects the poor Indian.

b. The Bishop of Salisbury is the third bishop that his family has given to the world.

c. Even the greatest encmy that this country may possess at this hour cannot fail to admire...

d. Visualize the wonderful things the airman sees & all the feelings he has.

e. It seems that the Derna, which arrived safely, was sent in the ordinary way.

f. It is extremely unwise to try to reinforce a bond that is quite adequate with others that might only prove disruptive.

g. Among the distinguished visitors the Crawfords had at Rome was Longfellow.

h. The greater proportion of Consols are held by persons or corporations that never place them on the market.

4. Even in the cathedral organ-loft there are grievances that flourish & reforms that call for attention.

k. It is necessary to root out the autocratic principles that underlie German militarism, which threatens the peace of the world.

i. King George & Queen Mary have been welcomed with the pomp & circumstance that may well attend an event new in the expericnce of India.

m. A hatred of the rule that not only is unable to give them protection, but strikes at them blindly & without discrimination.

n. He provides a philosophy that disparages the intellect, & forms a handy background for all kinds of irrational beliefs.

636

o. She cannot easily regain control of the threads of culture that she has let drop, which now lie in muddled tangles at her feet.

p. President Wilson has been very prompt with his reply to the Note that Dr Solf sent to President Wilson, which was received in Washington yesterday morning.

q. The life-work that Acton collected innumerable materials for, but never wrote, was a History of Liberty.

r. You give currency to a subtle fallacy that one often comes across, but does not like to see in one’s favourite paper.

s. After a search for several days, he found a firm that had a large quantity of them for which they had no use.

t. No-one can fail to be struck by the immense improvement they have wrought in the condition of the people, which often is quite irrespective of the number of actual converts.

v. There will be a split in the Lutheran Church comparable to the quarrel that has broken out in the Catholic Church on the question of modernism, which seems to have run its course.

w. The class that I belong to, which has made great sacrifices, will not be sufferers under the new plan.

z. The Pan-German papers are calling for the resignation of Herr von Kuhlmann in consequence of the speeches he has just made in the Reichstag, in which he admitted that it was impossible for Germany to win by force of arms.

y. All honour to these men for the courage & wisdom they have shown, which are of infinitely greater value to the country than...

In the original extracts, which are given below in italics, the words that have been changed in the above versions are in roman type; & where the reason for the change is not at once obvious, a note is added. But it will save repetition to state
