page: 639

+ that it has treated the miner, or any tndustry with the incompetence that at has treated the coal industry, & then expect peace (=with which)./We wery much question whether the eventual historian will regard it as a pertod of Rationalism in the sense that we have apparently agreed to regard the cighteenth century as a period of Rationalism (=in which)./ She found herself after Trafalgar in the same position that Rome found herself after the destruction of the Carthaginian fleet (=in which)./He took him for his model for the very reason that he ought to have shunned his example (=for which)./Others, watching the fluctuating rates of exchange with all the anxiety that a mariner consults his barometer in @ storm-menaced sea, are buying securities thai can... (= with which).

This is a freedom that should no more be allowed to lapse than the right of putting a preposition last or of omitting an objective that. But idiom requires that which should not be so treated; it has been tried, with obviously bad results, in:— It touched them in a way which no book in the world could touch.them./ The man who cleaned the slate in the way which Sir E. Satow has done both in Morocco & Japan. And further, that itself cannot be so treated unless the preposition to be supplied in the clause has been actually expressed with the ante-

cedent; in the following, at which

must be substituted for thai: One of

the greatest dangers in London is the pace that the corners in the main

streets are turned.

4. That-clause not close up. The

clinging of the defining that to its

antecedent has been noticed in 1.

It is the gap between it & the ante-

cedent that occasions a certain dis-

comfort in reading the correct

sentences below. Each that-clause

is, or at the least may be meant as,

defining; but between each & the

ct slag aeu of the a

orm ) » thor ougnjare, coun-

try) intervenes a clause or phrase

+ that would suffice by itself for identification. In such _ circumstances a thaf-clause, though correct, is often felt to be queer, & it is usually possible, though by no means necessary, to regard it as non-defining & change that to which. The reader will probably agree that the change would be desirable in some of the four, & in others for special reasons undesirable:— * Petty France’ was the name anciently borne by the thoroughfare now known as York-street, that runs from the Broadway, Westminster, to Buckingham Gate./Dingwall, which has

en avery active part in the electoral fight for the Wick Burghs, that has resulted in so striking a Liberal triumph, has other claims upon .. ./ The foolish formulae for which the Coalition was responsible, & that the Conservatives have taken over, are not good enough./When Mr_ Raleigh writes, as he does, as if America was a country of bounding megalomaniacs, that measured everything by size & wealth, he is talking nonsense.

5. One that in two cases. Examples o & p of the first section contained two relative clauses each, the which of each second one nr suppressed. It is quite in order to let a relative which or that carry on & serve a second clause as well, but only if three conditions are satisfied: the antecedent of the two must be the same; both must be defining, or both non-defining; & the case of the relative must be the same: this last condition is violated with which in o & p, & with that in the examples now to be given. If there is a change of case, that or which must be repeated; or, more often, the repetition should be saved by some change of structure, as suggested in the brackets:—The whole thing is a piece of hypocrisy of a kind that few associations would care to avow even in committee, but is here exhibited unblushingly in the light of ace (committee; but here it is exhibited)./ The art of war includes a technique that it is indispensable to acquire &
