page: 641

+ mans & the Russians, he will say, must have their separating the; & in these rigours sensible people will not follow him. What may fairly be expected of us is to realize that arnong expressions of several adjectives or nouns introduced by the some cannot have the repeated with each item (the black & white pen- Zuins), & some can logically claim the repetition (the red & the yellow tomatoes). A careful writer will have the distinction in mind, but he will not necessarily be a slave to logic; *the red & yellow tomatoes’ may be preferred for better reasons than ignorance or indolence. For other attempts to ig ts a needless rigid- Pd see ONLY, & NOT 1. —

The with two nouns & singular verb. Jt is the single-handed courage & intrepidity of these men which appeal to the imagination, & are even more marvellous than their adventures. Two nouns of closely allied meaning are often felt to make no more than a single notion; courage & intrepidity is almost a matte for intrepid lab that fecling is here strength-

ened by the writer’s choosing to use

only one the instead of two; & to

ehange appeal & are to appeals & is

would be not only legitimate, but an

idiomatic improvement.

§. Single adverbial the with com-

paratives. In ‘the more the mer-

rier’ we have double the; in * They

are none the better ’ we have single

the, & that is the type here to be

discussed; but in both types the

is not the ordinary adjective or

‘ article ’, asin ‘the table’ &c., but

an adverb (or, in the double type,

two adverbs); the original mean-

ings were in the double type by what

(i.e. by how much) & by that (i.e. by

so much), & in the single type by that

(i.e. thereby or on that account, or

sometimes by so much or that

amount). These facts are familiar

to all students of grammar, & are

simple enough; but the modern

idiom based on them is less easy to

be sure of. It will apd from the

extracts presently to be quoted that

1381

O41

Y

+ the usage here ascribed to the best writers is not universal, but often violated. What is here maintained is that good writers do not, & bad writers do, prefix the to comparatives when it conveys nothing at all; & again that good writcrs do not, & bad writers do, allow themselves a than after a comparative that hss the before it. The sccond & more limited question may be taken first: Is the with comparatives idiomatic if than follows?

Starting with the position that I have taken pills & you have not, I may be imagined saying I took the pills, but

(without the) A, Iam no better B, I am no better for taking them C, I am no better than if I had not

taken them D, I am no better than you

(or, with the)

I am none the better a,

I am none the better for taking

them

I am none the better than if I

had not &c.

I am none the better than you All eight mean the same, but the ‘the’ forms a, b, c, & d, are idiomatically in order of merit. The the in a means ‘thereby ’, or more fully *for taking them’, or more fully still ‘than if I had not taken them’. So a is better than 0 & c because it does not say the same thing twice, as they do. And bd is better, idiomatically, than e¢ because, though both are tautological, 6 is at least as often said as a, & is sanctioned by usage, while c is ve rare. Yet c, though it is rare, though nearly everyone who wished to use than would prefer to it the C form without the, is felt to be not worse than clumsy, & less bad at any rate than d, which sounds illogical. It would be hard to prove its illogicality against a defender of it, but there is no difficulty in seeing how the impression comes: ‘ but I am none the better than you’
