page: 642

+ means when expanded ‘ but I am no better than if I had not taken them than you’; that is, the comparison indicated by better is measured by two separate standards, a than-clause implied in the, & a than-clause expressed. The upshot is that the should never be used with a comparative if than follows, but that where the than-clause introduces a standard of comparison different from that implicit in the (as in d above), the departure from idiom is much more glaring. In all the following extracts the the form should be got rid of by omission of the, with any consequential change; but they are arranged in three sets, the first of the c type (tautological & unusual), the second of the d type (prima facie illogical), & the third of the type in which the is entirely meaningless.

c type

I do not believe that the New Royalty productions would have pleased people any the more than at present by having money lavished upon scenery (any the more=any more than if ney had not been lavished)./7f we take the attitude of accepting her theory of naval policy, we make it so much the less probable that she will change her law than tf we enter into violent contention (the less probable = less probable than if we did not take the attitude of accepting). / A sentence in the courts of summary jurisdiction has not any the less effect upon the status & prospects of a prisoner than a sentence in the superior courts (any the less effect = any less effect than if it were not in courts of summary jurisdiction).

d type

Variety theatre audiences, however, are well accustomed to foreign artisis speaking tn strange tongues, to whom, indeed, they often take surprisingly kindly, in view of the linguistic difficulties invowed; & Madame Réjane is not likely to be any the less heartiiy appreciated during ker present stay than on the occasion of any of her

642

+ former performances in London on the * legitimate’ stage (any the less heartily=any less heartily than if she did not speak in a strange tongue). /But does that make Sophocles more Greek than Aeschylus or Eunipides? Each of the latter may be more akin to other poets; but he is none the less Greek than Sophocles (none the less Greek =no less Greek than if he were not more akin to other poets).

Meaningless type

Meanwhile the intellectual release had been none the less marked than the physical (read no less marked). / Lam the more disposed to rely on Mr Austen Chamberlain's silence than on Mr Anderson’s attempt to resuscitate a quotation which less adventurous Tariff Reformers scemed disposed to let drop (read I am more disposed). / Herr von Kthlmann, no doubt, is defiant about Alsace-Lorraine & silent about Belgium in the hope that the Allies will be the less willing to go on fighting for the one than for the other (read will be less willing).

The more general question of when the is appropriate & when it is out of place before a comparative, without the complication of a following than, is simpler. What is here submitted is that a fashion has grown up of inserting the where it is indefensible, in the false belief that it is impressive or literary; such fashions are deplorable; it is wisdom either to abstain altogether from the adverbial the or to clear one’s ideas upon what one means by it. The function of this the is to remind or acquaint the reader that by looking about he may find indicated the cause (or sometimes the amount, when the means rather by so much than thereby) of the excess stated by the comparative. If no such indication is to be found earlier or later in the passage, the has no justification, & merely sets readers searching for what they will not find. Normal examples are: J am the more interested in his exploit be-
