page: 644

+ day by day are being jammed the more stringently./The British utility car, if ever we get it, won't come from any of the old-established houses; it will the more likely come from people who are entirely new to the business. / Mr Chamberlain, in a letter, has satd: ‘I think now on the Irish question exactly as I thought tn 1586’; that would be the more informing if wwe knew to what month tn 18586 the reference was./Ilere we have a whole series of workmen, all of them day day rendering us service of inestimable aalie j; nor are we any the less dependent upon those whose work ts like that of the miner./I said at the election before last that I was in favour of the railways being nationalized, but it would be all the morc true to say that they would have to be kept running & that those employed on them could not exercise their full powers of collective bargaining if they recre nationalized than tt is at the present time./And for the calendar year to date upwards of 9 millions have been cancelled; this would be the more significant had we not to bear in mind that the increase in the issue was considerably accelerated during the latter weel:s of 1918./This pratseworthy humanity would move us the more if there were not an obvious way of meeting the case—viz by making a grant.

It may even be thought that in the vogue of this the more &c., where the is an adverb, is to be found the explanation of the wrong adjectival the in:—This was by fur the more heroic course than that of the average Tories who took the more obvious party line to the last ditch./It is curiously entertaining to see how, in all esscntial things, the actor-playwright is invariably the better craftsman than the literary man who commences dramatisi. Read a far more herotc & a bettcr craftsman. Choice in such sentences lies between A ts a better man than B & Of the tiwoo A ts the better man; the wrong form A ts the better man than B either confuses those two or apes the adverbial use. 644

6. Double adverbial the with comparatives. It has been stated in 5 that in this construction one fhe means by how much & the other by so much. The most familiar example, *the more the merrier ’, is the short for ‘ by how much we are more, by so much we shall be merricr’. To keep this in mind is uscful in settling a doubt that often arises & is illustrated in the three quotations below—whether a relative (that or which) is in order in the ‘by how much’ or measure clause. The better education a girl can receive, & the more time which can be spent on her training, the better. / Probably the Icss that is said by outsiders the better./On shore the slipper limpets can be sold for {1 a ton for use as manure, & the more of them can be kept out of the sea the beiter are the prospects of the oyster. ‘By how much better education which a girl can receive’? No, that would be patent nonsensc, with two objects to the verb instead of one, & the writer has not written which; but * by how much more time whtch can be spent’ is as bad, & he has written which. It should be noted that if a the had been inserted before time the construction would have been different,= @ the more the time (is) whichcan; that would have been correct, if necdlessly long; but the extra the, which is indispensable to it, is not there. The which of the first quotation, & the that of the second, must be omitted, while the third, in which the writers of the others would almost certainly have used that or which again, is correct. Those who can read Latin, with quo & eo, or quanto & tanto, to take them right with the & the, can appreciate the point at once; & the mistakes of the first two pieces are due to the accident that in English the adverbial the is the same in form as the adjectival the; adjectival the & its noun (& more, less, can be nouns) are very commonly followed by that or which, so that ‘the more time which’ & ‘the less that’ have a quite
