page: 645

natural sound though they happen

to be ungrammatical. This account

of the mistake finds supportin: Ie

remarked that the opposition to them

increased with the more territory

that they occupied, where the really

is the adjective (or ‘ article ’) & that

is therefore not ungrammatical, but

where it is nevertheless plain that

the writer had in his head the double

the construction: the more territory

we occupy, the greater is the Opposition. Otherwise he would certainl

not have said ‘ with the more territory ’, but ‘ with the territory ’.

It may perhaps, then, safely be laid down that when, in the measure clause of a the... the construction, the question arises whether a relative pronoun should be inserted, the answer is no. But the quotation Jast used in reaching that result, with its halting between the construction we are considering & another, suggests the need of paying proper respect to this exceeding] neat idiom, of not confusing it with Other forms of expression, & of using it in its most effective shape & in the most suitable context. A oe of specimens, one good & one

ad in various ways, may serve as text:—

A, good

The more the merrier.

°

B, bad dividend that accrues to the poor, & (3) the less variable are the annual volume of the national dividend & the annual share that accrues to the poor.

dence of the two parts; but read The idiom may be described as a

the message was instead of was the sliding scale stating that one process

message./The less likely is the satisof increase or decrease varies with

faction of France's claims—morally the variation in another, & the two

just, but practically impossible—the parts are the measure & the thing

more frantic grow these appeals to measured. Points of merit are:

force on the part of certain deputies. brevity; close Correspondence be-

An unsuitable case, because the tween the two parts; occurrence of

parenthesis, & the last phrase (on

the in both parts; measure first &

thing measured afterwards; no in-

version in measure clause; no

inversion in thing measured if it

stands first, but inversion common

if it has its normal later place. All

these points are found in A, except

that its elliptical brevity leaves the

more we are (not are we) the merrier

Shall we (or we Shall) be. B fails in

almost all of them; itis long; the

compound nature of the measure

prevents neat correspondence; the

thing measured lacks its the; the

thing measured stands first: &

there is inversion in all three parts

of the measure. Most of these baits

are curable by some such rewriting

as this: The larger the average

volume of the national dividend is,

& the larger average share of this

accrues to the poor, & the less this

volume & this share vary from year

to Nae the greater is the economic

welfare of the community likely to

But the fact is that this idiom

is suitable chiefly to short emphatic poted sentences, & should not

ave been set to so elaborate a task.

A specimen or two may be added with comments:—The wider was the League the greater it would be. A the League was, the &reater would it Suitable case; but read The wider (or it would) be; for the rights & wrongs of inversion, see the article so named, especially the section After relatives & comparatives./The less distinct was the message which he felt impelled to deliver, the more beautiful is often the speech in which he proclaims it. A particularly suitable case, in spite of its length, because of the detailed correspon-
