page: 649

+ ment, with the Clarke award before them, is yet unable to enforce it./A widely circulated Unionist journal, having discovered a mare’s nest in its attempt to show that an Englishwoman’s Drawing-room was to be open to the Government Inspector, is now trying to inflict a sort of revenge upon Mr Lloyd George for their own: mistake by... Discussion, & other examples, will be found in PERSONI- FICATION, 2.

3. Unsatisfactory reference. For the many possibilities in this kind, see Pronouns. A few flagrant examples follow, the bracketed numbers referring to sections in Pronouns:—The Germans will argue that, whatever they may undertake to keep the French at bay, they will still have no guarantee that they will evacuate their territory or even refrain from further occupations when they prove unable to meet the enormous demands still hanging over them (4)./

It must not repeat this history with the Poles or fall into a sudden scepticism about the Minsk ncgotiations,

because they have succeeded in keep-

ing the enemy from the capital (8)./

If the Paris Conference have to fight

the Bolshevists, i is because, by

attacking their decisions in advance,

waging war against Statics which

they propose io sct up, & by their

unscrupulous propaganda, they have

begun to fight the Conference (4)./

That the error in date, & the deduction,

are from Dr Garnett’s preface, I am

well aware; but that dies not make

them either correct or accurate. In

this last, error in date is necessarily

part of the reference of them; but,

since a fact cannot make an error

correct or accurate, it should have

been ‘the date’ or ‘the erroneous

date ’.

4. Case. Like him & ne (which see

for comment), them & they occasion-

ally go wrong, as in:—The whole

foundation of our constitution depends

upon the King being faithfully served

by his advisers, & they taking com-

plete responsibility for every act which

he does./Several bodies of the tribesmen

649

+ then undertook to help Kaid Maclean to escape to the sacred oasis, to which his captors had been careful to draw near in the event of they themselves being in danger. Observe that responsibility for these two blunders rests with the FUSED PARTICIPLE; read, in the first piece, upon the King’s being ... & their ing, &, in the second, in the event of their being in danger themselves.

thimbleful. Pl. -ls; see -FuL.

thin makes thinness; see SPELLING POINTS, 2.

thine. See ABSOLUTE POSSESSIVES.

thing. Things musical, things canine, things Japanese, & the like, are phrases sometimes serviceable & businesslike, as at the head of a newspaper column, but suggestive of affectation where the only reason for using them is that they are a slightly out-of-the-way form of expression.

Se ee my, are the chief survivors of a large number of variants.

think. 1. After ¢., that is usually omitted; see THAT, conj., 2.

2. T. to do,=t. of doing or remember to do, is at best colloquial, though the OED does, without producing any quotations, recognize its existence, thus: ‘ Mod. Did you think to ask him how his father is? ’.

8. No thinking man. One of the bluffing formulae, like It stands to reason (see REASON, 2), that put the reader’s back up & incline him to reject the view that is being forced on him. In the following piece it will be noticed that the writer by implication rules out all Liberals from rational humanity: No thinking man can believe that, without fairer conditions of internal competition, without a broader basis of revenue, without a league of commerce & defence between the Mother country & her colonies, the Imperial State can continue to exist.

thinkable is a word of the same unfortunate ambiguity as its much more popular opposite UNTHINE- Y2
