page: 652

+ iteelf that suggests a restriction: though, & other conjunctions, must not be constructed with a participle unless that participle would have been used in the unabridged clause; but that would not have been though I am = sympathizing, but though I sympathize; contrast with this the perfectly satisfactory Though living he is no longer conscious, where the full form would be not Though he lives, but Though he is living.

4. Hlogical use. The danger of using adversative conjunctions whcre two propositions are not strictly opposed, but in harmony, is explained & illustrated in But, 8. In the following example, though would be right if the words ‘is the only country in Europe that ’ were not there; as it stands, the sentence is nonsense: Though it ts only in recent times thatin England the Jewish civil disabilities were repeated, Turkey ts the only country in Europe that has throughout been free of any anti-Jewish propaganda.

thral(l}dom. See -LL-, -L-, 4.

thrash, thresh. One word, with two pronunciations & spellings differentiated. To separate grain is almost always -esh; to flog is always -ash; in figurative & transferred use the spclling varies as the user thinks of one or the other of the two simple senses.

thrasonical. See PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

Threadneedle Street, Old Lady of. See SOBRIQUETS.

threaten. The Mass Vestmenis, now threatened to be authoritatively revived, have to be decided upon. See DOUBLE PASSIVE.

three-quarter(s). The noun expressing a fraction has the -s, &, though usually hyphened, is better written as two separate words; see Hypaens, 8B. This noun is often used attributively with another noun, e.g. with back at football, or with length or face in portraiture; in those conditions a hyphen is required to show that the adjective +noun has become one word; but further, it is usual, when a plural 652

+ noun is used attributively or compounded, to take its singular for the purpose, even if that singular does not otherwise exist (shear steel, not shears steel; scissor-shaped, not scissors-shaped; racket-court, not rackets-court; cf., however, fivescourt, breeches-maker, &c.) 3; accordingly, three-quarter back & threequarter face are the normal forms. But the nouns back, length, &c., are often dropped when context allows, & the attributive compound is allowed to represent them as well as itself; being then an elliptical noun, it has a tendency to resume its -s, & a three-quarters is perhaps mure often scen than @ three-quarter; either is legitimate.

threnody, threnode. The OED treats the first as the standard form.

thrive. The OED gives thkrove, thriven, as the past p-p-, but allows thrived for either.

throat. For a lump in one’s ft., see STOCK PATHOS.

throstle. The -t- is silent; see PRONUNCIATION.

thunderer. For the T.= The Times, see SOBRIQUETS.

Thursday. For the adverbial use, see FRIDAY.

thus. There is a particular use of thus that should be carefully avoided; it is very common in the newspapers, & the fact that the OED nevertheless does not quote a single example of it probably indicates that it is very uncommon elsewhere. In this use thus is placed before a present participle (thus enabling &c.), & its function, when it is not purely otiose, seems to be that of apologizing for the writer’s not being quite sure what noun the participle belongs to, or whether there is any noun to which it can properly be attached (cf. UnNar- TACHED PARTICIPLES); the exact content of thus itself is often as difficult to ascertain as the allegiance of the participle. To each quotation is ie 4 sea (1) @ guess at the noun

h the participle belongs, &
