page: 653

+ (2) a guess at the content of thus; the guesses are honestly aimed at making the best of a bad job, but readers may prefer other guesses of their own:—Our object can only be successfully attained by the substantial contributions of wealthy sympathizers, thus enabling us to inaugurate an active policy (contributions? by being substantial?)./Letters on the constant stopping of omnibuses, thus causing considerable suffering to the horses (stopping? by being constant?)./But now a fresh anxiety has arisen owing to the rising of the Seine, thus making the river navigation more difficult & slow (rising? by occurring?)./The Prince was, by the special command of his Majesty the Emperor, made the guardian of H.1I.H. the Crown Prince, thus mecessitating the Prince’s constant presence in the capital of Japan (the appointment as guardian? by occurring?)./This circumstance is due to the sail innovation introduced at the eleventh hour by Captain Burton, thus necessitating a remeasurement of some of Shamrock’s sails (innovation? by occurring?). It should be noticed that the resolution of the participle into a relative clause, & the omission of thus, gcts rid of the difficulty every time (which would enable; which causes; which makes; which necessitated; which will necessitate).

thyme. Pronounce tim; _ before the 17th c. the usual spelling was tyme or time.

tiara’d is preferable to tiaraed; see

-ED & "D.

tibia. Pl.-ae; see LATIN PLURALS.

tic douloureux. The best pronunciation (pace OED, which says ‘often mispronounced ’) is tik ddlor60’; see FRENCH worRDs, 2.

ticklish. So spelt; see MuTE E.

tidal is a word badly formed, according to the views expressed in HYBRID DERIVATIVES; yet the light-hearted suggestion of abandonment made about coastal cannot be repeated for it; it has not the same 658

+ barbaric appearance, & it is not so easily done without. Nevertheless, since it is perhaps the only respectable-looking & useful word in which the rule aguinst appending the adjectival -ai to a Teutonic noun has been disregarded, & since it is therefore more likely than any other word to be quoted in defence of new hybrids in its own image, a protest against its form, though not a pro-

osal for its disuse, is called for.

t is of no hoary antiquity, the earliest OED quotation being dated 1807 ; the objection to it need not be set out again here; see the article already referred to. {n case it should occur to any reader that the adjective bridal is comparable with ¢., it should be mentioned that that word is not a true adjective from bride+-al, but an attributive use of the noun bridal, which= bride + ale, = wedding feast; & bridal, unlike #., is of hoary antiquity.

tidbit. See TITBIT.

tidy, v. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

tie, v. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 8.

tiers état. See FRENCH WORDS.

tigerish, tigress. So spelt.

tike. See TYKE.

tilde (ti’idé). The mark put over n (fi) in Spanish when it is to be followed by a y sound, as in Sefior (sanyor’).

tile(r), tyle(r). The words used in freemasonry are usually spelt with y, but are not of different origin. See

\: to the", y &1.

till, until. The first is the usubl form; for what difference of usage exists, see UNTIL; e& cf. (un)to, (al)though, (up)jon, in(to),(al)though, amid(st), among(st), while & whilst, _ toward(s), beside(s),(be)twixt,(with)- .. in, with(al), (or) ere, whoso(ever),. . th(o)rough.

tilth. A word not open remarks made in -TH NOUNS, being very far indeed from a recent formation. It differs, however, from the really common nouns in -th, such as. truth & wealth & filth; though still
