page: 655

+ uration of the League of Nations will, presumably, be satisfied when Parliament meets, but there is a certain nervousness at the suggestion that Mr Lloyd George will go over there as chicf of the British delegation.

tipstaff. Pl. -affs or -aves. tiptoe, v., is, like hoe & shoe, an exception to the Mure E rule, & makes tiptoeing.

tipsy. See GENTEELISM.

tirailleur. See FRENCH worps.

tire, v., makes Hirable; see MUTE E. Tiredly is a bad form if the views expressed in -EDLY are sound.

tire, tyre. For other words in which the same spelling qucstion has arisen, see Y & 1. The OED regards the word as a shortening of attire— the whecl’s attire, clothing, or accoutrement; & it states the spelling facts thus: ‘ From 15th to 17th c. spelt Hire & tyre indifferently. Before 1700 tyre became eacrally obsolete, & tire remained as the reguiar form, as it still does in America; but in Great Britain tyre has been recently revived as the popular term for the rubber rim of ...’. From this it appears that there is nothing to be said for tyre, which is etymologically wrong, as well as needlessly divergent from our own older & the present Ameriean usage.

tiro, ty-. Spell ti-, & seey & 1; pil. -08, see -O(E)s 6.

tissue. The OED gives precedénce to tl’shii over ti’sii; but the latter is probably now regarded as the better pronunciation. It is clear, however, that the sh sound prevailed in the 16th c., since h, which can only be accounted for as marking sound, occurs in quotations from 1501; & this may be the reason for the OLD’s choice. Ti’si is here recommended.

Titan. For the weary T., see SOBRIQUETS.

titbit, tid-. The older spelling is tid-; but it is now so much less usual, & the significance of tid is so

655

+ doubtful, that there is no case for reverting to it. To make the two

arts of such words rhyme or jingle is a natural impulse that need not be resisted unless it involves real loss of meaning.

tithe makes -ihable; see MUTE E.

titillate makes titillable; see -aBLE 1.

TITLES. A curious & regrettable change has come about in the last twenty or thirty years. Whereas we used, except on formal occasions, to talk & write of Lord Salisbury, Lord Derby, Lord Palmerston, & to be very sparing of the prefixes Marquis, Earl, & Viscount, the newspapers are now full of Marquis Curzon, Earl Beatty, Viscount Rothermere, & similarly Marchioness this & Countess that have replaced the Lady that used to be good enough for ordinary wear. We have taken a leaf in this as in other matters from the Japanese book; it was when Japan took to European titles that such combinations as Marquis Ito first became familiar to us, & our adoption of the fashion is more remarkable than pleasing.

tittupy. Not -ppy; see -P-, -PP-.

tmesis. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

to. 1. Substitution for other prepositions. 2. Unidiomatic infinitive.

1. After three years’ experience of the official machine I am of opinion that the causes are to be found in the rottenness of the present system, to the absence of any system at all so far as Cabinet control ts concerned, & to - the system of bestowing honours on | the recommendations of Ministers. The tos result from indecision between are to be found & some loosely equivalent phrase such as may be traced, perhaps assisted by the writer’s glancing back to recover his construction & having his eye caught by to. This sort of mistake occurs much more often with or, under which it will be found fully illustrated. ;

2. Unidiomatic infinitive. The tmpossibility to assert himself in any manner galled his very soul./The two
