page: 656

+ factors are the obvious necessity to put an end once & for all to the Turkish misrule over alien races, & the... To assert & to put should clearly be of asserting & of pulling. Discussion will be found under Gerunp 8; but it may be added herc that it is not dificult to account for this very common lapse, sequences apparently similar being familiar enough. There is, for instance, nothing against saying It was an impossibility to assert himself, or It is an obvious necessity to put an end; the difference is that to assert &c. & to put &c. are not there, as in the cxamples, adjectival appendages of impossibility & necessity, but the real subjects of the sentences, which might have run To assert himself was an impossibility, & To put an end to so-&-so is a necessity.

toady, v. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

tobacco. PI. -os; see -O(E)s 8.

tobacconist. For the form, see -1sT.

toboggan makcs -aner, -aning; see

Usually spelt with c;

y, tomorrow, tonight. The lingering of the hyphen, which is still usual after tle to of these words, is a very singuiur picce of conservatism; it helps no-one to pronounce, jt distinguishes between no words that without it might be confused, &, as the éo retains no vestige of its original meaning, a reminder that the words are compounds is uscless. Moreover, it is probably true that few people in writing ever dream of inserting the hyphen, its omission -being corrected every time by those who profess the mystcry of printing.

toffee. The successive forms seem to have been taffy, toffy, toffee; it may be guessed that the last is due to the influence of coffee, but it is now established.

together. ll t. must be carcfully distinguished from ALTOGETHER, often written instead of it.

toilet, -ette. The word should be

656 °

+ completely anglicized in spelling & sound (not -e’tte, nor twahlé’t). The verb, = to wash, dress, &c., is chiefly U.S.; adj. & p.p. -eted, see -T-, -TT-.

tollless. So written, but pronounced with two separate is; see SKILL- LEss s.f.

token. For synonyms see SIGN. By the same t., more by t., are phrases that probably those who know most about their meaning are least likely to use; the one thing clear is that, when they were Y aaeke of everyday English, they did not mean what they are usually made to by those who now adorn their writings with them. See Warpour STREET.

toko. See Toco.

Toledo. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 6.

toll. For synonyms see Tax.

tomato. Pl. -oes; see -o(E)s 1.

Tommy. See SOBRIQUETS.

tomorrow, to-m-. See TODAY.

ton (fashion). See FRENCH WORDs.

ton (weight). Ton, the weight; tun, the cask, vat, & wine-measure.

tondo. Pl. tondos, see -0(E)s 6 ; or tondi (-é).

tone, v., makes -nable; see MUTE E.

tonight, to-n-. See Tropay.

tonneau. See FRENCH WORDS.

tonsil makes ¢tonsillitis; -Lu-, -1L-.

tonsorial. A word used almost only in PEDANTIC HUMOUR.

tonsure, v., makes -rable; MUTE E.

too. 1. With passive participle. 2. Mlogical uses.

1. With passive esi ee t. is subject to the same limitations, though the point has been less noticed, as vEny; the line, however, between the adjectival & the verbal P-P. is often hard to draw; in the followin two quotations the addition of wii &c. & in &c. to the participles turns the scale, & too much should have been written instead of too:—Belfast ts too occupied with tls own affairs, too con of itself, to be readily stirred to any movement which would endanger tts prosperity. /But he was too engrossed in Northern Europe to realize his F Lad

2. Ilogical uses. These are very
