page: 657

common, sO common as to deserve a place among the Strurpy INDE- FENSIBLES & to be almost idiomatic. They result from confusing two logical ways of making a statement, one with & the other without too, & are better avoided. Praise which perhaps was scarcely meant to be taken too literally (a, which may easily be taken too literally;_ b, which was not meant to be taken litcrally)./We need not attach too much importance to the differences between Liberal & Labour (a, We may easily attach too much; b, We need not attach much)./It ts yet far oo early to generalize too widely as to origins & influences (a, If we generalize too early we may gencralize too widely; b, It is too early to generalize widely).

tool. Of the forms edge-tool, ede tool, & edged tool, it appears from the OED that the last is the least common, especially in the literal carpenters’ use; choice between the others depends on whether fool retains its accent (edge tool), or parts with it to nee (edge-tool) as it naturally would with technical wear & tear, but not in the proverb & other metaphors; see HyPuENs 3 B.

toothful. Pl. -ls; see -FuL.

top, writing of compounds. In topbools, topcoat, & topsawyer, the accent is on the second part, & they are therefore not qualified for the hyphen (see Hyrpnens 88), but should be either as printed above, or each in two separate words. In top hamper & top hat the same is true of the accent, but the two-word solution is best, because p & h unseparated are apt to coalesce, as in Tophet. In topmast & topsail the loss of the definite vowel sound in the second part so disguises the fact of their ing compounds that hyphens, though legitimate, are clearly superfluous. In topgallant accent again forbids the hyphen, & the silence of the p forbids separate words. In top-heavy (where the question of accent does not arise as

+ in compounds of adjective followed by noun), the hyphen is required to separate p & h. See HyPHeEns.

topmost. See -mosr.

torchon. See FRENCH worDs.

tormentress. See FEMININE DE- SIGNATIONS.

tornado, torpedo. PI.

-0e8 3 sec -O(E)s 1.

For tornado, see also WIND, n.

torpid makes -est; see -ER & -EST 4.

torpor. So spelt; scc -our & -or.

torso. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 6.

tortoise. Pronounce tor’tus; the pronunciation -oiz or -ois is not even given as an alternative by the OED.

torus. PI. -ri.

toss. For tossed & tost see -T & -ED.

total. The adjective makes -alest, -ally, -alize(r), -alizator, -ality; & the verb -alled, -alling. See -.x-, -L-.

tother, now only colloquial, was formerly in good literary use, & was then morc often written tother than t’other; there is therefore no need for the apostrophe.

toto caelo. Literally, ‘by the whole sky’, i.e. by the greatest

ible distance. Properly used only with differ, different, & words of similar meaning; the writer of the following extract has guessed that it is a high-class variant of totally: ... had the effect of habitually repealing tls own canon in part, during the life-time of parties ..., & of repealing tt, toto caclo, after the death of either of them. See FOREIGN DANCER.

touchy. See TreTcny.

toupee, toupet. The first is the form common in Iingland in the 18th c., written without an accent & pronounced todopé’ ; the second is the French word, now used in England & pronounced t60’pié. Adjective toupeted, pronounced t60’pad.

tour de force. See FRENCH WORDS.

tourniquet. Pronounce toor’nikét.

tournure. See FRENCH WORDS,

tousle, tousy. The OED puts these spellings first; ftouz-, fows-, lorwz-,

so occur.
