page: 660

trait. ‘The final t is sounded in America, but still usually silent in england. For synonyms, see SIGN.

traitress. FEMININE DESIGNATIONS.

trammel makes -lled, -Uing; -LL-,-L-.

tranquil makes -illest, -illity, -illize, -illy; see -LL-, -L-, 2. Mis-spellings are very common, esp. tranquility, wrong even on U.-S. principles.

transact makes transactor; see -or.

transcendence, -cy. See -cz, -cy.

transcendent(al). These words, with their many specialized applications in philosophy, are for the most part beyond the scope of this book; but there are popular uses in which the right form should be chosen. 1. The word that means surpassing, of supreme excellence or greatness, &c., is transcendent, & the following is wrong—The matter is of transcendental importance, especially in the present disastrous state of the world. LONG VARIANTS for similar pairs. 2. The word applied to God in contrast with nmMANENT is transcendent. 8. The word that means isonet: idealistic, outside of experience, &c., is transcendental. 4. The word applied to Emerson & his ° religio-philosophical teaching’ is transcendental.

transcribe makes -bable; MUTE E.

transfer. Noun f¢ra’nsfer, transfer’, see NOUN & VERB; transferred, -erring, -errer, sec -R-, -RR- ; but transferable, sec CONFER(R)ABLE 3 & transference, transferee, & transferor. Of transferrer & transferor, the first is the gencral agent-noun, a person or mechanism that passes something on, & the second a legal term for the person who conveys his property to another, the transfcrec.

transfuse makes -sible; sec -ABLE 2.

transgress makcs transgressor; -or.

tranship, transship, trans-ship. To all who do not happen to have been reconciled by familiarity to the short form it presents itself as an odd sort of monster, which they start by pronouncing tri’nship cf.) transom), & do not at once connect 660 verb.

+ with shipping. And they have at any rate the justification, however little they may be aware of it, that there are no other words in which trans is curtailed to tran when it is aa bap to a word of English & not

tin origin like ship. ‘The full & indisputably better form trans-ship is accordingly here recommended; but the OED accepts transhtp, saying only ‘ less commonly trans-ship °. Gencrations of clerks have saved themselves trouble & nearly made away with the s & the hyphen; of 28 OED quotations, including those for tran(s-)shipment, nine only show s-s or ss—nine & the right against nineteen & the wrong.

translate makes -fable, see MUTE E; & -lor, see -OR.

transliterate makes -rable, see -ABLE 1; & -lor, see -OR.

translucence, -cy. See -cE, -cy.

translucent. See TRANSPARENT.

transmit makes -tlted, -itier, -tlting, see -T-, -TT-; & -tssible or -ittable, see -ABLE 2.

ogrify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

transom makes fransomed; -M-,-M™M-.

transparence, -ency. The second is the usual form. The first is marked rarein the OED; & indeed, in its only two -ence quotations that are as late as 1800 euphony plainly accounts for the avoidance of -cy:— Motive may be detected through the transparence of tendency./Adamantine solidity, transparence, & brilliancy.

tra t, & the synonyms diaphanous, pellucid, translucent. Transparent is the general word for describing what is penctrable by sight (lit. or fig.) or by light, & it can be substituted for any of the others unless there is some point of precision or of rhetoric to be gained. All three synonyms have the rhetorical value of being less common than transparent, & therefore appear more often in poetical writing. As regards precision, the following definitions of the words’ narrower
