page: 662

treble. See TRIPLE.

trecento, -tiSt. Pronounce traéché’ntd, -tist. This & quattrocenio, -ist, cinquecento, -ist, are words constantly used by writers on Italian art. Though their true meaning is 300, 400, 500, they are used as abbreviations for the centuries 1300— 1399 (1801-1400 is with us the 14th c.), 1400-1499 (our 15th c.), & 1500- 1599 (our 16th). There is therefore a double puzzle, Italian 3800 for Italian 1800, & Italian 18th c. for English 14th c. The words in -ist mean painters &c. of the century.

tree’d is perhaps preferable to treed; cf. FEE’D & PEDIGREE’D, & see -ED & ’D.

trefoll. OED gives preference to tré- over tré-.

trellis makes -ised; see -S-, -S8-.

trembly, not -ey; see MUTE E.

tremolo. Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 6.

tremor. So spelt; see -our & -or.

trend. A word that, whether as noun or as verb, should be used by no-one who is not sure of both its meaning & its idiomatic habits. There has unquestionably been a trend of German policy to strengthen the Empire’s naval position by making relations closer with Austria-Hungary, Italy, & Turkey./Ilis chapter on..., although it has little to do with the rest of his volume, & trends very closely upon the forbidden theme of history, 18 interesting. ‘There is a t. of German policy to do’ is not English, though ‘The t. of German policy is to do’ would be. Trends very closely upon is perhaps a confusion with trenches &c. ; the essential idea in?¢. is direction, not encroachment.

trente et quarante. FRENCH WORDS.

trepan. Both verbs, that meaning entrap, & the surgical, make ftrepanned, -nning; see -N-, -NN-.

trepan, anes nn. & vv. The first, the older term for the instrument & for operating with it, is proven.y still the prevailing one in

ay use; but in surgical books &c. trephine, which as a noun is properly

662

+ the name of an improvement on the trepan, is now the regular term. Pronounce trifi’n or trifé’n.

trestle. Pronounce -sl; see Pro- NUNCIATION, Silent t.

trial. T. heat, t. trip; no hyphens; see HyPuENs 8 B.

tribrach. See TECHNICAL TERMS. Pronounce tri’brik.

tribunal. Pronounce tribii’nal or tribi’nal; the i is short in Latin, but OED puts tri- first, & see Fase QUANTITY.

tributary. So spelt; cf. contributory, & sec MANDATARY.

tribute. 1. For synonymy see Tax. 2. A SLIPSHOD EXTENSION of the less excusable kind—since the meaning of t. is surely no mystery—is that which nowadays sets ° a t. to’ to do the work of a proof (or illustration &c.) of, as in:—The debate on the whole was a tribute to the good taste & good form of the louse of Commons./All these & many other prominent English works have been fairly @ critically analysed, & it is a tribute to the modesty of the American editors that the European works recewe first place.

tricentenary. See CENTENARY.

triceps. For plural, see BICEPs.

tricksy)(tricky. DIFFERENTIATION is proceeding, in the direction of restricting tricksy to contexts in which the quality is regarded not with condemnation or dislike or 7 ar (= dishonest, cunning,

cult, mt sip bir amusement or interest (=pla » ingenious, &ec.). It had formerly: to judge from the OED record, all the meanings to itself, being more than two centuries older than tricky.

triclinium. Pl. -ia.

tricolor, tricolore, tricolour. The first is a Latin adjective (tri’Kolor) used in botanical names; the second is the French adjective used ia describingthe French flag (le drapeas tricolore); the third is a badly formed English noun (see CoLoun. & HYBRID DERIVATIVES) used by
