page: 664

best cured by sinking the words’

latinity & giving them all the ordin-

ary English plural—testa’trizes &c.

instead of testatri’ces or testa’trices.

For some of them the further

unglicizing of -triz into -tress would

also be possible. For the other

escape of using the masculine form

& dropping the feminine, see FEMIN-

INE DESIGNATIONS.

The chief words concerned are:

administratrix, cicatrix, directrix,

executrix, heritrix, inheritrix, ma-

trix, mediatrix, prosecutrix, radix,

testatrix.

troche. A word that it requires some ingenuity to pronounce wrong, trdsh, tréch, & trdk, being all recognized; but the OED draws the line at trd’kI, which is, it appears, ‘commercial & vulgar ’.

trochee. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

trois-temps. See FRENCH woRDs.

trolley. Usually so spelt; pl. -eys.

troop. Trooping the colour is the orthodox modern phrase; but in the older quotations in the OED it is colours.

trophy. OED pronounces trowithout alternative.

trottoir. See FrRENcH worps,

troublous. ‘* Now only literary or archaic’ says the OED; & one of its quotations shows well the bad effect of diversifying commonplace contexts with words of that sort; the ordinary troublesome was the word wanted: Mr Walpole took on himself the management of the Home Office, little knowing what a troublous business he had brought upon his shoulders.

trounce makes -ceable; see MUTE E.

trousers. So spelt. Adjective trousered, see -R-, -RR-. Compounds best made without the -S, €.g. trouser-button, -pocket, -stretcher. trousseau. See FRENCH worps, &, for plural, -x. trout. PI. usually the same, see COLLECTIVEs 1, 4. trouvaille, trouvére. See FRENCH

664 TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY

worps. From time to time the rector

records the arrival in this bird sanc-

tuary of redstarts, or still rarer

trouvailles (visitors?).

trow, when still in ordinary use,

was pronounced trod.

trowel makes -lled, -lling; -Lx-, -L-.

truculence, -cy. See -cre, -cy: &,

for pronunciation, foll.

truculent. OED gives preference

to tré0’ki- over trii’ki-; but the

latter is gaining, chiefly, no doubt,

owing to the much greater ease given

by the wider dissimilation of the two

vowels; cf. the substitution of 1a0

for la in the still more difficult lugu-

brious & lucubration (see LU).

TRUE & FALSE ETYMOLOGY.

Eng-

lish being the one of all languages

that has gathered its material from

the most various sources, the study

of its etymology is naturally of

exceptional interest. It is a study,

however, worth undertaking for

that interest, & as an end in itself,

rather than as a means to the acquiring either of a sound style or even of a correct vocabulary. What concerns a writer is much less a word’s histo than its present meaning & idiomatic habits. The etymologist is aware, & the person who has paid no attention to the subject is probably unaware, that a fuse is so called not because it fuses anything, but because it is spindle-shaped; that a belfry is not named from its bell; that a child’s cot & a shcep-cot come from diffcrent languages; that Welsh rabbit is iba f & right, & Welsh. rarebit stupid & wrong; that isle & island have nothing in common; & that pygmy is a more significant spelling than pigmy. But to know when it is & when it is not well to call an island an isle is worth more than to know all these etymological facts. Still, etymology has its uses, even for those whose sole concern with it is as an aid to writing & a preventive of blunders; it may save us from treating protagonist as the opposite of antagonist, or from supposing a
