page: 666

+ MOOD (gram.),=mode, not mood

(temper) MOULD, several words pen, pencil, unconnected PIGMY, deceptive -i- for -y- PROTAGONIST, Gk prdtos first, not

pro for recover, not E cover repair, two separate verbs river, not L rvus river scale, several words scarify, not E scare scissors, not L scindo sciss- cleave SORRY, SORROW, unconnected TUBEROSE, not tube or rose tureen, not Turin vile, villain, unconnected _ WATERSHED, neither a store of water

nor a place that sheds water WELSII RABBIT, not rare bit.

truffle. OED gives precedence to the pronunciation trii’fl, which is the natural English; but association with French cookery leads many people to partly assimilate the sound to that of the differently spelt French word, & say troo’fl.

truism. The word’s two meanings have been compared both with each other & with some synonyms undcr COMMONPLACE. It ts not perinissible lo be too sanguine of the outcome of the Conference, & A leading personage at the Conference declares that there is no cause for undue alarm, are examples of the sort of t. that writers should not allow themselves; mend them by changing too into very & undue into much, & see TOO 2. As to the use of the word itself, the temptation to say that a thing is a truism when no more is meant than that it is truc, because it has a smarter sound, should be resisted; so: It probably owes much to the dialect in which it is played; but that is a truism of almost every Irish or Scotch play.

truly. See LETTER FORMS.

trumpet mukes -eting, -eled, -eler; see -T-,-TT-. 7'. major; no hyphen; see HypHens (Group *Court Martial).

truncate. See -aATABLE.

trunk. 7. drawers, t. hose, t. road, no hyphens, see HYPHENS 3 B.

trunkful. Pl. -ls; see -FUL.

trunnion makes -oned; -N-, -NN-.

trust. The OKD’s definition of the commercial sense is here given. for comparison with CARTEL: A body of producers or traders in some class of business, organized to reduce or defeat competition, lessen e nses, & control production & distribution for their common advantage; spec.. such a combination of commercial or industrial companies, with a central governing body of trustees which holds a majority or the whole of the stock of each of the combining firms. thus having a controlling vote in the conduct & operation of each.

trustworthy, -lly. The generation is perhaps nearly extinct that held it a duty to thrust this good word into places where it was in obvious discomfort in order that the naughty reliable might be kept out. The OED quotes from the Datly News of 1870 ‘I am trustworthily informed that .. .’, with other specimens. See RELIABLE.

truth. Pl. pron. -dhz; -rH & -pa.

try. The idiom t. & do something is described as colloquial for t. to do. Its use is almost confined to exhortations & promises: Do t. & stop coughing; I will t. & have i ready for you. And it is hardly applicable to past time; He tried & made the best of tt is not English in the sense required, though He did t. & make the best of tt is conceivable. It is, therefore, colloquial, if that means specially appropriate to actual speech; but not if colloguial means below the proper standard of literary dignity. Though ¢. to do can always be substituted for t. & do, the latter has a shade of meaning that justities its existence; in exhortatiéns it implics encouragement—the effort will succeed— ; in promises it implies assurance—the effort shall succeed. It is an idiom thatshould be not discountenanced, but used when it comes natural. See PEDANTRY.
