page: 667

trysail. Pronounce tri’sl.

Tsar.

—OED.

tsetse. So spelt; pron. tse’ts!.

Monosyllables ending in -t double

beginning with

vowels if the sound preceding it is

a single vowel (a, e, i, o, u), but not

if it is a diphthong or a doubled

vowel or a vowel &r: pettish, potted,

cutter, but flouting, sooty, paar

Words of more than one syllable

follow the rule for monosyllables if

their last syllable is accented (co-

quettish, but repeater); but other-

wise they do not double it: discom-

fited, riveter, combatant, wainscoting,

snippety, pilotage, balloted.

tub. For the Tub in Philosophie

slang, see ACADEmy,.

tube makes tubing; see MUTE E.

tuber is the darling of the lower class of ELEGANT-VARIATIONists— the class that indulges in the practice not as a troublesome duty but for pleasure. A potato is a t., but the fact should be Icft in the decent obscurity of agricultural textbooks. There was no difficulty in getting potatoes one day—the next, so to speak, you could search Paris without

tscovering a single tuber. /The potato crop tn South Lincolnshire is in grave danger owing to the shortage of labour; the tubers, which by this time should be nearly all lifted, are still in the ground./Sir Walter Raleigh popularized them, d& in ail probability Sir Francis Drake was the first to bring gpe tuber that is ‘ doing its bit’ tn the war from the New World, tuberose. Pronounce tii’berés (not ti’bréz); not from tube or rose, but from (Polianthes) tuberosa= tuberous, or grown from tubers. tubful. PI. -ls; see -Fur. ‘ The now prevalent spelling’

TURF

Tuesday. For (on) T., see Fripay.

tug. For ¢. at one’s heartstrings,

see STOCK PATHOS.

tulle. See FRENCH worps.

tumblerful. PI. -ls; see -Fut.

tumbrel, -bril. OED gives the two

spellings in this order.

tumefy. So “ade not tumi-; for

inflexions see VERBS IN “IE &c. 6.

tumidity, tumidness, -ry & -NEsg.

\(tumultuous. The dis-

tinction between the two is not very

definite, & sentences may easily be

made in which either might be used

& give the same sense. B i

first be said that -tuous is now the

much commoner word, which should

be chosen unless there is good reason

to prefer the other; &, secondly,

what is emphasized by -tuous is

rather the violence & impetus &

force, while -tuary emphasizes the

irregularity & unorganized nature,

of the thing described: tumultuous

applause, seas, attack, joy, crowd; tumultuary forces (hastily: levied), thoughts (thronging confusedly), risings (sporadic).

tumulus. PI. -ii,

tun. See ron.

tune makes tunable & luny; see MuTE £, & -ry & -y.

tunnel makes -iled, -lling; -LL-, -L-,

tu quoque. See TEcanicaL TERMS. |

turban makes -aned: see -N-, -NN-,

turbid makes -est; see -ER & -EST 4,

turbidity, turbidness. -ry & -NESS.

turbine. OED recognizes only the pronunciation with -in; & that with -In, now often heard, & due rade to misguided reverence for spelling, will doubtless Pass away. Ture-. See Turk. Turcoman (pl. -ans) is the form accepted by the OED in preference to Turkoman & Turkman; cf. TuRK. tureen. The right pronunciation is teré’n, in accordance with the derivation (terra earth) & the older english spelling (terrene &c.); but it is noW more often said as tire’n, & perhaps associated with Turin. turf. Pl.; -/s & -ves appear an 667 equal number of times in the post-
