page: 668

18th-c. quotations of the OED,

which itself uses -fs. See -ve(p).

turgid makes -est; see -ER & -EST 4.

For turgidity, -idness, see -Ty & -NESS.

Turk makes Turco, & Turco- (in

compounds, as Turcophil, -phobe,

-mantia), but Turkery, Turkic, T'urk-

ism, & Turkize (as well as Turkey &

Turkish).

turkey. Pl. -cys.

Turk(o)man. See TuRcOMAN.

turn, v. In the age idiom three

constructions are recognized: I have turned 20, I am turned of 20,& Iam turned 20; the last (see for the construction INTRANSITIVE P.P.) is apparently of more recent origin than the second, but is said by the OED to be now more usual in England; the ‘of’ has certainly an _ oldfashioned or provincial sound.

turnip makes -ipy; see -P-, -pp-.

turn-over. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

turps. See CURTAILED worpDs.

turquoise. Pronunciation debatable. With Ben Jonson, Shakspere, Milton, & Tennyson, all for ter’kiz (or something like it), it is a pity that we cannot return to that; but the adoption of the later French spelling has corrupted us, & the OED labels ter’kiz archaic; it refuses, on the other hand, to recognize the kw sound for the -qu- & complete the triumph of spelling; ter’koiz seems the best solution.

turret makes -cled; see -1-, -Tr-.

tusser, tussore. The first, though how the less used, is preferable not only as keeping the sound of the last syllable closer to the original, but also as preventing a shift of the accent from the tus-. 7. is a sufficient name for the material without the addition of silk,

tutoress. FEMININE DESIGNATIONS.

tuyere. Pronounce twér.

twelvemo, 12mo. See Fouio. PI. -08 3 see -O(E)s, 6. twenties, thirties, &c. These words do not require an apostrophe (the "twenties &c.) when used for the wears 20-29 &c. of a century, & still ess for those of a person’s life.

twentymo, twenty-fourmo, 20mo,

O. See FOLIO. Pl. -os; see

-O(E)s 6.

twilit. The earliest OED quotation

for the word is 1869, so that it is,

whatever its merits may be, not

venerable. Its formation implies

a verb to twilight made from the

noun; & that verb, though un-

known to most of us, is recorded to

have been used; it also implies that

fo iwilight has p.p. twilit rather than

twilighted, which is not impossible.

But, though fcilit can therefore not

be absolutely ruled out, it is better

to use twilight attributively where,

as usually, that does the work as well,

& elsewhere to do without. In the

two following quotations, twilight

would have served at least as well:— He found himself free of a fanciful world where things happened as he preferred—a twilitt world in which substance melted into shadow. /The years of the war were a clear & brilliantly lit passage between tro periods of twilit entanglement.

twine, v., makes -nable; see MUTE E.

TWOPENCE COLOURED. The insertion of irrelevant details, resort to needless rhetoric, & such devices for the heightening of effect, move the reader (as Mr Burchell ‘ at the conclusion of every sentence would cry out * Fudge’) to exclaim in more modern phrase ‘twopence coloured!’. A couple of specimens of what meets us every day must suffice; it will be noticed that cantons & heights & plains have nothing to do with the matter; & that the rhetoric of the second extract has a very factitious sound:-— Again, I look around & see in the Cantons of Switzerland, on the heights of Quebec, & in the plains of H ungary, Protestants & Roman Catholics living, as a rule, in harmony &: peace to- Bether./The glib, thin-lipped Burian. the soulless hybrid product of Magyar arrogance & of the Vienna Ballplatz diplomacy, has already been swept away with the polished formulas on which he thought to ride the storm.
