page: 671

+ TYPE, 5 671 priority in time of a particular type over its antitype, such priority not being essential to the notion of type & antitype; secondly when type, which has other senses than that to which antitype is opposed, might be ambiguous; & thirdly when typification itsclf is of no great consequence, & the sense wanted is no more than ‘the earliest form’ of something. For those who feel a temptation to use the word prototype without being sure that they know the difference between the three words, it is well to remember that antilype is much more likely to be safe than prototype, but that real safety lies in abstaining from so tricky a set of words altogether.

5. Type-writer)(typist. It is of practical importance that, as the two words exist, the first should be restricted to the machine & not extended, at the risk of ambiguity, to the operator.

typhoid. See ENTERIC.

oon. See wInp for synonymy.

typic(al). Typic survives only as a form occasionally useful to versewriters in metrical straits, & as a (now rare) epithet of fevers, = intermittent &c., in which use typical would be ambiguous. See -1c(At).

typify. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &c., 6.

- See Type 5.

typo,=typographer. Pl. -os, see -oO(E)s 5. A CURTAILED WORD.

typographic(al). Both forms are in use, & no shade of difference seems discernible in the OED quotations, except that those for -al are more numerous. See -1c(a.).

tyrannic(al). Tyrannic is now not at home outside verse. -1C(AL).

This attempt to coerce & tyrannize us will produce which the Government will have good reason to regret./They were * the strong, rugged, God-fearing people’ who were to be tyrannized & oppressed by a wicked Liberal Government. Most readers of good modern writin will have the familiar slight ahiock

U incident to meeting a solecism & want to insert ‘over’. But the OED’s comment on the transitive use is merely ° now rare’, & it produces abundant examples from older writers; still, the present idiom is to tyrannize over, not to tyrannize, one’s subjects.

tyrant. The original Greek sense of the word is so far alive still that readcrs must be prepared for it. Neither cruel nor despotic conduct was essential to the Greek notion of a tyrant, who was merely one who, or whose ancestors, had seized a sovereignty that was not his or theirs by hereditary right. Despotic or tyrannical use of the usurped

sition was natural & common, but incidental only.

tyre, tyro. See TIRE, TIRO.

Tyrrhene, Tyrrhenian. So spelt.

Tzar, tzetze. See Tsar, TSETSE.

U

u. N.B. In this article the symbol ai stands for the sounds y66 or yoo. The pronunciation of long u (as a, or 66) is a point that has been discussed at length for the special case in which practical doubts arise, i.e. when | precedes the u; see Lu. The same question presents itself, but the answers are less doubtful, when the preceding letter is not 1. 1. When it is the other liquid, r, attempts at ii are difficult; few people make them, & 66 (or 60) being generally accepted should be made universal (see PRONUNCIATION); sO rool (rule), krdéd (crude), Intrd6’zhn (intrusion), kwé’rodlus & gi&’roolus

querulous, garrulous), grdo (grew),

t (fruit). 2. When no letter precedes, 0 is invariable (unit, ubiquily, &c.) except in foreign words such as uhlan, Ural, unberufen, umlaut. 8. After the sounds ch, j, sh, zh, attempts at @ are as ill advised as after r; so ch60, jddn, jOdt, jdds, shoot, shoor, fi’zhooal, for chew, June, jute, juice, chute, sure, usual; not chi, jan, jit, jas, shit, shir,
