page: 673

+ Glil- suggests howling much more vividly than alal-.

-UM. For general remarks on the

lural of Latin nouns adopted in

nglish, see LATIN PLURALS. Those in -um are numerous & demand special treatment. The Latin plural being -a, & the English -ums, three sclections follow of nouns (1) that mow always use -ums, either as having completed their naturalization (as it is to be hoped that the rest may do in time), or for special reasons; (2) that show no signs at present of conversion, but always use -a; (8) that vacillate, sometimes with a differentiation of meaning, sometimes in harmony with the style of writing, & sometimes unaccountably. In deciding between the two forms for words in the third list, it should be borne in mind that, while anglicization is to be desired, violent attempts to hurry the process actually retard it by provoking ridicule.

1. Plural in -ums only: albums; antirrhinums (& plant names); asylums; decorums; delphiniums; Elysiums; factotums*; forums; harmoniums; laburnums; lyceums; museums; nasturtiums; nostrums; pendulums; troleums; pomatums; remiums; quantums® ; quorums* ; targums*; vellums*; *The -a plural for these would violate grammar as well as usage; they are included here not as Latin nouns, but as words that might be given wrong plurals by mistake.

2. Plurals in -a only: agendaf; bacteria (& many scientific terms); corrigendat; curricula; desiderataf; errataf; memorandat; scholia (& other such learned words); strataf; succedanea. {Latin gerundives & passive participles often resist naturalization.

3. Words with either plural; some notes are inserted as suggestions only: aquarium (usu. -ms); compendium; cranium (-ums in joc. use for heads); emporium; encomium (usu. -ms); exordium; interregnum

1361

673

+ (usu. -ms); medium (-ms in spiritualism); millennium (usu. -ms); rostrum (usu. -a); spectrum (usu. -a); trapezium (usu. -a); ultimatum (-ms better); vacuum (usu. -a); viaticum (-a in eccl. sense).

umbilicus, -ical. The OED recognizes only imbI‘likal for the adjective, but for the noun gives precedence to imbili’kus over imbI'likus. See FALSE QUANTITY for the question involved.

umbo. Pl. -os or -0’nés; sec LATIN PLURALS.

umbra. PI. -rae.

umbrella makes umbrella’d; see -ED & -’D.

umlaut. Pronounce 66’mlowt or 0o’mlowt.

un, un,=one, as in that un, young un, old un, game un, & such phrases, needs no apostrophe or hyphen.

UN-. 1. Danger of ellipsis after unwords. 2. Un-)(in-.

1. Danger of ellipsis after un-. Untouched means not touched, but with the difference that it is one word & not two, a difference that in some circumstances is important. In I was not touched, & you were the word touched is understood to be repeated, & not to ca the not with it; but I was untouched, & you were cannot be substituted with the same effect; if it means ney heres: it means that both were untouched, the un- having to be understood as well as the touched. Needless as such a statement may sound in a simple case like the above, where there is nothing to distract attention from the wording, blunders essentially similar are frequent; a couple of examples follow, & the state of mind that produces them is fully illustrated in the articles NEGATIVE & AFFIRMATIVE, & NEGATIVES:— Dr Rashdall’s scholarship is unquestioned; most of his writings &

inions on ecclesiastical matters are.

t is meant is that most of them are questioned, not unquestioned. / When I sat in the square of Oudenarde, opposite the old Hétel de Ville, which
