page: 674

+ UN-, 2 happily has come through the war |

674 UNATTACHED PARTICIPLES in, & un, -human; in, untouched by Vandal hands, methought, tf it had been, who in Belgium could have butlt the like of it? ‘That is, had been touched, not untouched; correct untouched into without being toached.

2. Un-)(in-. When positive adjectives, including participles, ure to be converted into negative, it is usually done by prctixing one of these; which of the two 1t should be is a question that most people can answer without difliculty for most words, & the laying down of exhaustive rules would be both tedious & useless; some of the tendencies have been shown in the urticle IN- & UuN-. One or two quotations are here given to prove that the wrong decision is sometimes made: The Government let loose their ‘ Black & Tans’ to deal oul summary é& = indiscriminating punishment. /Olrig, of whose incompleted labours we spoke lately in these columns./It was inevitable that many men of instable nervous organization shou be included./Read undiscriminating, uncompleted, & unstable. All three lapscs result from the commonest cause of error, the existence of a familiar allied word beginning rightly with the prefix that, in the word used, is wrong—here indiscriminate, incomplete, & instability, One other point is perhaps worth stressing. It is a gencral truth that, while it is legitimate to prefix un-, but not in-, to any adjective of whatever form, those Negative adjectives in in- that exist are normally preferred to the corresponding un- forms; but when an in- (or il- or im- or ir-) adjective has developed a sense that is something more than the negation of the positive adjective, an un- form is often used to discharge that function without risk of ambiguity; immoral having come to mean offendin against morality or wicked, unmor is called in to mean not moral or outside the sphere of morality; others are irre, & unre, -ligious;

& un, -artistic; in, & un, -artificial; in, & un, -sanilary; inept & wunapt; ansoluble & unsolvable; im, & un, -material.

unabashedly. Five syllables, if used; see -EDLY.

unaccountable. Occurrences that are for the time being, @& to the spiritualist, unaccountable by natural causes. U. itself belongs to the class of words, including reliable, whose legitimacy is upheld in -aBLe 4; but to use by after it, compelling the reader to resolve it into its elements (not to be accounted for), & so discover that for is missing, is very indiscrect.

unadornedly, unadvisedly. As ux- ABASHEDLY.

unapt, inapt, inept. Inept represents the normal Latin negative of aptus, &, like many such negatives in in-, has developed a special sense. We have therefore made in English, also normally, the new negative of apt, free of the special sense, unapt; & this, not the hybrid inap?, should be uscd when inept is not meant.

unartificial, ine. The differentiation is now generally recognized by which the first means free from artifice or artless or natural, & the second lacking art or unskilful or rude; see UN- 2,

unartistic, ine. The second is the usual word; but since it has acquired a sort of positive sense, ‘outraging the canons of art” &c., the other has been introduced for contexts in which such condemnation is not desired; the unartistic are those who are not concerned with art. See un- 2.

unashamedly. As UNABASHEDLY.

UNATTACHED PARTICIPLES & adjectives (or wrongly attached). A firm sent in its bill with the folowing letter:—Dear Sir,—We beg to enclose herewith statement of your account for goods supplied, & being desirous of clearing our Books to end
