page: 676

+ to cater for the tourist, Russian is the only language spoken (the capital in question; Russian)./A belief that a Committee of Inquiry is merely an evasion, & that, if accepted, the men will be caught out (Committee; men). Experiments have shown that, while affording protection against shrapnel, the direct bullet at moderate range would carry fragments of the plate into the body (plate; bullet). /Based on your figures of membership, you suggest that the Middle Classes Union has failed (suggestion; you)./I would also suggest that, while admitting the modernity, the proofs offered

him as to the recent date of the loss of aspiration are not very convincing (I; proofs)./A girl fell on a pen, which pierced her eye, &, causing meningitis, she died (which; _ she)./ Having muzzled the House of Lords it is difficult to see at the moment any real obstacle to the successful passage of the Bill (the Government; )./ Whilst placing little hope in the present dynasty, vt is always possible in the East for some official to rise to power who may change the destinies of his people (we; official).

unavowedly. As UNABASHEDLY.

unbeknown(st). Both forms are now out of use except in dialect or uneducated speech or in imitations of these. The -st form is more ee adverbial; cf. tnawares as the adv. of unaware, & whiles, whilst.

unbending, as participle of to unbend, means throwing off stiffness, but as a compound of un- & bending it means never throwing off stiffness; contrasts, not usually so diametrical as this, often result from the prefixing of un- at different stages; e. 5 in ‘lessons learnt & unlearnt’, unlearnt may mean either of two very different things.

unberufen. Pronounce ddnbiréo’fn. It means ‘ unchallenged ’, i.e. without defying Fate.

unbfas(s)ed. The spelling varies; SCe -S-, -S8-.

uncia. PJ. -aeé.

uncial. See TECHNICAL TERMS.

Uncle Sam. See SOBRIQUETS.

un-come-at-able. The word had doubtless, two or three centuries ago, a jolly daredevil hang-thesepeguelans air about it; that has

ong evaporated; it serves no purpose that tnaccessible does not; it requires a writer to choose between five forms (uncomatable is the other extreme); & it surely deserves a place among SUPERFLUOUS WORDS.

uncommon. The old slang use as an adverb=remarkably (an wu. fine del &c.) has nearly died out, & is no

onger in place outside the dialogue of historical novels.

unconcernedly, unconstrainedly. As UNABASHEDLY.

uncontrollable. Better than in-; see IN- & UN-.

uncontroliedly. As UNABASHEDLY.

undeceived. Two words of diffcrent meaning, like UNBENDING.

undependable. For the legitimacy of this & similar words, see -aBLE 4.

under, prep. See BEeELow for distinctions; & UNDERNEATH.

underlay, -lle, vbs. The confusion noticed in Lay & LIE is worse copfounded for the compounds; see the remarks on OVERLAY,

undermost. See -mMost.

underneath (prep.), compared with BELOW & under, is not, like BE- NEATH, a word that tends to become archaic; on the contrary, it is stil in full colloquial as well as literary use; its is much narrower than that of under, bei almost confined to the physical relation of material things (cf. *‘ underneath the bed’ with ‘under the stimulus ol competition ’), but within that range it is often preferred as expressing a si eae peas the notion of

ing covered over, fing a ste further the difference pot nted out between below & under.

undeservedly, undesignedly. As UNABASHEDLY.

undigested, undisciplined, undiscriminating. All better than the ip-
