page: 678

+ country level plain & the roads lent themselves to the munawuvre... See INVERSION.

Hermetic scaling up of a subject within its verb demands repetition of the subject if it is to serve in, but— Does he dislike its met , & willonly mention ...? See PARALLEL- SENTENCE DANGERS.

One or two other types may be added without quotations:—Either he did not know or was lying (read He etther); The old one was as good if not better than this (read as good as this tf not better); One of the worst kings that has aver reigned (read have); Jt is all & more than I expected (read all I expccted, & more); Ile was young, rich, handsome, & enjoyed life (rcad & handsome; see AND 2). “unescapable, unessentlal. Better than in-; see 1n- & UN-.

unexceptionable)(-al. Scc EXcKpP- TIONABLE.

unfeignedly. Foursyllables; -EpLy.

unfortunate. For ‘one more u.’, see STOCK PATHOS.

ungula. PI. -lae.

unhuman. For the use of this by the side of inhuman, see uUN- 2.

unidea'd. Best so written; -ED & ’p.

UNIDIOMATIC -LY. As the lapses from idiom here to be illustrated probably owe their origin to the modern wider extension of grammatical knowledge, it may _ be prudent to start by conciliating the sticklers for grammar & admitting that a -ly is somctimes missing where it is wanted. So:—The Carholme course, shaped very similar to the Doncaster Town Moor, is one of the best in England./Procecdings instituted by the local Education Committee against the mother for neglecting to send her girl to school regular.,;If the Government ts going to nationalize the coal, we belicve it would do wiser to leave its hands free to... (more wiselv)./I hope that most teachers in the present day have learnt to read the Old Testament (thanks to the higher critics) different

678

+ from the way I was taught to read tt in my youth./Surely no peace-loving man or woman will deny that it would be advisable to prevent strikes & lock-outs consistent with the prin ciples of liberty as set forth by John Stuart Mill.

But, if grammar is inexorable against consistent & different & the rest, it would in the following sentences allow contrary & trrespective without a frown, while idiom for its part would welcome them:—The provision is quite inadequate & very grudgingly granted, & often, contrarily to the spirit of the Act, totally denied./Loyal obedience is due to the ‘powers that be’, as such, irrespectively of their historical origin. / His method is to whitewash them all vigorously with the same brush, irrespectively of differences in the careers & characters of his heroes. Contrary & irrespective are among the adjecctives that have, with others mentioned in Unatracnep &c. & in QUASI-ADVEBBS, developed adverbial force; to ignore that development is bad literary judgement, but, among the mistakes made with -ly, one of the Icast.

A degree worse is the use of a -ly adverb where idiom requires not an adverb at all, but a predicative adjective. See LARGE(LY) for the phrases bulk & loom large, & substitute adjcctives for adverbs in the four following quotations:—Bué over the rival claims of the Marquess Curzon & Mr Baldwin controversy waxed vigorously./In neither direction can we fic our hopes very highly./This country was brought much more closely to disaster at sea than ever the Allies were on land (much closer)./ It is a gigantic labour before which the labours of Westphalia, of Utrecht, of Vienna, pale insignificantly.

Yet a little worse is the officious bringing up to date of such timehonoured phrases as mighty kind & sure enough:—Still, t is mightily kind of the Morning Post to be se anxious to shicld the Labour Party from the wrath to come./We begin to
