page: 681

+ there said, two special warnings may be given. J counted eighty-nine rows of men standing, & unlike in London, only occasionally could women be distinguished. U. is there treated as though it had developed the adverbial power described in the article UNATTACHED &c. as acquired by owing (to) but not by due (to); it has not, & something adverbial (in contrast with ways?) must be substituted.

M. Berger, however, does not appear to have—unlike his Russian masiers— the gift of presenting female characters. As with many negatives, the placing of u. is important; standing where it does, it must be changed to Ake; unlike would be right if the phrase were shifted to before ‘ does not appear ’.

unmaterial, if chosen instead of the ordinary im-, confines the meaning to ‘not consisting of matter’, & excludes the other common meaning of immaterial, viz ‘that does not matter’, ‘not important or essential’; see UN- 2.

unmentionables. WoRN-OUT HU-

aaivoral: For this & im-, see UN- 2. MO —- —

unna ble. Betterso; IN- & UN-.

un ed. Not -lled; see PARALLEL for the irregularity.

unpertur . AS UNABASHEDLY.

unpractical. Better so; 1n- & UN-.

unrecognizable. Better so; In- & UN-.

unre » chosen instead of the usual ir-, excludes the latter’s implications of sin &c., & means outside the sphere of religion; see UN- 2.

lahenichbetad . As yaoi

unresponsive. Betterso; 1n-&un-.

unrestrainedly. As UNABASHEDLY.

unretentive. Ir-is better; iv-& un-.

unsanitary, in-. Jn- is the established form; but it would not be used, as un- might, of a place &c. that neither had nor needed provisions for sanitation: a primitive & unsanttary but entirely healthy life or village; insanitary implies danger. See UN- 2. 681

unsolvable differs from insoluble in having its reference limited to the sense of the English verb solve, & not covering, as insoluble does, various senses (dissolve as well as solve) of the Latin verb solvere; it is therefore sometimes useful in avoiding ambiguity; see UN- 2.

unstable. Better than in-, in spite of instability; see UN- 2.

unstringed)(unstrung. See sTRING- ED

unthinkable is now a sort of expletive. When we say damn, it relieves us because it is a strong word & yet means nothing; we do not intend the person or thing or event that we damn to be burnt in hell fire; far from it; but the faint aroma of brimstone that hangs for ever about the word is savoury in wrathful nostrils. So it is with unthinkable, ‘that cannot be thought ’’. That a thing at once exists & does not exist, or ‘the things which God hath prepared for them that love him’, are unthinkable, i.e., the constitution of the human mind bars us from conceiving or apprehending them; but we do not mean all that with our VoGuE- WORD unthinkable at present; anything is now unthinkable from what reason declares impossible or what imagination is helpless to conceive down to what seems against the odds (as that Oxford should win the boat-race), or what is slightly distasteful to the ker (as that the Labour Party should ever form a Government). The word is so attractive because the uncompromising intensity of its proper sense in metaphysics & philosophy lingers around it, like the brimstone of damn, even when it is transferred to ordinary ions; & this recommends it to all who like to combine the most forcible sound with the haziest meaning. The haziness is easily accounted for; the un- & eable meaning ‘that cannot be —ed’ are regarded as affixed to (1) think in the philosophic sense Z3
