page: 682

+ ‘frame a conception of’, (2) think in the everyday sense ° believe’ or * be of opinion ’, (3) think of, in the sense * consider advisable ’ or ° contemplate doing’, (4) think ltkely. To attach to so protean a verbnotion the affixes that make it mean *that cannot be which-you-pleaseof-four-different-things-ed ” does result & could not but result in haziness. Herc is a quotation from yesterday’s paper (Westm. Gaz., 31/1/24) that comes pat to show it: What Conservatives are trying to decide is whether they are Protectionists ornot; ...to abandon Protection is unthinkable, because the majority of Conservatives have Protcction in their bones. To abandon Protection cannot be thought? if that has a meaning, it is that the mind cannot form an idea of it, which is obviously untrue. Then, cannot be thought of? that means that Conservatives cannot consider its advisability, which it is plain from the sentence before that some of them are doing. Then, cannot be thought likely? to that we seem to be brought, & it amounts merely to saying that abandonment is unlikely (which may be true) & adding that no-one can think otherwise (which is false).

It is probable that even now no really clear thinker ever uscs the word out of its severely limited philosophic sense, or applies it to anything but what the mind is incapable of conceiving; & at any rate that is the only sense in which it is likely to live long; its present vogue will last only till the necessity -of confining it to one clear meaning has forced itself on the general consciousness. A few quotations, beginning with the philosophic use, but chiefly of the bad trivial kinds, are added, not because anyone cannot find such things for himself, but because their massed variety may have a chance of disgusting those who do not reckon shiftiness a virtue in the words they use:—‘ Ultimate’ scientific ideas may be unthinkable apithout prejudice to the ‘ thinkable-

682

+ ness’ of ‘proximate ” scientific ideas. / Yet we do not know how plastic the mind is; we do not know what thoughts are thinkable by man./If the reformers of our time, gencrously impatient as they are, could coud upon the wisdom, the devotion, & the caution of this older school, as near an ideal combination as is .thinkable would be effected. A cross between the philosophic sense, which the writer is aiming at, & the popular; for an ideal combination of generous impatience & caution is itself not unthinkable, however unlikely./Jé ts unthinkable that we should continue a policy under which a given locality may be allowed to commit a crime against a friendly nation. In this & the next, each with a thaf-clause as the unthinkable thing, the defence is possible that think has its ordinary meaning, the one numbered 2 above, & that unthinkable cannot be deprived of its right to embody this; the answer is that the defence is, for the particular construction, sound, but that abstention would nevertheless be better. / The Arbitration Treaty is going through; about that I have no manner of doubt; that it may be altered in some details is possible; that it will be rejected altogether is unthinkable. See the preceding; & read incredible./A tariff, having regard to is effects upon the textile industries of the country, is unthinkable. Impracticable?/Witk all respect to the advocates of a third reading amendment, such @ course oppeats to us to be simply unthinkable. A course that has advocates unthinkable!/4 popular vole, ar tailing no adverse consequences to a Government on us chief constructive policies, is unthinkable under our system. Yet the referendum has been thought of; read inconsistent with. {He said that he would welcome any improvement in our relations with Germany, & } a war with Germany as unthinkable. Out of the question?/J¢ is unthinkable that hundreds upon hundreds of people should be getting their freedom. on the
