page: 684

+ “us. 1. Case mistakes. 2. is, our, &c., after of us.

1. Case. The roman-type wses & ‘ we in the following examples are ungrammatical:—They are as competent as us as regards manufacture, & so why not serve them the same as they serve us?/The Germans are involved like ourselves in a_ blind struggle of forces, & no more than us to be blamed or praised./Age & ezperience bestow the sktll to recognize in a book only what we require; that we not only read & mark, but inwardly digest; it becomes us./Let us be content—we Liberals, at any rate—to go on tn the possession of our old principles. In the first two, after as & than, there can be no objcction to letting grammar have its rights, with the correct we. In the third, if becomes we is thought pedantic, becomes oursclf or ourselves is an easy way out; & in the last, if it is obtrusively formal to keep the required case in mind for the duration of a dash & repeat it on the other side, Let us Liberals at any rate be content would not have been unbearably ordinary.

2. Our, or his &c., after of us. Types, tt must be admitted, under which each of us can classify a good many of his acquaintances. That is the logical arrangement, which, as the quotation shows, is free from any taint of over-precision; but much more commonly our acquaintances is substituted owing to the attraction of us.

-UsS. The plurals of nouns in -us are troublesome. 1. Most are from Latin second-declension words, whose Latin plural is -t (pronounced 1); but when that should be used, & when the English plural -uses is better, has to be decided for each scparately; see LATIN PLURALS, -1, & the individual words. 2. Many are from Latin fourth-declension words, whose Latin plural is -us (pronounced iis); but the English Seater -uses is almost always pre-

erred, as prospectuses; hiatus (-iis) 684

+ is occasionally seen as a plural; words of this class, which must never have plural in -i, are affiatus, ap-

aratus, conspectus, hiatus, impetus,

usus, meatus, nexus, plexus, prospectus, saltus, senatus, status. 3. Some are from Latin third-declension neuters, whose plurals are of various forms in -a@; 80 corpus, genus, opus, make corpora, genera, opera, which are almost always preferred in English to -uses. 4. Callus, octopus, polypus, & virus, nouns variously abnormal in Latin, can all have plural -uses; for any alternatives see the words. 5. Some English nouns in -us are in Latin not nouns, but verbs &c. ; so tgnoramus, mandamus, mittimus, non MUS, omnibus; for these the only possible plural is the English -uses.

use, n. The forms What ts the use of complaining?, & There ts no use in complaining, are current & uncriticized. The forms It ts no use complaining (or to complain), & Complaining (or To complain) is no use, are still more current, but much criticized, & the critics would have us correct them by inserting of (ts of no use). General adoption of their of is at this time of day past praying for; we should all take refuge instead in useless, which would do well enough if we could remember to say it. Still, on the assumption that use in these idioms means utility or usefulness, they are justified in their objection, if not in their remedy; & they will probably refuse to be pacified by the admitah imperfect analogy of It is no good, It is no harm. Perhaps the OED, which has unfortunately not yet reached use, may find us a better defence; at any rate most of us would like to be allowed our Zé is no use, if it is but on the footing of a STURDY INDEFENSIBLE; we should welcome the rites of the church, but, if they are withheld, we mean, like Touchstone, to live in bawdry. In so full-dress a sentence as the following, however, the writer might have
