page: 690

+ slates &c. It is a pity that the early 19th c. could not leave well alone; for the OED records that by about 1630 the word was dead, but the eatly 19th c. revived it. Would it had not! its appearance in a description has always the effect of taking down the reader's interest a peg or two, both as being a FoRMAL worp, & as the now familiar herald of a strained top note. The adverb, which could equally well be spared, does the same service, or disservice, to adjectives as the adjective to nouns (veritably portentous &c.); it is also used with verbs as a supposed improvement on the various natural adverbs, as in: If this ts to be the last word, we shall find ourselves thrown back into a hopeless impasse, @ there will veritably be no way of reforming our Parliamentary institutions (actually? really? positively? absolutely? in very truth?).

vermeil. Pronounce ver’mil; the verb makes vermeiled, see -LL-, -L-.

vermilion makes -oned; -N-, -NN-.

vermin. The plural form -ns is now hardly used; the word is a collective (sec collectives F in TrecHNICAL TERMS) meaning either all the crcatures entitled to the name, or any particular species or set of them, or some of them; it is treated usually as a plural (these 0.3 the vo. are an incessant torment; v. infest everything), but sometimes as singular (this v.=these rascals &c.), & occasionally has a both in the collicctive sense la vw. that I hope to reduce the numbers of) & as denoting an individual (such av. as you).

vermouth. So spelt;

pronounce

690 var’moot.

vernacular. For v., idiom, slang, &c., see JARGON. For the use of the word in apologies, see SUPERIORITY.

verruca. Pl. -cae (-sé).

versatile. Adverb versatilely.

vers libre. For the nature of it, see vers libre in TECHNICAL TERMS. The French phrasc is still in general use; but there secms to be no g reason why ‘ frce verse’ should not

+ be preferred. For the writers we have to choose between ‘ free-versewriter’ (since the handier ‘ freeverser ’ would probably be thought unduly familiar by the designated) & ‘ verslibrist ’ (as queer a fish for English waters as bellettrist) or its jocose anglicization here quoted: Scholarly elaboration ts, we are aware, out of fashion with the modern verse-ltbrettists. A ° verse-librettist ’ can only be one who writes librettos in verse; as to the other forms, if the free-versers will let us call them 80, we shall take it kindly of them, & if not, had better fall back on * free-verse-writers °.

versify. For inflexions, see Verss IN -IE &c., 6.

verso. Pl. -os; see -o(E)s 3, 6.

vert. A CURTAILED WORD.

vertebra. Pl. -brac.

vertex. For plural, see -Ex, -1x, 4.

vertigo. Pl. -08, see -o(E)s 8. The correct pronunciation in accordance with the Latin quantity is verti’g, but the OED gives ver’tigd precedence, & see FALSE QUANTITY. It is worth remark, however, that all the OED verse quotations (Jonson, Swift, Fletcher, Wither) show verti’go (or -é’gd).

vertu. See vIRTU.

verve. See FRENCH WORDS.

very with passive participles. The legitimacy of this, or at least the line limiting its idiomatic use, is an old & not very easy puzzle. It will at once be admitted that I was much tired is improved by the substitution of very for much, whereas, in I was very inconvenienced, much has undoubtedly to be substituted for very. And it may be said generally that the critics of very have a way of going too far & damning the laudable; they fail to recognize that very & much are complementary, each being suited to places in which the other is unnatural or wrong. Here is part of a newspaper letter: Sir,— When the Westminster Gazette can write & publish ‘ the ‘*‘ Common Cause ’’ is very affronted’, it seems -
