page: 692

+ the derived words vé’sikl (vesical & vesicle), vé’sikat, &c.; cf. doctrinal in FALSE QUANTITY.

vessel. See FORMAL WORDS.

vest. The older meanings robe, tunic, or collectively clothes (= vesture), are still in poetic or archaic usec; aS a synonym for a man’s waistcoat it is chiefly a shop word, but is more generally applied to the corresponding partly visible feminine garment; & it is now the usual name (singlet being another) for the woven piece of underlinen formerly culled jersey.

vesta. Chiefly a shop word, but occasionally used elsewhere of the kinds of match carried in the pocket; formerly wax, now of wood also.

vet. A CuRTAILED WORD.

veto. Pl. -os; see -0(r)s 3.

vexedly. A bad form; see -EDLY.

vexillum. PI. -la.

via, vid. In via media, via is the Latin nominative, & must not have -4. In the use as a preposition meaning ‘ by way of” or * passing through ’ it is the Latin ablative, the distinguishing of which by a circumfliex accent is optional. As both forms are pronounced vi’a, & there is mever any risk of confusion, it scems idle to retain the accent, but accent & italics are still usual.

viable (-bility). A word apt to puzzle an Englishman. Formed in French from vie life (see -ABLE 4), it means capable of living, & its special application is to newborn children (e.g. in contrast with sézllborn), but there is some tendency to widen its use. The two words of the sume form applicd to a road, a pass, &c., & obviously associated with Latin via way, are of recent origin; they mean ‘that can be passed through ’, ‘ passability ’, & it may be conjectured that they owe their existence to a misconception of the older viable; they are certainly better avoided.

viaticum. PI. -ms, -ca, see -UM 3 but the plural is rare, & e.g. in the 692

+ PEDANTIC-HUMOUR uS¢S One’s Ppfovisions &c. are one’s viaticum.

vibrate makes -iable, -ior; see -ATABLE, -OR.

vibrato. Pronounce vébrah’t6 ; pl. -os, see -O(E)s 6.

vicar. Vicar & rector, as parish pricsts, are paar earrete by the rector’s retaining the tithes, which are lost to the vicar by having been appropriated to a monastery or other religious corporation or impropriated to a lay person or corporation.

vice, prep., prefix, & abbreviated noun. The preposition is pronounced vi‘sI, & means in the of (esp. in the sense succeeding to), being, like pace, the ablative of a Latin noun followed by an English noun regarded as in the genitive (appointed Secretary vice Mr Jones deceased).

The prefix is the same word treated as an adverb compounded with English nouns such as chancellor, president, chairman, admiral, but meaning rather deputy, & pronounced vis.

The noun is the prefix uscd without its second element, but with the aid of context, as a CURTAILED WORD for some of its compounds, e. g. for vice-chairman & vice-chancellor, but not for vice-admiral. Cf. suB, SUPER, PRO.

vicegerent)(viceregent. The first is a word of very wide application, including anyone who exercises * authority committed or supposed to be committed to him by another. from the Pope as the Vicar of Christ on earth or the regent of a sovereign State to the clerk running an office during his employer’s holiday. Viceregent, on the other hand, is defined in the OED as * One who acts in the place of a regent’; but from the quotations given it would appear that that is rather what it ought to mean than what it does. A regent is a particular kind of vicegerent, viz a sovereign’s. But viceregent is sometimes used in error
