page: 693

for vicegerent, & sometimes used

pleonastically for regent (which word

includes the notion of vice-), so that

it seems to have no right to exist,

may be classed among SuPEr-

FLUOUS worRDs.

Vvice-queen)(vicereine. The first

is

recorded from the 16th c., the second

(in English) from the 19th only.

V icereine is now the regular word for

viceroy’s wife, & vice-queen, in much leas frequent use, i8 now reserved for # woman ruling as a queen’s representative—a useful DIFFERENTIATION.

viceregal)(viceroyal. There being no distinction of meaning, it would be

vicinage is now, compared with

ighbourhood, a Forman WORD, &, compared with Vicinity, a dying one.

Vicious circle. See under Trcu- NICAL TERMS. There ts gq vicious circle in which starvation produces Bolshevism, & Bolshevism in its turn feeds on starvation. What, then, produces starvation, & on what does starvation feed? € writer can no doubt'retort with truth that nothing (i.e. no food) produces starvation, & that starvation feeds on nothing; but he will have proved his wit at

victimize makes -zable; see MUTE E. |

Vietress. FEMININE DESIGNATIONS.

victual. The verb makes -ller,’ -ling, see -LL-, -L- ; pronounce vi'tl, Wtler, vi’tling.

vide. Pronounce Vi'd! ; literally * pee’ (imperative). It is properly used in referring readers toa age in which they will find a proof or illustration of what has been stated, & should be followed by something in the nature of chapter & verse, or at least by the name of a book or author. But it has, like rE, been taken over by the illiterate, & ig daily used by them in extended

destroyer was stationed there (right)./

senses with an incongruity of which

the following is a comparatively mild

specimen: Numbers count for no-

abbreviation viz being used instead;

See viz for meaning.

Vidimus. PI. “uses 5 see -us. Pro-

hounce vi‘di.,

vie. For inflexions, see VERBS IN

“IE &c., 3.

View forms part of three well

established idioms each equivalent

to a preposition, & each liable to be

confused in meaning or in form with

the others, These are in py, of, with

av. to, & with the v. of. In view of

followed by a noun expressing ex-

ternal circumstances that exist or

must be expected: Jn p. of these

facts, we have no alternative; In v.

of his having promised amendment;

nv. of the Judgement to come. With

@ view to means calculating upon or

contemplating as a desired result,

& is followe by a verbal noun or

(less well) lo diminish waste. _ With

with av. to, but is both less usual & less flexible, being naturally followed only by a gerund: With the v. of proving his sanity. It will be observed that in the first phrase ov. means sight, in the second eye, & in the third purpose. The forms of confusion are giving the first the meaning of the others or vice versa, & neglecting the correspondences a & to, the & of, in the second & third. After each of the following quotations a correction, or a statement that it is ri ht, is bracketed:-— There was very little likelihood in the réport of disaster to g Turkish destroyer in harbour at Preveza, in view of the fact that no Turkish
