page: 695

to china, or parasol to sunshade,

or

robe de chambre to dressing-gown— the relation, that is, of refined journalese to Ordinary plain lan-

g “—» May be deplored, but

y vow reversed. pares

to tion to the Italian; Violonsé16, which the OED puts first, is the complete anglicization; & Violonché15 is the usual compromise, which, having in its favour both violin & ’cello (ché15), is here recommended.

- Pl. -os; see -O(E)s 8.

V. & Virgilian gain or lose as much by being corrected into Veras MAHOMET by the change to Muhammad.

virgin. V. Queen; see SOBRIQUETS.

n). The noun used attributively ( Virginia creeper, tobacco, &e. maintained itself by the side of the adjective fPirginian creeper &c.) from the ea y 17th c. till now in spite of a modern tendency (like that noticed under Un- IDIOMATIC -LY) to insist on an adjectival form where one is available.

virile. The pronunciation of both ts varies between i &1¥; accent on first syllable: OED puts first vi’ril.

he proper sense ig ‘ having the qualities of a male adult ’, but the emphasis is on male, &, though is out of place, as in: VIRILE A st’ aod her great age, Mrs

enjoying a noticeable vogue; *,..,

atrly virile, & Performs all

in those days: there was no open

household work: robabl the reporter associates v. wit

vision’ (7 Sam., iii. 1) is perhaps

iridis green, not vir man, & was

what makes the word tempting to thinking of a green old age.

Politicians who wish to be mys-

teriously impressive; at any rate

VISION

virtu. So spelt (not ver-); pro-

nounce vert6o’.

virtue. To make av. Of necessity is

one of the maltreated Phrases illus:

trated in IRRELEVANT ALLUSION,

being often applied to the simple

doing of what one Must, irrespective

of the grace with which one does it.

virulent. The OED Pronounces

Vi'ryoolent; in view of the difficulty

U.

Virus. Pl. -uses.

visa. See visk.

viene. See COUNTENANCE,

vis S. See FrencyH WORDs.

The French Sttuation viz-d-viz M uS-

fapha Kemal is uncertain is probabl y

the result of spelling a foreign word

Y ¢ar; see Foreign DANGER {

UtZ--viz is, however, recorded as an

obsolete form.

viscount. For V. Smith & Lord

Smith, see Tiries. Of the two forms of the rank-name, Viscounty & viscounicy, the first is both much older & of better formation.

visé (vé’za), in French & p.p.= ‘examined ’ or * endorsed ’, is used in English with regard to passports (1) as a noun = endorsement, for Which the French noun visa ig sometimes preferred, (2) as a verb= endorse, with in flexions visés, viséd, viséing, & (3) as a Pp-p.= endorsed, sometimes preferred to viséd, Visibili \(visibleness. See “Ty &

ESS. The second has always been ners in “ty, & the special sense of , at became so familiar in the war may be expected to throw more general work on the other. Vision, in the sense of statesmanlike foresight or political Sagacity, is
