page: 700

+ transporied our army to S.A. & maintained tt there.

I trust you will kindly grant me a little space to express, in my own d&: in the name of those elements in Russia whom I have the honour to represent, our indignation at... The walled-up noun here (name) is governed not by a verb, but by u preposition; read in my own name & in that of the elements... .

The fourteen chapters erplore the belief in immortality in primitive & in the various civilizations of antiquity taken tn order. Like the preceding; read tn primitive civilizations & tn those of antiquity.

wall-eye should be so written, not as separate words; its proper meaning is the state of being wall-eyed, i.e. of having both eyes, or one, -eaaebiccar hs light-coloured, whethcr because the iris is very pale, or because the whites are disproportionately large, or because a squint ¢xposes one white excessively. Walleye is formed from wall-eyed, not vice versa.

wall-less. Write so; see SKILL-LESS.

wallop makes -oped, -oping, -oper; see -P-, -PP-.

walnut. So spelt;

unconnected

700 with wail.

waltz, valse. The first is the form that has established itself as the ordinary English, the other being confined to programmes & the like.

Wwampum. Pronounce wé-.

want. No man can say what is wanted to be done in regard to the military affairs of a nation till... For this ugly construction, see DOUBLE PASSIVE.

wanton makes -oned, -oning, -onest (adj.), see -N-, -NN- ; but wantonness.

wapiti. Pronounce wo6’piti.

wap(ping). Whop(ping) is now the established spelling.

war. 1. Wars & rumours of wars is the correct quotation (Matt. xxiv. 6); see MISQUOTATION. 2. Secretary of War, Secretary at War, Secretary for War. The first two are

+ obsolete titles that belonged to officials whose duties have been rearranged; Secretary for War (or War Secretary) is the current abbreviation of the present Minister’s title—The Secretary of State for War.

WARDOUR STREET. ‘ The name of a street in London mainly occupied by dealers in antique & imitation-antique furniture °—OED. As Wardour Street itself offers to those who live in modern houses the opportunity of picking up an antique or two that will be conspicuous for good or ill among their surroundings, so this article offers to those who write modern English a selection of oddments calculated to establish (in the eyes of some readers) their claim to be persons of taste & writers of beautiful English. And even as it is said of some dealers in the rare & exquisite that they have a secret joy when their treasures find no purchaser & are left on their hands, so the present collector, though he has himself no practical use for his articles of virtu, yet shows them without commendation for fear they should be carried off & unworthily housed.

albett* ; ANENT*®: AUGHT* ; beltke; ERE; ERST(WHILE); ETHIC dative with me & you; FOREBEARS, D.; haply; HOWBEIT; inverted protasis with had*, should, & were; maugre; more by TOKEN; Off; PERCHANCE; p.p. in -en, as knitten, litten, PROVEN; rede; SANS; SAVE, prep. Or conj. ; SHALL (6) asin You shall find; Sus- JUNCTIVE as in If tt be; therecompounds such as THEREFOR, thereof, thereto; THITHER; to wit*; trow; VARLET; WELL-NIGH; wherecompounds such as wherein, whereof; whit* ; withal; wot.

*A book that in the main is bright. chatty, & readable, albeit rather too kindly in tts lavish distribution of praise./So much has been written about the selfishness & stupidity of women anent the servant clause of the Insurance Billi that . . ./I have never written aught conflicting with that
