page: 701

theory of State function./Had the

etghteenth century bishops more vision

would

Lhe platform, the &0lf club, the bridge

table, in no whit Pa fen the la

& the workshop, must relaz their

claims,

The words in small capitals are

further commented upon in their

dictionary places,

Wardress. FEMININE DESIGNATIONS.

-WARD(S), Words endin with

~ward(s) may most of them used as adverbs, adjectives, or nouns.

“he -s is usually present in the adverb, & absent in the adjective; the noun, which is rather an absolute use of the adjective, tends to follow it in being without -s; moving castwards; the eastward Position; looking to the eastward(s). This usage prevails especially with the words made of a noun + -ward(s), but is also generally true of the older words in which the first part is adverbial, such as downward.

ome words, however, have peculiarities; see AFTERWARDS, FOR- WARD, ONWARD, TOWARDS.

Ware, in the warning cry w. wire / &c., is usually pronounced wor.

warehouse. For the verb the pronunciation -z ig recommended; see Noun & VERB 2.

Warp, n. See woor. watrant, vb, makes -lor; see -or, wash. The rivals wash-hand-stand, washing-stand, & wash-stand, are all

happens to suffice without aid from

the word itself, which meanin it has washtub, waiting to welcome wash-

in any particular place. The old stand, which is recommended.

sense should be restored & rigid}

maintained. OED quotations from Mera f For take in one another's

Lyell & Geikie follow to make the «0., see WORN-OUT HUMOUR.

old use clear, & an extract from a wassail. The pronunciation pre-

newspaper shows the modern mis-

ferred by OED is wo’sl. W. makes

ee ea

waste. 1. W. makes -table; see

MuTE £. 2, Waste paper. No

hyphen; see HyPuens 8 B.

Wastrel. The sense spendthrift

watchword. For Synonymy see sien,

Watershed. The original meaning

of the word, whether or not it js an

anglicization of German Wasser-

Scheide (lit. water arting), was the

line of high land dividing the waters

that flow in one direction from those

that flow in the other. THe older Darwin & Geikie are all quoted for the correct sense; & that ne 80 it is lamentable that the mista en probed that water- arting should

introduced to do watershed’s work, & watershed be allowed to mean what the ignorant thought it meant. The inevitable result is that now one has no idea, unless context
