page: 704

come well-nigh to is to put the

antique in an incongruous frame.

As the OED has not reached well

when this is written, the idiomatic

restriction may be proved false, &

is to be taken only as a guess.

well-read. See INTRANSITIVE P.P.

Welsh, Welch. Thc established

modern spelling is -sh, except in the

official names of regiments, for

which -ch is used. That distinction,

being meaningless, is regrettable.

A much more profitable one would

be that -sh should be universal for

the national adjective, while -ch

was assigned to the verb to welch

& to welcher—& that whether the

verb is or is not etymologically con-

nected (a disputed point) with

Welsh. ich spelling is in itself preferable, apart from custom, depends merely on the prevalent pronunciation, which is -sh. The analogy of French & Scotch & Dutch is irrelevant because the precedi dentals account for the harder ch in them, & that of English, Scottish, Irish, & British, because the familiar -ish, to which Welsh has not surrendered, disqualifies them.

wen. For the W., see SopriQueEts.

were. For the subjunctive uses in the singular, as If I were you, Were he alive, It were futile, some of which are more inconsistent than others with the writing of natural English, see SUBJUNCTIVES.

werewolf, werw-. The first is recommended; it is the more familiar, it suggests the usual pronunciation, & it dates back to Old Iinglish.

wert. See se 7.

westerly. See EASTERLY.

westernmost. See -sosr. Westminster, = Parliament.

See

704 SOBRIQUETS. westward(s). See -warp(s). WH. The sounding of h in words containing wh (what, whether, nowhere, &c.) is a matter of locality or nationality, & comes under the general principle suggested in Pro- NUNCIATION.

wharf. For plural &c., see -vE(p).

wharfinger. Pronounce -jer.

what is a word of peculiar interest,

because the small problems that it

poses for writers are such as on the

one hand yield pretty readily to

analysis, & on the other hand

demand a slightly more ‘expert

analysis than they are likely to get

from those who think they can

write well enough without stopping

to learn grammar.

1. Wrong number attraction. 9.

What singular & what plural. 3. One

what in two cases. 4. What resumed

by (and, but) which. 5. Miscellaneous.

1. Wrong number attraction. In

each of the examples to be given it

is beyond question that what starts

as a singular pronoun (=that which,

or a thing that), because a singular

verb follows it; but in each also the next verb, belonging to the that of that which, or to the a thing of a thing that, is not singular but plural; this is due to the influence of a complement in the plural, & the

mmatical name for such influence 1s attraction; all the quotations are on the pattern What is said are words, instead of What is said is words. Whether attraction of verb to complement is idiomatic in English has already been discussed in NuMBER, 1; it is here assumed that it is not; in all the quotations, which are multiplied to show how common the mistake is, the romant verb should have its number changed from plural to singular:— What is of absorbing & permanent interest are the strange melamorphoses which this fear underwent./What is required are houses at rents that the people can pay./What seems to be needed, & what, I believe, public

inion calls for, are stringent regulafkons to restrict the sale./What makes the omission still more amazing are, jirst, that the Allies . . -; secondly, that. . ./What is required are three bedrooms, a good large Eiving-room . - -/What puzzles us very much are the constant references in the Observer's
