page: 706

+ agitation)./What are wanted are not small cottages, but the larger houses with modern conveniences that are now demanded by the working classes (read what is wanted is; the thing that is wanted—rather than the buildings that are)./What provoke men’s curiosity are mysteries, mysferies of motive or stratagem; astute or daring plots (read provokes ... ts; that which provokes—rather than the things that provoke)./In order to reduce this material to utility & assimilate it, what are required are faith & confidence, & willingness to work (read what is required is; but the qualities that arc required justifies the plurals, though it does not make them idiomatic).

It will be observed that there is more room for difference of opinion on this set of examples than on either those in 1 or the previous set in 2, & probably many readers will refusc to accept the decisions given; but if it is realized that there are problems of number after what, & that solutions of them are possible, that is sufficient.

3. One what in two cases. For the general question whether in a language that like English has shed nearly all its case-forms the grammatical notion of case still deserves respect, see Cases; it is here assumed that it does, to the extent that no word, even if it has not different forms such as I & me for the subjective & objective uscs, ought to be so placed that it has, without being repeated, to be taken twice over first in one & then in the other case. The word what is peculiarly liable to such treatment. There are two chief ways of sparing grammatically-minded readers this outrage on their susceptibilities; sometimes a second what should be inserted; sometimes it is better to convert a verb to the other voice, so that what becomes cither object, or subject, to both. Corrections are given in brackets; to correct Pater, from whom the last example comes, is perhaps impudence, but grammar

706

+ is no respecter of persons:— This is pure ignorance of what the House is & its work consists of (& what its)./ But it is not folly to give it what it had for centuries & was only artificially taken from it by force rather more than a hundred years ago (what belonged to it for)./Mr tells us not to worry about Relativity or anything so bratn-tangling, but to concentrate on what surrounds us, & we can weish d& measure (& can be weighed & measured)./Impossible to separate later legend from original evidence as to what he was, & said, & how he said it (& what he said).

4. What resumed by (and, but) which. Francis Turner Palgrave, tohose name is tnseparably connected with what is probably the best, & which certainly has proved the most popular, of English anthologies (what is probably the best, & has certainly proved)./It ts an instructive conspectus of views on what can hardly be described as a‘ burning question’, but which certainly interests many Irishmen (but certainly interests)./ Mr Gladstone recewed a peculiarly warm welcome when he appcared clothed in what has been described as a Yeomanry uniform, but which was really the peaceful but picturesque scarlet & siloer of a Lord Lieutenant (but was really)./We are merely remembering what happened to our arboreal ancestors, & which has been stamped by cerebral changes into the heredity of the race (& has been stamped). A want of faith either in the lasting power of what (which has a good sccond wind & can do the two laps without turning a hair), or in the reader’s possession of common sensc, has led to this thrusting in of which as a sort of relay to take up the running. These sentences are not English; nothing can represent whai—except indecd what. That is, it would be English, though hardly idiomatic English, to insert a second whai in the place of the impossible which in each. If the reader will try the effect, he will find that the second what,
