page: 708

+ means that which or the (thing, things) that, whatever means all that or any(thing &c.) that. The point ignored in the quotations below is that whatever contains in itself the rclative (that or which) as well as the demonstrative or antecedent (all, any, &c), & that another relative cannot grammatically be inserted after it; whatever (or whatsoever) means not any, but any that, & whatever that is us absurd as any that that. In the first two, omit the roman-type that; in the third, which has gone wrong, as often happens, owing to the PREPOSITION- AT-END superstition, get rid of which by rewriting in whatever component, big or small, thetr attention is concentrated upon:—His cynical advice shows that whatever concession to Democracy that may seem to be involved in his words, may not be of permanent tnconventence./ Keep close in touch with Him in whutsocver creed or form that brings you nearest to Him./They see in the shell, the gun —in whatever component, big or small, upon which their attention is concentruted—the essence of all that matters.

3. The concessive use. Whatever one does, you are not satisfied; Iam safe now, whatever happens; Whatever you do, don’t lie. These are concessive clauses, short for Though one does A or B or C, Though this or that or the other happens, Though you do anything else. They differ from the whaiever clauses dealt with above in being adverbial, whatever meaning not all or any that (that beginning an adjectival clause), but though all or any. The difference is not a matter of hair-splitting; Whatever he has done he repents may mean (a) He is one of the irresolute people who always wish they had done something different, or (0) Though he may be a great offender, repentance should count for something; whatever antecedent-relative gives a, & whatcver concessive gives b. In practice it should be noticed that proper punctuation distin-

708 from, & where ..

+ guishes the two, the a meaning not having the two clauses parted by a@ comma, since whatever belongs to & is part of both, & the 6 meaning having them so parted, since whatever belongs wholly to one clause. In the following sentence, the reader is led by the wrong comma after have to mistake the whatever clause for a concessivre & adverbial one: Sir Edvard Grey has no reason to be displeascd with this sequel to his effort, and, whatever responsibility he may have, he will no doubt accept gladly. ‘The words concerned should run: and whatever responsibility he may have he will no doubt accept gladly.

wheal. See WALe.

Wheaten. See -EN ADJECTIVES.

whence, whither. The value of these subordinates of where for lucidity & conciseness seems so obvious that no-one who appreciates those qualities can see such help being discarded without a pang of regret. Why ts it that substitutes apparently so clumsy as where .. .

. to, can be preferred? It is surely because the genius of the language actually likes the PREPOSITION AT END that wiseacres have conspired to discourage, & thinks ‘Where are you coming to?’ more quickly comprehensible in moments of threatened collision than ‘ Whither are you coming?’. We who incline to wecp over whence & whither must console ourselves by reflecting that in the less literal or secondary senses the words are still with us for a time; ‘ Whither are we tending? ’, & *‘ Whence comes it that ...?’, are as yet safe against where...to & where...from; & the poets may be trusted to provide our old friends with a dignified retirement in which they may even exercise all their ancient rights. But we shall do well to shun all attcmpts at restoration, & in particular to eschew the notion (see ForRMAL worps) that the writer’s duty is to translate the where...
