page: 710

+ 6. Late position. 7. One of the best which has. 8% Commas. 9% In which to.

1. Relative instead of demonstrative. The type is: Jle lost his temper, which proving fatal to him. The essence of a rclutive is to do two things at once, to play the part of a noun in a sentence & to convert that sentence into, & attach it to another as, a subordinate clause. He lost his temper; this proved fatal; these can be made into one sentence (a) by changing the demonstrative this into the relative which, or (b) by changing the verb proved to the participle proving; onc or the other, not both as in the false type above. Actual examples of the blunder, with corrections in brackets, are:— It was rumoured that Beaconsfield intended opening the Conference with a speech in French, his pronunciation of which language leaving everything to be desired (read of that language; or else left for leaving)./Surely what applies to games should also apply to racing, the leaders of which being the vcry people aie whom an example might well be looked for (read of this or of the latter; or clsc are for being)./Persons who would prefer to live in a land flowing with milk & honey if such could be obtained without tendue exertion, but, failing which, are content to live in squalor, filth, & misery (read failing that; or clse failing which they for but failing which)./The World Scout principle— namely, of bringing into an Order of the young the boys of different races, by which means not only educatin the children in scouting, but... ( ead by this means; or clse we should not only educate for not only educating).

2. One relative in two cases. See wat 3 for this question; in all the following extracts, a single which is once objective & once subjective. The cure is either to insert a second which in the second clause, or to convert one of the two verbs into the same voice as the other, e.g. in the first example ‘ & others to study ’:—Mr Roche is practising a

710

WHICH, 83 definite system, which he is able to describe, & could be studied by others./He went up to a pew in the gallery, which brought him under a coloured window which he loved & always quicted his spirit./It gave a cachet of extreme clericalism to the Irish Party which it does not deserve, but must prejudice tt not a little in the eyes of English Radicalism./The queer ptece, which a few find dull, but to most is irresistible in its appeal./ Shakespearian words & phrases which the author has heard, & belicces can be heard still, along this part of the Avon valley.

8. One relative for main & subordinate verbs (or verb & preposition). The following sentence is provided with three endings, A, B, C, with each of which it should be read successively: This standard figure is called Bogey, which if you have beaten (A) you are a good playcr, (B) you are apt to mention, (C) is sometimes mentioned. In A_ the

rammar is unexceptionable, which

ing the object of have beaten, & having no second job as a pronoun (though as relative it attachcs to Bogcy the clause that is also attached by if to you are &c.). In modern use, however, this arrangement is rare, baieay pyar changed to ° if you have beaten which’. In B we come to questionable grammar, which being object first to hate beaten & then to mention; English that is both easy & educated usually avoids this by making which objcct only to mention, & providing have beaten with another—which, if you have beaten it, you are apt to mention. Meeting the B form, we incline to ask whether the writer has used it because he knows no better, or because he knows better than we do & likes to show it. Grammatically, it must be regarded as an ellipsis, & to that extent irregular, but many ellipses are idiomatic; this particular kind is perhaps Jess called for as idiomatic than noticeable as irregular. About C there are no such doubts; it is indefensible, the
