page: 713

the influence of the PREPOSITION

AT Carefully revised edition, & made

hesitate about going back to nature

& saying fo buy food with. And even

for the first ‘ the last Country to sa

so in’ is here recommended, thoug

the very light word ao happens

to

make with the other very light

word in an uncomfortably weak

ending; much more ig ‘ & good land

to live in ’ superior to ¢ & good land

in which to live ’, A confessedly

ly that there is an

clause— rhaps This is a good land

in which (one is) to live. The

amateur guess is that there is no

relative clause in the case at all,

& that the form to live tn originated

man to beat; how hard? why,

to beat; what Greek grammars cal]

an epexegetic (or ex lanatory) in-

finitive. Jt is aq good land to in-habit

is precisely parallel, & to live-in is

prouscly the same as io tn-habit.

f this account should happen to be true, the unpleasant form ‘in which to live’ might be dismissed ag a grammarians’ mistaken pedantry.

Which)(that)(who. 1. General. 2. Which for that. 3. Which after superlative &. 4. Which in Itis.., that. 5. Which as relative adverb, 6. Elegant variation. 7% That for which. 8, Which, who, & nouns of multitude. 9. Who & that.

1. General, If the evidence of a Morley’s opinion exhi ited below should make it worth while to are from an article in the Westminster Gazette of 8rd Oct. 1928 by Miss Hulda Friedrichs: ‘In 1920 Messrs Macmillan published a new edition of Lord Morley’s works . . . He was determiued to make it a

Aa2

himself . . . He then asked me

One or two attempts at revising it

i

for that... He was always ready &

very willing to go with me through

the notes had poe r

oing through a page by page,

f which ” hunting & looking out for

other errors ’.

priate to non-defining & that to

defining clauses; (B) of which &

who, which belongs to things, & who

to persons; (C) of who & that, who

Suits particular persons, & that

generic persons, (A) The river,

is ti 1 walking dictionary, but He iz a man that is never at a loss. To substitute for the relative used in any of those six examples either of the others would be, if the rinciples maintained in this boo are correct, a change for the worse; &, roughly speaking, the erroneous uses (if they are 80) illustrated below are traceras to neglect or rejection of A, B, 2. Which for that. The importance & convenience of using that as the regular token of the defining clause

been fully illustrated’ under
