page: 714

+ certainly a great improvement on the old plan of having ships in reserve without crews ... But Mr Robertson does not mention the case of the nucleus-crew ships, which are a substitute, not for unmanned ships, out for fully manned ships. It is startling to read that Mr R. does not mention nucleus-crew ships when we have just been told that he did; we recover after a bewildered moment, but we should have been spared that moment if ‘the nucleus-crew ships that’ had been written instead of ‘ the nucleuscrew ships, which ’./Serious works on Russia from Polish sources, which are not intended as merely propagandist pamphlets, are a valuable contribution towards a better understanding of that country. If the clause is non-defining, as ‘, which’ suggests, none of these scrious works are propagandist, & all are valuable. The real meaning is that some of them are free of propaganda, & are therefore valuable; but this real meaning requires ‘ that’ instead of *, which’./The second statement which, taken as it stands in Mr Wedgwood’s letter, is misleading ts that which implies that... Impossible to tell, since there are no commas after statement & misleading, whether the clause is defining (=the second misleading statement) or non-defining (= thesecond statement made—a misleading one); probably it is defining, & should have that instead of which.

Much more often there is no danger of misinterpretation, but that is desirable because its regular association with defining clauses helps to establish a workmanlike distribution of the relatives to the work that has to be done. Examples need not be multiplied; that should be preferred to which in all such places as: If the amending Bill ts to serve the purpose which responsible men in all parties profess to desire. Special circumstances that make which undesirable are set out in N° 3-5.

3. Which after superlative &c. When the antecedent of a defining

714 WHICH\THAT)(WHO, 4

+ clause includes a word of exclusive meaning, such as a superlative, an ordinal numeral, or ‘ the few’, the use of which instead of that (or who as second best) is bad enough to be almost a solecism even in the present undiscriminating practice. The question between that & who in such ae will be touched upon in 9;

ut at least which should be expelled from the extracts; by rule B who is better than which, & by rule C that is better than tcho:—All three will always be ranked among the foremost physical theorists & cxperimenters which Great Britain has produced./ Lord Spencer came to be regarded as one of the best Viceroys which the country had ever had./Ifad the two men of greatest genius in the respective spheres, which the British Navy has ever produced, had their way . . ./He was a true musical poet—perhaps, with one exception, the most gifted which England has ever produced./ The Bishop of Salisbury, ts the third bishop which his family has given to the world./One of the few composers of the first rank which England has produced.

Besides the particular type here described there are othcrs in which for various reasons which is wrong, but whether who, or that, should replace it is doubtful, e.g. persons or corporations which, against an enemy which, the many friends which; these will be dealt with in N° 9.

4. Which in Itts... that... The constructions exemplified in simple forms by Jt was the war that caused it, It was yesterday that we came, arc often difficult to analyse grammatically or account for; the difficulty nced not concern us here; one thing can be confidently said about them, which is that they require that & not which—that the defining relative (Jt was Jones that did it, the clause defining It; often tacit, as Jt was Jones did it), or that the conjunction (Jt ts with grief that I learn ...). Inthe three examples, that should replace to which, in which, & which:—It is to the State,
