page: 715

+ & to the State alone, to which we must turn to acquire the transfer of freeholds compulsorily, expeditiously, & cheaply./It is in the relation between motive, action, & result in a given chain of historical causation, in which history consists./So once again East is West, & it is shown that it is not only the Japanese which have the imitative instinct strongly developed.

5. Which as relative adverb. The curious & idiomatic use of that in this construction is explained in THAT REL. PRON. 8, where it is added that which is unsuitable for similar treatment. The clauses are defining, attached to such words, expressed or implied, as way, extent, time,

lace. That should be substituted in each example for which. It will be noticed that in the last of all in which has been used, which is in itself not irregular; but see the comment there:-—In England the furthest north which I have heard the nightingale was near Doncaster./ Parliament will be dissolved not later than Monday wecel:—the earliest moment, that is to say, which it has ever been seriously considered possible for the dissolution to take place./The curtain went up & down & up & down tn a way which only the curtain at the New Theatre when Miss Julia Neilson is at home to worshippers can do./So long as the Unionist Party is conducted on the lines which Mr _ Locker-Lampson desires it to be./Before we can find a Government or a Parliamentary majority expressing itself in the way which Americans express themselves./ Ile made a good ‘ legend’ during his lifetime in a way which very few actors have done./Before railway working was ‘ sped up’ to the extent which if ts at present, continuous work of this character was no great strain./The opportunity has been denied me of showing in the way which I am convinced a contest would have enabled me to do how small the real opposition is./The public will not be likely to misinterpret it in the way in which the party-capital

+ makers would desire. In this last, singularly enough, the insertion of in makes matters worse; which, or better that, might have been a pronoun, object to desire; but with in which the clause needs to be completed with ‘ that they should ’ or some equivalent.

6. Elegant variation. I was surprised many years ago when a very well known writer gave me his notion of the relation between which & that: When it struck him that there was too much which about, he resorted to that for a relief. So he said; it was doubtless only a flippant evasion, not a truthful account of his own practice, but still a tacit confession that he followed instinct without bothering about principles. Of the unskilled writer’s method it would be a true enough account; here is a specimen: Governments find themselves almost compelled by previous & ill-informed pledges to do things which are unwise & to refrain from doing things that are necessary.

he two relative clauses are exactly parallel, & the change from which to that is ELEGANT VARIATION at its worst. When two relative clauses are not parallel, but one of them depends on the other, it is not such a simple matter; as is stated in REPETITION (dependent sequences). there is a reasonable objection to one which-clause, or one that-clause, depending on another. Two examples will show the effect (a) of scorning consequences & risking repetition, & (b) of trying elegant variation; neither is satisfactory:— (a) Surely the reductio ad absurdum of tariffs is found in a German treaty with Switzerland which contains a clause which deserves to remain famous; (b) The task is to evolve an effective system that shall not imperil the self-governing principle which is the corner-stone of the Empire. The repetition is casily avoided in a by the change of which contains to containing; both whichs ought to have been that, which is here irrelevant. In b the absence of a comma shows
