page: 718

+ two from the most ordinary modern writing. Supporters of the rule of thumb will find it more difficult to appeal here to common sense, & will perhaps say instead that, no matter who wrote them, they are wrong; it will be maintained below that they are right. The rule of thumb fails, as such rules are apt to do, for want of essential qualifications or exceptions. The first qualification needed is that the which that has preceded must belong to the same antecedent as the one that is to be attached by and or but; our set of wrong examples would have been written otherwise if that had been part of the rule. The next amendment is both more important &, to the lovers of simple easy rules, more discouraging: the ‘ another which’ that was to be the test must be changed to ‘a clause or expression of the same grammatical value as the coming which-clause’. Now what is of the same grammatical value as a which-clause is either another which-clause or its equivalent, & its equivalent may an adjective or participle with its belongings (utterly unknown to the laws of this land; discovered by Mr B. in the summer), or an adjectival phrase (of most extensive prevalence; within the London area); for before these there might be inserted which are, which was, &c., without any effect on the meaning. But, secondly, what is of the same grammatical value as the which-clause that is coming is an expression that agrecs with it in being of the defining, or of the non-defining, kind; i.e., two defining expressions may be linked by and or but, & so may two nondefining, but a defining & a nondefining must not.

A defining expression is one that is inserted for the purpose of enabling the reader to identify the thing to which it is attached by answering about it such questions as which?, what?, what sort of?. Ifthe Burke quotation had stopped short at things 718

+ (Mandates . . . are things.), we should have said No doubt they are things, but what sort of things? we cannot tell what sort of things Burke has in mind till the expressions meaning ‘unknown to law’ & ° arising from mistake ’ identify them for us; both expressions are therefore of the defining kind, & legitimately lhnked by and; whether which occurs in both, or only in one, is of no importance. In that example there can, owing to the vagueness of the antecedent things, be no sort of doubt that the expressions are defining. Often there is no such comfortable certainty; in the Mill sentence, for instance, ‘ another natural prejudice’ is not a vague description like things, demanding definition before we know where we are with it; if the sentence had run simply Another natural prejudice was thts, we should not have suspected a lacuna; it cannot be said with confidence whether the two expressions were defining, so that the summary might be Another natural, widespread, & fatal prejudice was this, or non-defining, so that it would be Another natu rejudice— & tt was a widespread & fatal one— was this. It is clear, however, that whichever ‘ of most extensive prevalence ’ is the whtch-clause is also, & the and which is legitimate. It was because it is not always possible to say whether clauses & cxpressions of the kind we are considering are defining or non-defining that the phrase ‘inserted for the purpose of enabling the reader to identify * was so worded; the difference is oftcn, though not usually, a matter of the writer’s intention.

After these explanations the rule, as now amended, can be set down: (4nd which or but which should not be used unless the coming which-clause has been preceded by a clause or expression of the same grammatice] value as itself., And a rcasonableaddition to this is the warning that, though the linking of a relative clause to a really parallel expression

~~~
