page: 721

+ ADVANCE THE WHICH INTO

THE FIRST EXPRESSION

If this is done the which after and é&c. may be omitted or retained as seems. bens Pea enormous wire barrels & buoys, tone ae the neis, marked by lines of floati bottom of the sea, were pointed out to me (F; which are marked ..., & reach)./Mr Corbett’s Nelson is a very great commander, bountifully endowed with that indispensable gift, a sound * imagination’, but who scorned to rely upon mere uncorroborated insight (F; who was bountifully ..., but scorned)./Hallam, that most impassive of writers, & whose Liberalism would at the present day be regarded as tepid, tells us that...(Aj3; who was the most .. ., & whose)./A Byzantine cross, reported to be valued at {250,000, & which belonged to a church in the province of Aquila, has to be returned to the parish priest (F; which is reported ..., & which).

Anyone who has lasted out to this point may like to finish up with a few specimens of exceptional interest or difficulty, to be dealt with according to taste:—

With what difficulty had any of these men to contend, save that eternal & mechanical one of want of means & lack of capital, & of which thousands of young lawyers, youn doctors, young soldiers & sailors, o inventors, manufacturers, sho keepers, have to complain?_Thackeray./Nothing would gratify, or serve the purpose of, our enemies 80 much as would a panic in the capital of the Empire, as a result of their murderous aircraft attacks, @ which might involve serious national consequences./An amendment setting forth that the Government’s action is in accordance with the strict Constitutional practice of the country & is the only method by which the will of the people as expressed by the majority of the elected representatives of the House of Commons can be made effective, and among

721

+ the good consequences of which will be that the absolute veto of an unrepresentative & hereditary Chamber will for ever cease to exist./But the review contains several criticisms which are uncalled-for, incorrect, and to which I wish to take exception./Dealings are allowed in securities in such cases as those where negotiations between buyer & seller had been in course before the close of the House, but which were not completed by three _ o’clock./Mr De Haviland made a preliminary test with consummate success, and which was all the more impressive as the craft went through it in a casual way./Bulgaria announces a Servian repulse with severe losses at Kochana, where the fourth & fifth Bulgar armies are uniting, and which is only some twenty miles distant from Ishtib./It is precisely in those trades in which unionism is the strongest that we have the most stability and in which we have made the greatest advancc./I got him to play in one of the charity matches at Lord’s, many of which were held during the war, and by which means we raised a good deal of money.

whichever, which ever. See EVER.

while (or whilst) is a conjunction of the kind called strong or subordinating, i.e. one that attaches a clause to a word or a sentence, not a weak or coordinating conjunction that joins two things of equal grammatical value; it is comparable, that is, with if & although, not with and & or. The distinction is of some importance to what follows. Nothing, perhaps, is more characteristic of the flabbicr kind of journalese than certain uses of while, especially that which is described by the OED as ‘colourless’. The stages of degradation may be thus exhibited:—

1. Temporal strong conjunction, = during the time that: While she spoke, the tears were running doin.

2. The same with inversion, a foolish variant of 1: And while is being noticed just now the advance Germany
