page: 722

+ ad: other nations are making in aerial navigation, we see that...

3. Non-temporal strong conjunction in contrasts,= whereas: While this is true of some, it ts not true of all.

4. Strong conjunction with correct ellipsis: While walking in the road he was run over (=while he was walking).

5. Strong conjunction with incorrect cllipsis of two kinds (a) disregard of the full form, (b) wrongly attached participle &c., see UNATTACHED: But while being in agreement with Sir Maz Wacchters main thesis, LI am bound to confess my opinion tnat he... (the full form is not while I am being, but while I am, which should be used without ellipsis)./We abide by that generous gesture, & while being prepared to remit all that our Allies owe to us... we ask only that they should... Omit being./ While willing to sincerely sympathize retth those who would suffer by such an order, they can only console themselves with the thought how lucky they hace been that the fortuncs of war have not affected them sooner (the full form would be not while they are willing, which could be got from what follows, but while I am or we are willing, which cannot, so that willing is wrongly attached; read while we are willing)./Whilst admitting that much could still be done to speed up the production, it is absurd lo suggest that... (this contains both faults,a & bs; read whilst we admit)./ While battling savagely inside the northern ditch of the Fort to extend the footing he had gained, repeated uttucks were made in force from Catllette wood (what is to be undcrstood between while & batiling 7)./ An action was brought on account of injuries received in an accident whilst being driven in one of the company’s cars (were the injurics or the accident or the action being driven?).

6. Strong conjunction playing the part of weak, i.e. introducing what may be defended as a subordinate clause but is in sense a coordinate sentence; the ‘* colourless’ use,=

T22

+ and, so common in bad newspaper writing that illustration is almost supertiuous: White oulfought Ritchie in nearly every round, & the latter bled profusely, while both his eyes were nearly closed at the end.

7. The same as 6, but with the defence prevented by the interrogative form of the while sentence;= and: There is surely in this rccord a plain hint to the twin-Protectionist members for the City, Mr Balfour & Sir Frederick Banbury; while was it not Disraeli who in 1842 admiringly traced the close connexion of the Tory Party with Free Trade principles?/We can only console ourselves with the thought that the German people are also ‘slaves’ on this showing; whilst what are we to think of a House of Lords which permitted this Slavery Act to become law?

8. Use as FoRMAL worD or ELF- GANT VARIATION for and, with complete abandonment of the strong conjunction character: Archbishops, bishops, & earls were allowed eight dishes; lords, abbots, & deans six; while mere burgesses, or other * substantious’ men, whether spiritual or temporal, no more than three./The initial meridian to be that of Greenwich, while the descriptive text to be in the language of the nation concerned.

whilom. For the adverbial use (the wistful cycs that w. glanced down), see WARDOUR STREET; for the adjectival (a w. medical man), LATE.

whilst. See wni Le.

whin. See FURZE.

whine. Adj.-ny; -ry & -y.

whinny, vb. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

whip. Whip hand, not whip-hand; see HypHens 8 B.

whirlwind. See wInp, n.

whir(r). The second r is now usual, in the noun as well as in the verb.

whisht, whist, int. The first is recommended.

whisky, -ey. The OED treats the first as the standard form.

whiskyfied. For spelling see -FIED.

whit. See Warvbowr STREET.
