page: 723

+ are Whit Sunday, Whit Monday, &c., Whit-week, Whitsuntide. The adjective is Whitt (i.e. white), & the word Whitsun is a curtailment of Whit Sunday, used attributively in the forms Whitsun Monday, Whitsun week. It is true that Whit with other words than Sunday is merely a further curtailment of Whit Sunday; but, as Whit Monday is now established, it is better to prefer Whit to Whitsun wherever the latter is not, as in Whitsuntide, too firmly in possession to be evicted. It must be remembered, however, that Whitsun-Week & Whit-Sunday are the Prayer-Book forms, & that the Oxford Almanack prints Whitsun Day, so that the advice given above can be negiected without danger. It was designed to suit modern convenience & pronunciation; the Oxford Whitsun Day implies two accents, neither of them on -sun-, & the Prayer-Book Whit-Sunday implies (see HYPHENS) at most a secondary accent on -sun-, whercas in modern speech -sun- bears the chief accent. The Whitsun forms owe their survival partly also to the mistaken derivation (‘ a specimen of English popular etymology ’—Skeat) from German Pfingsten= pentccost.

white, adj., makes whity; -ry & -y.

white(n), vb. See -EN VERBS. For the noun meaning prepared chalk the old word, still in use, is whiting; but it is being ousted by whitening, perhaps partly because the verb is now to whiicn instead of to white, & partly for distinction from the fish wiiiing.

whither. Scc WHENCE.

whiting, Whitsun, whity. See WHITE(N), WHIT, WHITE adj.

whiz(z). The single z is recommended, except in the verb inflexions, to which the doubling of z elsewhcre is doubticss due; -z-, -zz-.

who & whom. 1. Miscellaneous y blag of case. 2. Young Fer-

inand, who(m) they suppose is drown’d. 3. Who(m) defining & non-

+ defining. 4. And or but who(m). 5. Person & number of who(m). 6. Personification. 7. Who(m) & participle.

1. Miscellaneous questions of case. Who being subjective & whom objective, & English-speakers being very little conversant with caseforms, mistakes are sure to occur. One is of importance as being extraordinarily common, & is taken by itself in N° 2; the others can be quickly disposed of here.

The interrogative who is often used in talk where grammar demands whom, as in Who did you hear that

rom?. No further defence than

colloquial’ is needed for this, & in the sort of questions that occur in printed matter other than dialogue the liberty is seldom taken. The opposite mistake of a wrong whom is not uncommon in indirect questions. Examples are:—Speculation is still rife as to whom will captain the English side to Australia./There ts qutte a keen rivalry between father & son as io whom is to secure the greater share of distinction as a caitlebreeder./There has been some speculation as to whom the fifth representative from South Africa was./ The French-Canadian, who had learned whom the visitors were, tried to apologize to Prince Albert. The mistake is a bad one, but fortunately so clementary that it is nearly confined to sports-reporters & patrons of the as-to style (see as 3), & needs no discussion.

The relative who now & then slips in for whom, giving the educated reader a shock; so:—. .. on the charge of ‘ feloniously receiving, comforting, harbouring, assisting, & maintaining one Hawley Crippen, who she then knew to have commiticd the murder of his wife ’./There is the Lord Chancellor, for example, who in other days we knew as Galloper Smith./As Mr Bevin reminds those who in other ctrcumstances we should call his followers, the agreement provided for ... That is a mistake that should not occur
