page: 724

+ in print; & at least as bad is the making of one whom serve two clauses of which the first requires it as the object, & the second as subject; this practice is untidy enough with words that, like which & that, have only one form for both cases (see THAT REL. PRON. 5, WHICH 2), but is still worse with who & whom; the correct form should invariably be inserted in the second clause when a different case is wanted:—He ran upstairs & kissed two children whom he only faintly recognized, & yet were certainly his own./But there has emerged to the final a Spaniard, in Sefior Alonso, whom few people would have supposed to have a good chance a fortnight ago but is delighting the advocates of the older style by the beauty & rhythm of his strokes.

For the incorrect formula whom failing, see ABSOLUTE CONSTRUC- TION; & for than whom see THAN 6.

2. Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose ts drown’d.—Tempest I11. iii. 92. It was said in 1 that the ater between who whom illustrated by this Shakspere quotation is of importance. That is because the whom form, though probably no grammarian would have a word to say for it, is now so prevalent in the newspapers that there is real danger of its becoming one of those Srurpy INDEFENSIBLES of which the fewer we have the better, & of good writers’ taking to it under the hypnotism of repetition. We have not come to that pass yet; good writers kecp clear of it; but it is high time for emphatic protests. What makes people write whom in such sentences? In the Shakspere, the preceding words are ‘ while I visit’, so that Ferdinand is objective; the relative, which should be who us subject to is drown’d, may have become whom by attraction to the cause of Ferdinand; or by confusion with another way of putting the thing—whom they suppose (to be) drown'd; or again a writer cy have a general impression that wit 7724

+ who & whom to choose between it is usually safer to play whom except where an immediately following verb decides at once for who. Any of these influences may be at work. but none of them can avail as a defence against the plain fact that the relative is the subject of its clause; nor can Shaksperc’s authority protect the modern solecist; did not the Revisers, in an anal case, correct the whom of a more familiar & sacred sentence (Bu whom say ye that I am?—Matt. xvi. 15) into conformity with moder usage? Of the newspaper extracts that follow, the earlier show easily intelligible whoms, because an active verb follows that could be supposed by a very careless person to be governing it, while in the later oncs a passive verb or something equivalent puts that explanation out of court:—Madame Vandervelde spoke ee women, whom, she claimed, most

ated war because they suffered most from w./Mr Austen Chamberlain, whom we are glad to see has returned to lead the Housc./ Success depended entirely upon the attitude of the Prussians, whom Pit believed would assist him, but whom Mr Fortescue knows well could never be depended upon./The witness was Admiral Birileff, whom the Kaiser well knex was @ thoroughly improper person to witness a document of the kind./The letter gives the name of a man whom the wriicr alleges was responsible for the child's death./ Arrangements cere made to accommodate a few ladies whom tf was ceriain would rot be likely to raise any Sujfragist interruplion./Lord Justice Younger,whoni it is rumoured may be nominated fer the Lord-Chancellorship./ Mr Asquith, a statesman whom we are conrinced will be more honoured by posterity than by the present generation. / A ver; modern Japanese, one whom it may be observed spoke English fluently. ' Amongst others whom tt ts hoped will be among the guests are . . ./ Mention was made of * .lyesha’, whom tt is alleged meant Mrs Bryce.
