page: 727

whoever &c. 1. Forms. 2. Who ever)(whoever. 3. Case.

1. Forms. Subjective: whoever, whosoever (literary), who-e’er (poet.), whoso (arch.). Objective: whomever (rare), whoever (collog.), whomsoever (literary), whomsoe’er (poct.), whomso (arch.). Possessive: whoseever, whoever’s (colloq.), whoscsoever (literary).

2. Who ever)(whocver. See EVER. Whoever can it be? is illiterate, & Who ever can it be? is colloquial only. In print, when an cmphasizing ever is uscd, it should not come next to who; correct the following to But who could ever &c.: But whoever could have supposed that the business interests which are threatened would not have organized to resist?

3. Case. ‘“*‘ For whoever was responsible for that deliberate lie there can be no forgivencss.”’ The reviewer who quotcs these words does so after saying *‘ His views on... are by an accident ungrammatical, but vigorous’. Obviously there is nothing ungrammatical in the sentence unless whoever is so, & we must conclude that the reviewer would have written whom-ever or whomsocoer, & that the subjective case thercfore requires defence. The defence is not difficult, & whom-ever would be wrong. This, the ordinary use of the pronoun, should be distinguished from (a) the incorrect interrogative use mentioned in 1 & (b) the concessive use as in Whoever consents, I refuse; apart from these, whoever is a relative that resembles what in containing its antecedent in itself; as what=that which, so whoever=any person who; the that & the which of what may or may not be in the same case, & similarly the any person & the who of whoever are often in different cases; but the case of whoever is that of the who, not that of the any person, that is, it is decided by the relative clause, not by the main sentence: He asked whom-ever he met, but He asked whoever came near him; For whomever he met he had a nod,

T27

+ but For whoever met him he had a nod.

wholly. So spelt, but pronounced as if it were wholely & normally formed like palely, vilely, & solely; see MUTE E.

whom. See wuHo.

whortleberry. Pronounce wer-.

whose. 1. General. 2. Whosc=of which.

1. General. The word is naturally liable to some of the same misuses as who, which need not be here discussed scparately; see wHo & wHoM, 3-6. Even the making of whose scrve in two clauses requiring different cases (cf. wHo & wHomM, 1) is not unexampled: The whole scheme may be likened to the good intentions of the dear old lady whose concern for the goldfish led her to put hot water into their bowl one winter's day, & was grievously surprised when they died.

2. Whose=of which. A literary critic observes of an author: ‘ His style is clear & flexible; yet it still necds a little clarifying—weeding out “* whose ”’ as a relative pronoun of the inanimate, & the like’. If one knows neither who the author nor who the critic is, one cannot help suspecting that the flexibility commended may owe something to the condemned whose; in the starch that stiffens English style one of the most effective ingredients is the rule that whose shall refer only to persons; to ask a man to write flexible English, but forbid him whose °‘ as a relative pronoun of the inanimate ’, is like sending a soldier on ° active’ service & insisting that his tunic collar shall be tight & high; activity & stocks do not agree. if the reader will glance at the specimens of * late position of which’ given in wHIcu 6, he will see how cumbrous a lateplaced relative is; now insistence on of which instead of whose accounts for more late-placed relatives than anything else; whose would often replace not only of which, but in &c. which; even the specimens just
