page: 729

+ of them, will at least dress it in English clothes. Meanwhile, GROW- ING WILL TO RECONSTRUC- TION, says a newspaper headline. 2. Will makes will-less; see SKILL-LESS.

will, vb. 1. Forms. 2. Will & shall.

1. Forms. There is a verb fo will, conjugated regularly throughout— will, willest, wills, willed, willedst, willing; it means to intend so far as one has power that so0-&-so shall come about, the so-&-so being expressed by a noun or a that-clause or an infinitive with to: You willed his death, that he should die, to kill him. The much commoner auxiliary verb has none of the above forms except will, & on the other hand has wilt & would & would(c)st; it has also none of the above constructions, but is followed by an_ infinitive without to: He will dic, Would it be true? The meaning of this auxiliary is curiously complicated by a partial exchange of functions with shall, the work of merely giving future & conditional forms to other verbs being divided between certain persons of shall & certain persons of will, while the parts of each not so employed retain something of the senses of ordering (shall) & intending (xcill) that originally belonged to the stems.

2. Will & shall. There is the English of the English, & there is the English of those who repudiate that national name; of the English of the English shall & will are the shibboleth, & the number of those who cannot ‘ frame to pronounce it right’, as they talk to us in the newspapers, best reveals to us the pore in the English Press wielded

y Scots & others who are not English. That power necd not be grudged them, & it is perhaps presumption to take for granted that shibboleth is better than sibboleth; but the mere Englishman, if he reflects upon the mattcr at all, is convinced that his shall & will endows his speech with a delicate

729

+ precision that could not be attained without it, & serves more important purposes than that of a race-label.

The idiom is a strange one, & under shall has been sufficiently illustrated to save those who may wish to acquire it some of the usual mistakes. The general statement will be enough here that nearly all misusces are of will for the idiomatic shall, not of shall for will; to which may be added a small selection of various common wrong forms, with references to the sections of shall:-—

See SHALL, 1

If we add too much to these demands we will be in grave danger of getting nothing. / We are facing the consequences today, & will have to face them for many years to come in the affairs of Europe./We have no proper place at the Coronation of King George, & would lay ourselves open to the gravest misunderstanding by departing, on this occasion, from the settled policy of our party.

See SHALL, 2

We would like to bring together two extracts dealing with the effects of the Budget on land./But at any rate we would feel sorry to have missed anything that is told us of Edison in the biography.

See SHALL, 3

The Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society will go to a foreign astronomer, when this evening the President of the Socicty will present it to Professor Max Wolf.

See SHALL, 4

The Grecks will now decide whether their country shall continue to be a Monarchy or will become a Republic./In a very few years we shall not remember, & will scarcely care to inquire, what companies were included.

See SHALL, 5

The King has expressed a desire that on Sunday all flags:ill be flown at the masthead./It is in-
