page: 730

+ WILLY tended that the exterior scenes in no fewer than four different pictures will be taken before they return.

Willy, -le. See -Ey, -I§, -y.

wily makes wilily; see -LILy.

wind, n. Words for wind, & names of particular winds, are apt to be troublesome & to be confused with one another. The following words are in alphabetical order, & the definitions are those of the OED, except where (for wind itself only) the OED was not yet out:—

anti-trade wind. A wind that blows steadily in the opposite direction to the trade-wind, that is, in the northern hemisphere from S.W., & in southern hemisphere from N.W.

bise. A keen dry N. or NNE. wind prevalent in Switzerland & the neighbouring parts of France, Germany, & Italy.

blast. A strong gust of wind.

blizzard. A furious blast of frostwind & blinding snow.

breath. A gentle blowing, a puff.

breeze. A gentle or light wind.

cloud-burst. A violent storm of rain, a * waterspout ’.

cyclone. a. A storm in which the wind has a circular course. b. A hurricane or tornado of limited diameter & destructive violence. c. A system of winds rotating around a centre of minimum barometric pressure.

draught. A current of air, esp. in a confined space, as a room or a chimney.

fohn. A warm dry south wind which blows down the valleys on the north side of the Alps.

gale. a. A wind of considerable strength. b. A gentle breeze.

gust. A sudden violent rush or blast of wind.

harmattan. A dry parching landwind, which blows during December, January, & February, on the coast of Upper Guinea in Africa; it obscures the air with a red dust-fog.

hurricane. A name given primarily to the violent wind-storms of the West Indies, which are cyclones of

730

+ diameter of from 50 to 1000 miles, wherein the air moves with a velocity of from 80 to 180 miles an hour round a central calm space, which with the whole system advances in a straight or curved track;_ hence. any storm or tempest in which the wind blows with terrific violence.

mistral. A violent cold north-west wind experienced in the Mediterranean provinces of France & neighbouring districts.

monsoon. A _ seasonal wind prevailing in southern Asia & esp. in the Indian Ocean, which during the period from April to October blows approximately from the south-west. & from October to April from the north-east.

puff, <A short impulsive blast of breath or wind; a whiff.

samtel. The simoom.

simoom. A hot, dry, suffocating sand-wind which sweeps across the African & Asiatic deserts at intervals during the spring & summer.

squall. A sudden & violent gust, a blast or short sharp storm, of wind.

storm. A violent disturbance of the atmosphere, manifested by high winds, often accompanied by heavy falls of rain, hail, or snow, by thunder & pene ne & at sea by turbulence of the waves. Hence sometimes applied to a heavy fall of rain, hail, or snow, or to a violent outbreak of thunder & lightning, unaccompanied by strong wind.

tempest. A violent storm of wind, usually accompanied by a downfall of rain, hail, or snow, or by thunder.

tornado. a. A very violent storm. affecting a limited area, in which the wind is constantly changing its direction or rotating; loosely, any very violent storm of wind, a hurricane. b. On the west coast of Africa, a rotatory storm in which the wind revolves violently under @ moving arch of clouds. c. In the Mississippi region of U.S., a destructive rotatory storm under a funnelshaped cloud like a_ waterspout, which advances in a narrow path over the land for many miles.
