page: 732

ee ee eee 732

witch-. See wych-.

witenagemot. Pron. wi’tenagimd‘’t.

with. Writers who have become conscious of the ill effect of as to & in the CASE of, casting about for a substitute that shall enable them still to pull something forward to the beginning of a sentence (* The modern journalistic craving for immediate intelligibility ’ said Dr Henry Bradley), have lately hit upon with, which is sometimes found displacing of or some really appropriate preposition—atrick that should be avoided:—With pipes, as with tobacco, William Bragge was one of the most successful collectors./ [Collins, Blair, Parnell, Dyer, Grecn] Collins has had his excellent editors, & we must suppose that the manuscript has finally disappeared; but, with the others, we suspect that the poems are extant./Read of pipes, of tobacco, the poems of the others.

withal. See WaRDoUR STREET.

withe, withy. Both spellings, & the monosyllabic as well as the disyllabic pronunciation, are in use. As against those who condemn the monosyllable as a novelty or an ignorance, there is the plural withs in the A. V. of Judg. xvi. 7. But probably withy, pl. -ies, is the best form for modern purposes, obviating uncertainty.

without. 1. W.=outside. 2. W.= unless. 3. Without or without. 4. Without hardly. 5. Without him being. 6. Negative confusion.

1. W.=outside. Both as adverb (listening to the wind without; clean within & without), & as preposition (is without the pale of civilization), the word retains this pasta but it is no longer for all styles, having now a literary or archaic sound that may be very incongruous.

2. W.=unless. No high efficiency can be secured without we first secure the hearty cooperation of the 30,000,000 or so workers. The use is good old English, but bad modern English— one of the things that many people say, but few write; it should be

+ left to conscious stylists who can rely on their revivals’ not being taken for vulgarisms.

|

3. Without ...or without... It can be done without any fear of his knowing it, or without other eil consequences. The well meant repetition of without is not merely needless, but wrong. See or 4.

4. Without hardly. The introduction of the vast new refineries has been brought about quickly, silently, & effectively, & without the surrounding community hardly being aware of what was happening. Again, like 2, a common colloquialism, but, unlike it, one that should never appear outside spoken or printed talk; the English for without hardly is almost without.

5. Without him being. The word is peculiarly apt to usher in a FuseEep PARTICIPLE, e.g. The formidable occasion had come & gone without anything dreadful happening. The fused participle is no worse after without than elsewhere, but those who are prepared to eschew it altogether should take warning that without will sometimes try their virtue, so often does the temptation present itself; it is, for instance, & pure accident that the sentence quoted in 4 for a different point contains the fused participle without the community being aware. Esca are usually not hard to find; here * & nothing dreadful had happened ’, or ‘ without any dreadful results ’, would do, but particular suggestions for a particular case are of little value; the great thing is general readiness to abandon & recast any of one’s phrases that one finds faulty.

6. Negative confusion. Like all negative & virtually negative words, without often figures in such absurdities as:—Jt 7s not safe for any young lady to walk along the Spantards-road on a Sunday evening by herself without having unpleasant remarks spoken as she passes along./ Rendering it possible for a Government to accept some at any rate of the recommendations of the Committee
