page: 733

+ without any loss of face, & least of all without loss of office.

witticism. A HyBRID DERIVATIVE.

wive. See -vE(D).

wizard. For W. of the North, see SOBRIQUETS.

wizened, wizen, weazen. All three forms are or have been used as adjectives, but the first is now usual. The -en of wizen & weazen is a p.p. termination, as well as the -ed of wizencd.

wizier. See VIZIER.,

wobble, wab-. The first is now the established spelling.

wolf. See -vE(D).

wolverene, -ine. The first appcars to be accepted.

woman. For woman suffrage, as a phrase, see FEMALE)(WOMAN. For chairwoman & chairman, as applied to a woman, see FEMININE DESIGNA- TIONS. Womankind, not womenkind, for the whole sex or women in general; but womenkind is common for one’s female relatives &c.

womanly. See FEMALE, FEMININE.

wonder. For I shouldn't w. if it didn’t rain, see Nort 4, & StuRDY INDEFENSIBLES.

wood. Wood anemone is better as two separate words; also, without question, wood pavement; see Hy- PHENS 8B. Woodbine, not -bind, is the established form, esp. with Shakspere & Milton to maintain it. Tomorrow to fresh woods, not fields; a pasture, by the way, ts a field; see MISQUOTATION.

wooden makes woodenness.

woof, warp, web, weft. The warp is a set of parallel threads stretched out; the threads woven across & between these are the woof or weft; & the fabric that results is the web.

wool makes, in British spelling, woollen, woolly, & in American woolen, woolly; woollen is perhaps anomulous even by British standards (see -LL-, -L-), but is certainly established; &, on its analogy, -woolled should be better than -wooled. ; 788

woolly bear.

No hyphen; see HyPuHENs 8 B.

WORD-PATRONAGE. Under SuPER- IORITY, the tendency to take out one’s words & look at them, to apologize for expressions that either need no apology or should be quietl refrained from, has been uecationed: To pat oneself on the back, instead of apologizing, for one’s word is a contrary manifestation of the same weakness, viz_ self-consciousness; but it is rare enough to deserve this little article all to itself: ... propose to use their powers to force a dissolution. That is a contingency which has been adumbrated (to revive a word which has been rather neglected of late); but this is one more case in which we must be content to wait & see.

work, vb. The disappearance of the form wrought is so manifest, yet so far from complete, that it is impossible to say from year to year where idiom still requires it & where it is already archaic. A few sentences with blanks for wrought or worked will illustrate. As_ the direction of progress is clear, prudence counsels falling in with it in good time. A contemporary who

in brass. These things have together for good. She upon his feelings. This infinite mischief. They have their will. Conscience within him. tle —— his audience into fury. When they were sufficiently up.

workaday is now displaced, wholly in the noun use, & for the most part as an adjective, by the normal workday, of which it is regarded as a slipshod pronunciation to be used only as a genial unbending; * this workaday world ’ is still usual.

working. W. capital, w. expenses, &c., should have no hyphens; see Hypuens 3 B.

WORKING & STYLISH WORDS. Anyone who has not happened upon this article at a very early stuge of his acquaintance with the book will not suppose thut the word stylish is

WORKING & STYLISH WORDS
