page: 734

+ meant to be laudatory. Nor is it; but neither is this selection of stylish words to be taken for a blacklist of out-&-out undesirables. Many of them are stylish only when they are used in certain senses, being themselves in other senses working words; €.g., antagonize is a working word for ‘to arouse antagonism in the mind of’ or * make hostile’, though nothing if not stylish for ‘to oppose’; category is a working word in the philosopher’s sensc, though stylish as a mere synonym for class; protagonist a working word for the one person upon whom the intcrest centres, but aggressively stylish for an advocate; college stvlish for school but the working word for—college. Others again, such as bodeful & dcem & dwell & maybe, lose their unhappy stylish air when they are in surroundings of their own kind, where they are not conspicuous like an escaped canary among the sparrows.

What is to be deprecated is the notion that one can improve one’s style by using stylish words. Those in the list below, like hundreds of others, have, either in certain senses or generally, plain homely natural companions; the writer whe prefers to one of these the stylish word for no better reason than that he thinks it stylish, instead of improving his stvle, makes it stuffy, or pretentious, or incongruous. About the words in small capitals remarks bearing on the present subject will be found in their dictionary places:— STYLISH WORKING ANGLE, vb fish ANTAGONIZE oppose assist help beverage drink BODEFUL ominous catarrh cold CATEGORY class COLLATION repast, meal COLLEGE school comestibles eatables, food COMMENCE begin comprise INCLUDE

+ STYLISH WORKING CRYPTIC obscure, mysterious deem think; DESCRIPTION __ kind, sort DWELL live ENVISAGE face, confront FEASIBLE possible FORENOON morning MAYBE perhaps

et ee PORCELAIN china PROTAGONIST champion, advocate sufficient ENOUGH VIOLIN FIDDLE

workless. In the article ’s 1xcon- GRUOUS somce illustrations have been Abe of how the newspaper head-

ine is affecting the language;_ see also WED. Workless gives another example. We have all known * the unemployed’ as long as we can remember. But unemployed fills up a good deal of headlinc; something shorter is wanted, & workless is invented for the necd. But, secondly, workless by itself is shorter than the workless; so workless is turned from an adjective into an indcclinable plural noun—all to make possible such gems as: KENT WORKLESS WANT TO

SEE PREMIER

TO AID WORKLESS

world. All the w. & his wife is like the Psalmist; it has been young & nowis old; see WoRN-ouT HUMOUR.

worldly. So spelt, not wordly; but the mistake is common; cf. unwieldly for unwieldy.

WORN-OUT HUMOUR. ‘ We are not amused’; so Qucen Victoria baldly stated a fact that was disconcerting to someone; yet the thing was very likely amusing in_ its nature; it did not amuse the person whose amusement muttered, that was all. The writer’s Queen Victoria is his public, & he would do well to kecp a bust of the old Queen on his desk with the legend * We are not amused ” hanging from it. His WORN-OUT HUMOUR
