page: 735

+ public will not be amused if he serves it up the small facetiae that it remembers long ago to have taken delight in. We recognize this about anecdotes, avoid putting on our friends the depressing duty of simulating surprise, & sort our stock into chestnuts & still possibles. Anecdotes are our pounds, & we take care of them; but of the phrases that are our pence we are more neglectful. Of the specimens of worn-out humour exhibited below nearly all have had point & liveliness in their time; but with every year that they remain current the proportion of readers who ‘are not amused’ to those who find them fresh & new inexorably rises.

Such grammatical oddities as muchiy; such puns as Bedfordshire & the Land of Nod; such allusions as the Chapter on Snakes in Iceland; such parodies as To or not to; such quotations as On intent, or single blessedness, or suffer a sea change; such oxymorons as The gentle art of doing something ungentle; such polysyllabic uncouthness as calling a person an individual or an old maid an unappropriated blessing; such needless euphemisms as unmentionables or a table’s limbs; such meioses as the herringpond, or Epithets the reverse of complimentary, or ‘some’ as a superlative; such playful’ archaisms as hight or yclept; such legalisms as (the) said ,& the same, & this deponent; such shiftings of application as innocent or guiltless of hs, or of the military persuasion, or to spell ruin or discuss @ roast fowl or be too previous; such metonymics as the leather & the ribbons for ball & reins; such mctaphors as timberyard & sky-pilot & priceless; such zeugmas as in topboots & a temper; such happy thoughts as taking in each other's washing—with all these we, i.e. the average adult, not only are not amused; we feel a bitterness, possibly because they remind us of the lost youth in which we could be tickled with a straw, against the

WS

+ scribbler who has reckoned on our having tastes so primitive.

woiry. For inflexions see VERBS IN -IE &¢., 6.

worsen. See -EN VERBS.

worship makes -ipped, -ipper, -ipping; see -P-, -PP-.

worsted. Pronounce w00s-.

worth)(worth while. In certain uses great confusion prevails, which can be cleared up with the aid of grammar. The important fact is that the adjective worth requires what is most easily described as an object; it is meaningless to sa This is worth, but sense to say This is worth sixpence, or This is worth saying (i.c. the necessary expenditure of words), or This is worth while (i.e. the necessary expenditure of time); but one such object satisfies its requirements, so that This is worth while saying, with the separate objects while & saying, is ungrammatical. A_ less essential point, which must nevertheless be realized if all is to be clear, is the doubtful nature of the J¢ that is often present in sentences containing worth. Though This is worth while saying is wrong, It is worth while saying this is right, but again J¢ (viz whatever has just been said) ts worth while saying is wrong; the last Jt is the ordinary pronoun, & this or that might have stood instead of it, but the It of It 2s worth while saying this is what is called the anticipatory it (see IT, 1, 2) & means not this or that, but saying this. In the following table, this source of confusion will be avoided, every it used bein of the anticipatory kind. A & are two faultless forms, B usually appearing not in the direct order, but with Jt; C is another correct form, but slightly less idiomatic than A & B; it, like B, is usually not in direct order, but with Jt. Of the ~ a, b, c, forms, ais A spoilt by having worth while instead of worth, which means that worth has two objects; bis B spoilt by the verb say’s having no object, the cause being, as will
