page: 739

" xX

-x, as French plural. It is still usual, in various degrees, to write -x instead of the English -s in the

lurals of words in -eau & -eu

rrowed from French, the pronunciation being -z, as in English plurals. It is to be hoped that some day all of these that are in familiar English use will be anglicized with -s; but a list of the chief words, here given in the plural in order that the reader may judge of their looks, is admittedly forbidding: adieus; beaus; chiteaus; flambeaus; plateaus; portmanteaus; rondeaus; rouleaus; trousseaus. The fact, however, that purlieu, which has all the air of a French word without being one, looks right with the plural -s (purlieus) because we are used to it suggests that courage with the others might soon be rewarded. Phrases such as feuz de joie & jeux desprit would naturally keep their French -x, & so would any single words whose anglicization was so far from accomplished that the plural was still pronounced like the singular, without the sibilant; that is hardly true of any of the list above; we say not *‘ bé like Brummell’, but ‘ bdz like Brummell’, & ‘ all portmantéz will be opened ’, not ‘ all portmantd...’.

xebec. Pronounce zé’bék or zIbé’k.

-XION,-XIVE. About certain nouns, especially connexion, deflection, inflexion, & reflection, there is a doubt whether they should be spelt with -xion or -ction, & the adjectives in -tve are also concerned. The forms connexion, deflexion, inflexion, & reflexion, are all called by the OED the ‘etymological spellings’. Inthe first place, each is derived from an actual Latin noun in -xio, the chan to English -ction being due partly to the influence of the verbs connect & de-, in-, re-, flect, & partly to that of the multitude of English nouns in -tion; & secondly, a vast majority of nouns in -ion were formed from

789

+ the p.p. stem & not from the present stem of Latin verbs, so that flecto flex-, & necto nezx-, would be expe to use flez- & nez- as the

asis of their -ion nouns. As a few Latin nouns in -io were nevertheless formed from present stems, e.g. oblivio, the philological lapse is of no great importance. It may be well to retain the x in connexion & inflexion, in which it has by no means gone out of use, though the earlier connexive has been displaced by connective. For reflection & reflexion, reflective & reflexive, with which attempts at differentiation | have had unequal success, see the separate articles.

Y

-Y. For the suffix used in making adjectives from nouns (slaty &c.), as it affects spelling, see -ry & -y in adjectives. For the diminutive suffix (Johnny, doggie, &c.), see -EY, -IE, -Y, in diminutives.

yacht. So spelt.

yager. The form now usual is the German word Jdger itself.

yahoo. See FAUN.

Y & I were in older English writin frecly interchanged; that genera liberty has long been abandoned, but there are still a few words in which usage varies or mistakes are common; they are, in the spelling here recommended: cipher; Gypsy; Libya(n); lichgate; Mytilene; pyemy; sibyl & Sibyl; SILLABUB; SILVAN & Silvanus; siphon; siren; STILE (in hedge) & style (manner); sTIMy; TILER (in free-masonry); TIRE (of wheel); tiro; wycH-elm.

In Libya, sibyl, & Mytilene, the right spelling is indisputable, but with the same sound in successive syllables it is difficult to remember which is i & which y; even those who have read Herodotus & Thucydides are often fain to visualize the Greek words before they feel safe. In cypher, lychgate, syl , sylvan, syphon, syren, & tyro, the intrusive
