page: 741

80 settled—in

Chile, for instance.

2. logical pregnant use. When

yet is used to point a contrast,

Opposition between the fact it intro-

duces & that which has gone before

should be direct & clear.

contrast is by no means the essential

contents of the previous sentence,

but has to be got out of it at the

cost of some thought. We confess

fo being surprised at the line taken

by the railwaymen at C

reference to Colonel Yorke’s conclu-

ston that the Shrewsbury disaster

occurred through

Army officer who does not understand

the real working of railways.

rectness

but, though many other things not in Contrast with their indignation can be got out of the sentence, the correctness of the conclusion is inferable only from the newspaper’s surprise at the men’s indignation at the conclusion. If yet were omitted, the second sentence would come in logically enough as an explanation of what the men’s ‘line ’ referred to had actually been.

Sir,—I doubt af sufficient attention

been drawn to the tnjustice of throwing on the landlord “in whose house they happen to be resident the cost of a@ large additional insurance benefit for those who are sick, under Clause 51, @ sick tenant would be able to live rent free for a year at the Argentine &

syllepsis are explained under syle

lepsis in TECHNICAL TERMS. Inten-

ZEUGMA

essence of the Yet sentence is that

& tenant has power to injure a land-

lord. What is that in contrast

with? with the fact that justice

would protect landlords; i

not with the main sentence

ing, which is a statement of why the

writer is writing, but with a mere

inference from a houn that occurs

in it, viz injustice. As in the first

example, the logical work of the

explanation is presented in the guise

the sentence

work properly if yet

were omitted.

Yiddish is not a kind of Hebrew,

but a kind of German. As miscon-

ception is common, the OED de.

finition follows:

y Jews in Europe & America, consisting mainly from the Middle admixture (accordin individual usage) o words, & printed in Hebrew characters.

yodel, vb, has -lled, -l 3 “LL, -L-,

yoke, vb, makes -kable wae MUTE Ek,

yokel makes yokelish 3 -LL-, -L-, 2.

cr See Warpour STREET,

or: - No hyphen; see HYPHENS 8 B. young. For Y. Chevalier, Y. Pre-

» Bee SOBRIQUETS. yours. For misuseg

in place of your, see ABSOLUTE POSSESSIVE, or epistolary uses, LETTER FORMS. youth. Plural pron. -dhz > -TH&-pDa.

Z Zarathustrian. See ZOROASTRIAN, Zeitgeist. Pronounce tsi’tgist. zemstvo. Pi. "08; see -O(E)s 6. zephyr. See winp, n. zero. PI. -os; see -O(E)s 3. ZEUGMA, PI. -as or -ata. The 741 in the meaning of the word & its relation to
