Chapter 21

The next day we set out at dawn. We had to hurry. We were five days' march from the crossroads.

I won't dwell on the miseries of our retreat. My uncle bore them with the fury of a man who knows he isn't the stronger; Hans, with the resignation of his peaceable nature; and I — I admit it — complaining and despairing, unable to steel my heart against this run of bad luck.

Just as I'd foreseen, the water gave out entirely by the end of the first day's march. Our supply of liquid was reduced to gin; but that infernal stuff scorched the throat, and I couldn't even stand the sight of it. I found the heat suffocating. Fatigue had me paralyzed. More than once I nearly dropped where I stood. Then we'd halt, and my uncle or the Icelander would do their best to revive me. But I could already see that my uncle was reacting badly to the extreme exhaustion and the tortures of thirst.

At last, on Tuesday the 8th of July, dragging ourselves along on our knees and our hands, we reached the junction of the two galleries half dead. There I lay like a dead weight, stretched out on the lava floor. It was ten in the morning.

Hans and my uncle, propped against the wall, tried to nibble a few scraps of biscuit. Long groans escaped my swollen lips. I fell into a deep stupor.

After a while my uncle came over and lifted me in his arms.

"Poor child!" he murmured, with a note of real pity.

I was moved by those words, unused as I was to any tenderness from the fierce professor. I seized his trembling hands in mine. He let me, watching my face. His eyes were wet.

Then I saw him take the flask that hung at his side. To my astonishment, he raised it to my lips.

"Drink," he said.

Had I heard right? Had my uncle gone mad? I stared at him blankly. I wouldn't let myself understand.

"Drink," he said again.

And tipping up the flask, he emptied the whole of it between my lips.

Oh — boundless bliss! A mouthful of water came to wet my burning mouth, a single mouthful, but it was enough to call back the life that was leaking out of me.

I thanked my uncle with my hands pressed together.

"Yes," he said, "a mouthful of water — the last! Do you hear me? The last! I'd guarded it carefully at the bottom of my flask. Twenty times, a hundred times, I had to fight down the terrible urge to drink it. But no, Axel — I was saving it for you."

"Uncle!" I murmured, while great tears wet my eyes.

"Yes, poor child, I knew that when you reached this crossroads you'd fall half dead, and I kept my last drops of water to bring you back."

"Thank you! Thank you!" I cried.

Little as my thirst had been quenched, I had recovered some strength all the same. The muscles of my throat, clenched tight until then, were loosening; the burning in my lips had eased. I could speak.

"Look," I said, "there's only one thing we can do now. We're out of water — we have to turn back."

While I was saying this, my uncle avoided my eyes; he hung his head; his gaze slid away from mine.

"We have to turn back," I cried, "and take the road to the Sneffels again. God grant us the strength to climb back up to the top of the crater!"

"Turn back!" said my uncle, as though he were answering himself rather than me.

"Yes, turn back, and without losing a moment."

There was a long silence.

"So then, Axel," the professor went on in a strange tone, "these few drops of water haven't given you back your courage and your energy?"

"Courage!"

"I see you as beaten down as before, still speaking words of despair!"

What sort of man was I dealing with, and what schemes was that daring mind still hatching?

"You mean you won't —"

"Give up this expedition, at the very moment when everything says it can succeed? Never!"

"Then we have to resign ourselves to dying?"

"No, Axel, no! Go. I don't want your death. Let Hans go with you. Leave me alone!"

"Abandon you!"

"Leave me, I tell you! I began this journey; I'll see it through to the end, or I won't come back at all. Go, Axel, go!"

My uncle was speaking in a state of extreme agitation. His voice, tender for a moment, had turned hard and threatening again. He was battling the impossible with a grim energy. I didn't want to leave him at the bottom of this abyss, and yet, on the other hand, the instinct of self-preservation was urging me to flee from him.

The guide watched this scene with his usual indifference. And yet he understood what was passing between his two companions; our gestures made it plain enough which different way each of us was trying to drag the other. But Hans seemed to take little interest in a question on which his own life hung — ready to leave if the signal to go were given, ready to stay at the slightest wish of his master.

How I wished, at that moment, that I could make myself understood by him! My words, my groans, the ring of my voice would have overcome that cold nature. Those dangers the guide didn't seem to suspect, I would have made him grasp them, put his finger on them. Between the two of us we might have convinced the stubborn professor. If need be, we'd have forced him back up to the heights of the Sneffels!

I went over to Hans. I laid my hand on his; he didn't stir. I pointed him toward the road to the crater. He stayed motionless. My gasping face spoke all my suffering. The Icelander shook his head gently, and, calmly indicating my uncle:

"Master," he said.

"His master!" I cried. "You fool! No — he isn't the master of your life! We have to run! We have to drag him with us! Do you hear me? Do you understand?"

I had seized Hans by the arm. I wanted to force him to his feet. I struggled with him. My uncle stepped in.

"Calm down, Axel," he said. "You'll get nothing from that unshakable servant. So listen to what I have to propose."

I folded my arms, looking my uncle full in the face.

"The lack of water," he said, "is the only thing standing in the way of my plans. In this eastern gallery, made of lava, shale, and coal, we haven't met a single molecule of liquid. It's possible we'll have better luck following the western tunnel."

I shook my head with an air of deep disbelief.

"Hear me out," the professor went on, forcing his voice. "While you were lying there without moving, I went to scout the shape of that gallery. It drops straight down into the bowels of the globe, and in a few hours it'll bring us to the granite mass. There we're bound to find abundant springs. The nature of the rock demands it, and instinct agrees with logic in backing my conviction. Now here's what I have to propose. When Columbus asked his crews for three days to find new lands, his crews — sick, terrified — nonetheless granted his request, and he discovered the New World. I, the Columbus of these underground regions, ask you for just one more day. If, when that time is up, I haven't found the water we're missing, I swear to you, we'll go back up to the surface of the earth."

In spite of my irritation, I was moved by those words, and by the violence my uncle was doing himself to speak that way.

"All right!" I cried. "Let it be as you wish, and may God reward your superhuman energy. You've only a few hours left to try your luck. Let's go!"
