BOOK I

Chapter 1

1. Slavery is so vile and miserable an estate of man, and so completely opposed to the bold spirit and courage of our nation, that it's hard to imagine any Englishman -- let alone a gentleman -- would actually argue in its favor. And honestly, I would have taken Sir Robert Filmer's Patriarcha the same way I'd take any other book trying to convince everyone that they're slaves and ought to be -- as a clever intellectual joke, like the writer who once penned a mock tribute to the emperor Nero. I wouldn't have treated it as a serious argument meant to be taken at face value, except that the gravity of its title and dedication, the author's portrait at the front, and the applause it received all forced me to accept that both the author and the publisher actually meant it.

So I picked up the book with every expectation it deserved, and read it through with all the attention owed to a treatise that made such a splash when it first appeared. And I have to confess: I was absolutely stunned to find that in a book designed to forge chains for all of humanity, there was nothing but a rope of sand. Useful, maybe, to people whose skill and profession is kicking up dust to blind the public and lead them astray -- but in truth, completely powerless to drag anyone into bondage who has their eyes open and enough sense to realize that chains are a bad look, no matter how carefully they've been filed and polished.

2. If anyone thinks I'm being too harsh in speaking so freely about a man who is the great champion of absolute power and the idol of everyone who worships it, I ask for this small allowance: that even after reading Sir Robert's book, I still can't help thinking of myself as a free man, just as the law says I am. And I don't know what's wrong with that -- unless someone with better insight into destiny than I have has received a revelation that this long-dormant treatise was destined, upon its appearance in the world, to use the sheer force of its arguments to sweep all liberty off the face of the earth, and that from now on our author's neat little system was to be the ultimate gold standard of political theory for all time. His entire system can be boiled down to a very small space. It amounts to nothing more than this:

"All government is absolute monarchy."

And the foundation he builds it on is this:

"No one is born free."

3. In recent times, a class of people has sprung up among us who would flatter rulers with the idea that they have a divine right to absolute power -- regardless of the laws under which those rulers were appointed, regardless of the conditions they agreed to when they took office, and regardless of how solemnly they swore oaths and made promises to uphold those conditions. To pave the way for this doctrine, these people have denied humankind any right to natural freedom. In doing so, they've not only exposed every citizen to the worst possible tyranny and oppression (as far as it was in their power to do so), but they've also destabilized the very titles and shaken the very thrones of the rulers they claim to support. After all, by their own system, every ruler except one is also born a slave, and by divine right is a subject of Adam's rightful heir. It's as if these theorists had set out to wage war on all government and tear up the very foundations of human society, just to serve their own purposes in the moment.

4. But we're supposed to take them at their bare word when they tell us, "We are all born slaves, and we must stay that way." There's no escape from it, they say -- life and servitude came as a package deal, and you can't get rid of one without giving up the other. Scripture and reason, I'm quite sure, say nothing of the sort, no matter how much noise these people make about "divine right," as though God himself had subjected us to the unlimited will of another person. What a wonderful vision of humanity -- and one they weren't clever enough to come up with until just recently!

For however much Sir Robert Filmer tries to paint the opposing view as a dangerous novelty (Patriarcha, p. 3), I think he'd have a hard time finding any other era or country besides this one that has claimed monarchy exists by divine right. And he himself admits (Patriarcha, p. 4) "that Heyward, Blackwood, Barclay, and others who have bravely defended the rights of kings on most points never thought of this, but unanimously accepted the natural liberty and equality of mankind."

5. I'll leave it to historians to tell the story of who first introduced this doctrine and made it fashionable among us, and what terrible consequences it led to -- or to the memory of those who lived through the era of Sibthorp and Manwaring to recall. My job right now is only to examine what Sir Robert Filmer -- who is acknowledged to have pushed this argument the furthest and is supposed to have perfected it -- has said on the matter. Because from him, everyone who wanted to be as trendy as speaking French was at court picked up and ran with this tidy little political system, namely: "People are not born free, and therefore could never have had the liberty to choose either their rulers or the form of their government." Rulers have their power absolutely and by divine right, because slaves could never have a right to make agreements or give consent. Adam was an absolute monarch, and so has every ruler been ever since.