V

Of Adam's Title to Sovereignty, by the Subjection of Eve

The next passage of scripture where our author tries to build Adam's monarchy is Genesis 3:16: "And thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee." "Here we have," Filmer says, "the original grant of government," from which he concludes on the following page (O. 244) "that the supreme power is settled in the fatherhood, and limited to one kind of government, that is, to monarchy." Because no matter what his premises are, this is always his conclusion. Just let the word "rule" appear once in any biblical text, and -- presto -- absolute monarchy is established by divine right.

If anyone will carefully read our author's own reasoning from these words (O. 244), and consider, among other things, "the line and posterity of Adam" as he brings them in there, they'll find it pretty hard to make sense of what he's saying. But we'll chalk that up to his peculiar style of writing for now, and focus on what the text itself actually says.

These words are God's curse on the woman for being the first and most eager participant in the act of disobedience. And if we consider the context of what God is saying here to our first parents -- that he was pronouncing judgment and declaring his anger at both of them for their disobedience -- we can't possibly suppose that this was the moment God chose to hand out privileges and perks to Adam, investing him with dignity and authority, elevating him to dominion and monarchy. Yes, because Eve was the instigator in the temptation, she was placed beneath Adam, giving him an incidental superiority over her as part of her greater punishment. But Adam had his share of the fall too, as well as the sin, and was brought low himself, as you can see in the very next verses. It would be hard to imagine that God, in the same breath, would make Adam universal monarch over all of humanity and a day laborer for the rest of his life -- kick him out of paradise to till the ground (verse 23) while simultaneously promoting him to a throne with all the privileges and comfort of absolute power.

This was not a time when Adam could expect any favors or grants of privilege from his offended Creator. If this is "the original grant of government," as our author tells us, and Adam was now made a monarch -- whatever Sir Robert wants to make of him -- it's plain that God made him a very poor monarch indeed, the kind that even our author himself wouldn't have considered much of a privilege to be. God puts Adam to work for a living, and seems more likely to be handing him a shovel to work the earth than a scepter to rule over its inhabitants. "In the sweat of thy face thou shalt eat thy bread," God tells him in verse 19. This was unavoidable, someone might answer, because Adam didn't have any subjects yet and had nobody to work for him. But later on, living as he did for over 900 years, he might have had plenty of people he could command to work for him. No, says God -- not just while you have no help besides your wife, but for as long as you live, you will live by your labor: "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread, till thou return unto the ground, for out of it wast thou taken, for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return" (verse 19). It will perhaps be answered again, in defense of our author, that these words aren't spoken to Adam personally, but through him, as a representative, to all of humanity -- this being a curse on mankind because of the fall.

I believe God speaks differently from human beings, because he speaks with more truth and certainty. But when he chooses to speak to people, I don't think he speaks differently from them by violating the normal rules of language they use. That wouldn't be condescending to their understanding when he humbles himself to address them -- it would be defeating his own purpose by saying things that, spoken that way, they couldn't understand. And yet that's exactly how we'd have to think of God if we accept the interpretations of scripture needed to support our author's doctrine. Because by the ordinary rules of language, it's very hard to understand what God means if what he says here in the singular to Adam is supposed to apply to all of humanity, while what he says in the plural in Genesis 1:26 and 28 is supposed to apply to Adam alone (excluding everyone else), and what he says to Noah and his sons jointly is supposed to apply to Noah alone (Genesis 9).

Furthermore, note that these words from Genesis 3:16, which our author calls "the original grant of government," were not even spoken to Adam. There was no grant in them made to Adam at all -- it was a punishment imposed on Eve. And if we take these words as directed specifically to her, or through her as a representative to all other women, they would at most concern the female sex only, and mean nothing more than the ordinary obedience wives owe their husbands. But even then, there's no more of an absolute law requiring a woman to submit to this, if her circumstances or her agreement with her husband should exempt her from it, than there is a law that she must bring forth children in sorrow and pain if a remedy could be found -- since that's also part of the same curse on her. The full verse reads: "Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children, and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee."

I think it would have been hard for anyone except our author to find a grant of "monarchical government to Adam" in these words, which were neither spoken to him nor about him. Nor will anyone, I imagine, take these words to mean that the weaker sex is so bound by the curse they contain that it's their duty not to try to avoid it. Would anyone say that Eve or any other woman sinned if she gave birth without the multiplied pains God threatens her with here? Or that either of our queens, Mary or Elizabeth, had they married one of their subjects, would have been placed in political subjection to him by this text? Or that he would have had monarchical rule over her? As I read this text, God doesn't give Adam any authority over Eve, or men over their wives. He merely predicts what the woman's situation will be -- how by his providence he would arrange things so that she would be subject to her husband, as we see that the laws and customs of nations have generally ordered it. And I'll grant that there is a natural basis for this.

Consider the parallel: when God says of Jacob and Esau that "the elder should serve the younger" (Gen. 25:23), nobody supposes that God was thereby making Jacob into Esau's sovereign. He was simply predicting what would in fact come to pass.

But if these words spoken to Eve absolutely must be understood as a binding law subjecting her and all other women, it can only be the kind of obedience every wife owes her husband. And then if this is supposed to be the "original grant of government and the foundation of monarchical power," there would be as many monarchs as there are husbands. So if these words give any power to Adam, it can only be a conjugal power, not a political one -- the power every husband has to manage the private affairs of his family, as the owner of the household goods and land, and to have his decision take priority over his wife's in matters of shared concern. But not a political power of life and death over her, and much less over anyone else.

This much I'm sure of: if our author wants this text to be a "grant -- the original grant of government," meaning political government, he should have proved it with better arguments than by simply asserting that "thy desire shall be unto thy husband" was a law by which Eve, and "all that should come of her," were subjected to Adam's absolute monarchical power and that of his heirs. "Thy desire shall be to thy husband" is too ambiguous an expression -- one whose meaning interpreters don't even agree on -- to build so confidently upon, especially in a matter of such importance and such broad consequences. But our author, in his typical fashion, having once cited the text, immediately draws his conclusion without any further effort. Just let the words "rule" and "subject" appear in the text or the margin, and he takes them to mean the duty of a subject to his prince. The relationship is transformed: even though God says "husband," Sir Robert reads "king." Adam suddenly has absolute monarchical power over Eve, and not only over Eve but over "all that should come of her" -- though scripture doesn't say a word about it, and our author doesn't offer a word to prove it. But Adam must be an absolute monarch regardless, and so on through the end of the chapter.

And here I'll leave my reader to consider this: is my simply saying, without offering reasons to prove it, that this text did not give Adam the absolute monarchical power our author supposes -- is that not just as effective at destroying that power as his bare assertion is at establishing it? After all, the text mentions neither prince nor people, says nothing about absolute or monarchical power, but only discusses the subjection of Eve to Adam, a wife to her husband.

Anyone who followed our author's method throughout would find that a short and sufficient answer to the greatest part of his arguments would be to simply deny them. An assertion made without proof deserves nothing more than a denial without reasons. So even if I had said nothing except to flatly deny that, by this text, "the supreme power was settled and founded by God himself in the fatherhood, limited to monarchy, and that to Adam's person and heirs" -- all of which our author boldly concludes from these words, as you can see on the same page (O. 244) -- that would have been a sufficient answer. If I had simply asked any reasonable person to read the text and consider to whom, and on what occasion, it was spoken, they would no doubt have wondered how our author managed to find monarchical absolute power in it -- unless they recognized that he has an extraordinary talent for finding things in texts that he can't show to anyone else.

And so we have now examined the two passages of scripture -- all that I can recall our author bringing forward to prove Adam's sovereignty, that supremacy which Filmer says "it was God's ordinance should be unlimited in Adam, and as large as all the acts of his will" (O. 254) -- namely, Genesis 1:28 and Genesis 3:16. One of these means only the dominion of humanity over the lower creatures, and the other means only the obedience a wife owes her husband. Both are far, far from the kind of subjection that citizens owe the rulers of political societies.