VI

Of Adam's Title to Sovereignty by Fatherhood

There's one more argument to deal with, and then I think I'll have covered everything our author brings forward as proof of Adam's sovereignty. This last one is the claim that Adam had a natural right to rule over his children simply because he was their father. And Filmer is so fond of this "fatherhood" idea that you'll find it popping up on practically every page. He says, for instance, "not only Adam, but the succeeding patriarchs had, by right of fatherhood, royal authority over their children" (p. 12). And on the same page: "this subjection of children being the foundation of all regal authority," and so on. Since this appears to be -- judging by how often he brings it up -- the main pillar of his entire framework, you'd expect him to provide clear and solid reasoning for it. After all, he lays it down as a fundamental principle that "every man that is born is so far from being free, that by his very birth he becomes a subject of him that begets him" (O. 156). So since Adam was the only man directly created by God, and everyone since has been born through reproduction, nobody has ever been born free. If we ask how Adam gets this power over his children, Filmer tells us right here: by fathering them. And he says the same thing at O. 223: "This natural dominion of Adam may be proved out of Grotius himself, who teaches that by the act of generation, parents acquire rights over their children." And indeed, since the act of fathering a child is what makes a man a father, his rights as a father can't logically come from anything else.

Now, Grotius doesn't actually tell us here how far this parental power extends. But our author, who is always perfectly clear on these matters, assures us it amounts to supreme power -- the same kind of absolute power that monarchs hold over their slaves, including the power of life and death. If you were to ask him how or why fathering a child gives a man such absolute power, you'd find he has no answer. We're just supposed to take his word for it -- on this point as on so many others -- and the laws of nature and the foundations of government are supposed to stand or fall on that basis. If he'd been an absolute monarch himself, this style of argument might have been fitting enough: "my will is my reason" carries some weight when a king says it. But as a method of proof or argument, it's pretty unimpressive, and it won't do much to advance his case for absolute monarchy. Sir Robert has diminished the authority of ordinary subjects too much to leave himself any hope of establishing anything just by saying it. One slave's unsupported opinion isn't weighty enough to decide the liberty and fortunes of all humankind. If all people aren't naturally equal -- though I believe they are -- then at the very least, all slaves certainly are. And in that case, I can, without being presumptuous, set my individual opinion against his, and be just as confident that my saying "fathering children doesn't make them slaves to their fathers" sets all of humanity free, as his saying the opposite makes them all slaves. But so that this claim -- which is the foundation of the entire doctrine of those who want monarchy to be established by divine right -- gets a fair hearing, let's see what reasons others offer for it, since our author offers none.

The argument I've heard others use to prove that fathers acquire absolute power over their children by fathering them goes like this: "Fathers have power over the lives of their children because they give them life and existence." This is the only proof the claim is even capable of receiving, since there can be no reason why one person should naturally have any right or claim over something in another person that was never his to begin with -- something he didn't bestow, but that was received from someone else's generosity.

First, I'd point out that not everyone who gives something to someone else automatically has the right to take it back.

But second -- and more importantly -- those who say the father "gives life" to his children are so dazzled by their obsession with monarchy that they forget, as they really shouldn't, about God, who is "the author and giver of life: it is in him alone we live, move, and have our being." How can someone be said to give life to another when he doesn't even understand what his own life consists of? Philosophers are at a loss about it even after their most careful investigations. Anatomists, after spending their entire lives and careers dissecting and meticulously examining human bodies, openly admit their ignorance about the structure and function of many parts, and about the processes that make life work in the body as a whole. So does the common farmer, or the even more clueless pleasure-seeker, somehow design and construct such an astonishing machine as a human being, and then install life and consciousness in it? Can any man honestly say he formed the parts necessary for his child's life? Or can he really suppose he gives the life when he doesn't even know what kind of vessel is needed to receive it, or what actions or organs are required for its reception and preservation?

To truly give life to something that doesn't yet exist would mean designing and creating a living creature -- shaping the parts, molding them, fitting them to their purposes, assembling them all together, and then breathing a living soul into the result. Someone who could actually do that might have some legitimate claim to destroy what he'd made. But is anyone really bold enough to claim for himself the incomprehensible works of the Almighty? God alone created, and continues to create, the living soul. He alone can breathe in the breath of life. If anyone thinks he's such a skilled craftsman, let him count up the parts of his child's body that he supposedly made. Let him explain their uses and how they work. Let him tell me when the living, rational soul began to inhabit this intricate structure -- when sensation first began, and how this machine he claims to have built thinks and reasons. If he made it, then when it breaks down, let him fix it -- or at least tell us where the problems are. "Shall he that made the eye not see?" says the Psalmist (Psalm 94:9). Consider how vain these men are: the structure of that one single part -- the eye -- is enough to convince us of an all-wise Designer, and God has so obvious a claim to us as his handiwork that one of the standard titles for God in scripture is "God our maker" and "the Lord our maker." So even though our author, in his eagerness to inflate the importance of fatherhood, is pleased to say (O. 159) "that even the power which God himself exercises over mankind is by right of fatherhood," this kind of fatherhood completely rules out any claim of title by earthly parents. God is king because he is truly the maker of us all -- and no human parent can claim to be that of their children.

But even if people had the skill and power to make their children, it's not such a trivial piece of work that we could imagine them doing it without intending to. What father out of a thousand, when he fathers a child, thinks about anything beyond satisfying his immediate desire? God in his infinite wisdom has placed powerful sexual urges in human nature as the means to continue the human race, and reproduction usually happens without any conscious plan, and often against the wishes and intentions of the man involved. And even those who do want and plan for children are really just the occasion of their coming into being. When they plan and wish to have children, they contribute little more to making them than Deucalion and his wife did to making the human race in the old myth -- by tossing pebbles over their shoulders.

But let's grant, just for the sake of argument, that parents did make their children, gave them life and being, and that this gave them absolute power over them. Even then, this would give the father only a shared authority with the mother. Nobody can deny that the woman has an equal share -- if not the greater one -- since she nourishes the child for a long time in her own body and from her own substance. It's inside her that the child is shaped, and from her that it receives the materials and the basic blueprint of its physical makeup. It's pretty hard to imagine that the rational soul immediately takes up residence in the still-unformed embryo the moment the father has done his part in conception. So if we're going to suppose the child owes anything to its parents, it must certainly owe the most to the mother. But however you settle that question, the mother can't be denied an equal share in producing the child, and so the father's supposed absolute authority can't be grounded here.

Our author, of course, sees it differently. He says: "We know that God at the creation gave the sovereignty to the man over the woman, as being the nobler and principal agent in generation" (O. 172). I don't remember that passage in my Bible. When someone can show me the place where God at the creation gave sovereignty to the man over the woman, and specifically for this reason -- because "he is the nobler and principal agent in generation" -- then it will be time enough to consider and answer it. But it's nothing new for our author to present his own fantasies as established divine truths, even though there's often a vast gap between his claims and actual divine revelation. After all, God in scripture says, "his father and his mother that begot him."

Those who point to the historical practice of people exposing or selling their children as proof of parental power over them are, like Sir Robert, truly impressive arguers -- and they can only recommend their position by grounding it on the most shameful action and most unnatural murder that human beings are capable of. The dens of lions and the nurseries of wolves know no such cruelty. These so-called savage creatures of the wilderness obey God and nature by being tender and protective of their young. They will hunt, keep watch, fight, and nearly starve themselves for the preservation of their offspring. They never abandon them, never forsake them, until they're able to survive on their own. Is it really the special privilege of human beings alone to act more contrary to nature than the wildest and most untamed creatures? Does God forbid us, under the most severe penalty -- death -- from taking the life of any person, even a stranger who has provoked us, and yet permit us to destroy those he has placed in our care? Those whom the principles of nature and reason, as well as his explicit commands, require us to protect? God has taken special care throughout all of creation to propagate and continue every species, and he makes individual creatures act so strongly toward this end that they sometimes neglect their own well-being for it. They seem to forget that basic rule nature teaches all living things: self-preservation. The drive to protect their young is such a powerful principle in them that it overrides their individual nature. And so we see the timid become brave, the fierce become gentle, and the predatory become tender and generous -- all when their young need them.

But if what has been done is supposed to be the standard for what should be done, then history could have supplied our author with examples of this absolute fatherly power at its peak -- and he could have shown us the people in Peru who bred children specifically to fatten and eat them. This story is so remarkable that I can't resist quoting the author's own words: "In some provinces," he says, "they were so greedy for human flesh that they wouldn't even wait until the victim was dead, but would suck the blood as it ran from the wounds of the dying person. They had public butcher shops for human flesh, and their madness reached such a point that they didn't even spare their own children, whom they had fathered on captive women taken in war. They carefully nourished the children they had by these women until the children were about thirteen years old, at which point they slaughtered and ate them. And they did the same to the mothers when they grew too old to bear children and stopped providing them with any more little roasts." (Garcilaso de la Vega, History of the Incas of Peru, Book I, Chapter 12.)

This is how far the restless human mind can carry a person -- down to a level of brutality below that of animals -- when people abandon the reason that places them almost on the level of angels. And it can't be otherwise with a creature whose thoughts are more numerous than grains of sand and wider than the ocean. When imagination and passion take the lead, they inevitably drive people into bizarre behavior -- if reason, which is their only guiding star and compass, isn't what they steer by. The imagination is always restless, constantly suggesting new ideas, and the will, once reason has been set aside, is ready for any wild scheme. In this state, whoever goes the furthest off course is considered the best leader and is sure to attract the most followers. And once fashion has established what folly or cunning first introduced, custom makes it sacred, and it will be considered rude or insane to question or challenge it. Anyone who takes an impartial look at the nations of the world will find that so much of their religions, governments, and customs have been introduced and maintained by exactly these means that they'll have very little respect left for the practices that are popular and respectable among people. They'll have good reason to think that the forests, where the supposedly irrational, untaught animal inhabitants stay on the right path by following nature, are better guides for us than the cities and palaces, where those who call themselves civilized and rational go astray under the influence of precedent and example.

If precedents are enough to establish a rule in this matter, our author could have found in the Bible itself cases of children sacrificed by their parents -- and this among God's own chosen people. The Psalmist tells us (Psalm 106:38): "They shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan." But God didn't judge this situation by our author's rule, nor did he accept the authority of common practice against his righteous law. As the passage continues: "the land was polluted with blood; therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance." The killing of their children, even though it was fashionable, was still charged against them as innocent blood. In God's reckoning it carried the guilt of murder, just as offering children to idols carried the guilt of idolatry.

So let it be, as Sir Robert claims, that in ancient times people commonly "sold and castrated their children" (O. 155). Let it be that they exposed them. And if you like, add to that -- since this represents an even greater exercise of power -- that they bred them for the dinner table, to fatten and eat them. If any of this proves a right to do such things, then we could use the same argument to justify adultery, incest, and sodomy, because there are examples of those too, both ancient and modern. These are sins whose main horror, I'd argue, comes precisely from the fact that they undermine nature's central purpose: the increase of the human race, the continuation of the species in the best possible condition, the distinction of families, and the security of the marriage bond -- all of which are necessary for that purpose.

Now, to back up this supposed natural authority of the father, our author brings forward a weak proof from the explicit commands of God in scripture. His words are: "To confirm the natural right of regal power, we find in the Decalogue that the law which enjoins obedience to kings is delivered in the terms, 'Honour thy father,' p. 23. Whereas many confess that government only in the abstract is the ordinance of God, they are not able to prove any such ordinance in the scripture but only in the fatherly power. And therefore we find the commandment that enjoins obedience to superiors given in the terms, 'Honour thy father'; so that not only the power and right of government, but the form of the power governing, and the person having the power, are all the ordinances of God. The first father had not only simply power, but power monarchical, as he was father immediately from God" (O. 254).

Our author cites the same law in several other places, always in exactly the same way: that is, the words "and mother" are always left out, treated as if they were apocryphal. This is a wonderful display of our author's cleverness, and of the strength of his cause -- which apparently required in its defender a level of zeal hot enough to warp the sacred text of God's word to make it fit his argument. This is a method not uncommon among those who don't embrace truths because reason and revelation offer them, but instead adopt positions and take sides for purposes that have nothing to do with truth, and then resolve to defend them at any cost. They treat the words and meaning of the authors they cite the way Procrustes treated his guests: they chop or stretch them until they fit the size of their theories. And the results always turn out like Procrustes's victims -- deformed, crippled, and useless.

If our author had quoted this commandment without the butchering -- as God actually gave it -- and included "mother" alongside "father," every reader would have instantly seen that it directly contradicted his argument. Far from establishing the "monarchical power of the father," it places the mother on equal footing with him and commands nothing that isn't owed equally to both father and mother. Because that is the consistent message of scripture throughout:

"Honour thy father and thy mother" (Exodus 20). "He that smiteth his father or mother shall surely be put to death" (Exodus 21:15). "He that curseth his father or mother shall surely be put to death" (Exodus 21:17, repeated in Leviticus 20:9 and by our Savior in Matthew 15:4). "Ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father" (Leviticus 19:3). "If any man have a rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his father or the voice of his mother, then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and say, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice" (Deuteronomy 21:18-21). "Cursed be he that setteth light by his father or his mother" (Deuteronomy 27:16). "My son, hear the instructions of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother" -- these are the words of Solomon, a king who was not ignorant of what belonged to him as either a father or a king, and yet he joins father and mother together in every instruction he gives to children throughout the entire book of Proverbs.

"Woe unto him that saith unto his father, What begettest thou, or to the woman, What hast thou brought forth?" (Isaiah 45:10). "In thee have they set light by father and mother" (Ezekiel 22:7). "And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet prophesy, then his father and his mother that begat him shall say unto him, Thou shalt not live, and his father and his mother that begat him shall thrust him through when he prophesieth" (Zechariah 13:3). Here it's not the father only, but the father and mother jointly, who had the power of life and death.

This is how the law ran in the Old Testament. And in the New Testament they're likewise joined in the obedience owed by their children (Ephesians 6:1). The rule is: "Children, obey your parents." I don't recall ever reading anywhere, "Children, obey your father" -- and nothing more. Scripture includes the mother in the honor that's due from children. And if there were any text where the honor or obedience of children was directed to the father alone, it's not likely that our author, who claims to build everything on scripture, would have failed to mention it. In fact, scripture treats the authority of father and mother over their children as so equal that in some places it even reverses the usual order of priority thought to be due to the father, and puts the mother first, as in Leviticus 19:3.

From this consistent pairing of father and mother found throughout scripture, we can conclude that the honor they're entitled to from their children is a single shared right belonging equally to both, so that neither can claim it entirely and neither can be excluded.

You'd think, then, that it would be pretty hard to figure out how our author concludes from the Fifth Commandment that all "power was originally in the father" -- or how he finds "monarchical power of government settled and fixed by the commandment, 'Honour thy father and thy mother.'" If all the honor required by the commandment, whatever it amounts to, belongs exclusively to the father because, as our author says, he "has the sovereignty over the woman as being the nobler and principal agent in generation" -- then why did God consistently join the mother with the father throughout scripture to share in this honor? Can the father, by this supposed sovereignty of his, release the child from paying honor to his mother? Scripture gave the Jews no such permission, and there were often rifts wide enough between husband and wife -- even to the point of divorce and separation. And I think nobody would say a child may refuse to honor his mother, or, as scripture puts it, "set light by her," even if his father ordered him to do so. Nor could the mother excuse a child from honoring his father. This makes it plain that this commandment of God gives the father no sovereignty, no supremacy.

I agree with our author that the right to this honor is rooted in nature and belongs to parents by virtue of having brought their children into the world, and that God has confirmed it through many explicit declarations. I also accept our author's rule that "in grants and gifts that have their origin from God and nature, as the power of the father" -- let me add, "and mother," for whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder -- "no inferior power of men can limit, nor make any law of prescription against them" (O. 158). So since the mother has, by this law of God, a right to honor from her children that is not subject to her husband's will, we can see that this "absolute monarchical power of the father" can neither be founded on the Fifth Commandment nor be consistent with it. A man has a power very far from monarchical -- very far from the absoluteness our author argues for -- when another person holds the same power over his subjects, by the same title. And so he can't help saying himself that "he cannot see how any man's children can be free from subjection to their parents" (p. 12) -- which, in ordinary language, I believe means mother as well as father. If "parents" here means only "father," it's the first time I've ever known it to mean that, and with that kind of wordplay you could prove anything.

According to our author's doctrine, the father, having absolute authority over his children, also has the same authority over their children -- that is, his grandchildren. And the logic would hold, if it were true that the father had such power. But I'd like to ask our author this: could the grandfather, by his sovereignty, release the grandchild from paying the honor due to his own father under the Fifth Commandment? If the grandfather has, "by right of fatherhood," sole sovereign power, and if the obedience due to the supreme ruler is what's commanded in the words "Honour thy father," then certainly the grandfather could excuse the grandchild from honoring his father. But since it's obvious to common sense that he can't do that, it follows that "honour thy father and mother" cannot mean absolute subjection to a sovereign power. It must mean something else. The right that parents have by nature, confirmed by the Fifth Commandment, therefore cannot be the political authority our author wants to derive from it. Political authority, being supreme somewhere in every civil society, can release any subject from political obedience to any fellow subject. But what law of any government official can give a child permission not to "honour his father and mother"? It's an eternal law tied purely to the relationship between parents and children, and so it contains nothing of the government's power in it, nor is it subject to that power.

Our author says, "God has given to a father a right or liberty to transfer his power over his children to any other" (O. 155). I doubt whether he can fully transfer the right to honor that's owed to him. But be that as it may, this much I'm sure of: he can't transfer a power and keep it at the same time. So if the government's sovereignty is, as our author would have it, "nothing but the authority of a supreme father" (p. 23), then it's unavoidable that if the government holds all this parental right -- as it must if fatherhood is the source of all authority -- then ordinary subjects, even though they're fathers themselves, can have no power over their children and no right to honor from them. The full authority can't be in someone else's hands while a portion of it remains with the parents.

So according to our author's own doctrine, "Honour thy father and mother" can't possibly be understood as referring to political subjection and obedience. The laws in both the Old and New Testaments that commanded children to "honour and obey their parents" were given to people whose fathers were living under civil government and were fellow subjects with them in political societies. To have told them to "honour and obey their parents" in our author's sense would have been telling them to submit to people who had no legitimate claim to their obedience -- since the right to obedience from subjects was supposedly all vested in someone else. Instead of teaching obedience, it would have been encouraging rebellion by setting up competing authorities that didn't actually exist.

So if the command "Honour thy father and mother" does refer to political authority, it directly demolishes our author's monarchy -- since it must be obeyed by every child toward his own father, even within political society. That would mean every father necessarily has political authority, and there would be as many sovereigns as there are fathers. And on top of that, the mother has her claim too, which destroys the idea of one supreme monarch. But if "Honour thy father and mother" means something different from political power -- as it necessarily must -- then it's beside our author's point and does nothing for his argument.

"The law that enjoins obedience to kings is delivered," says our author, "in the terms, 'Honour thy father,' as if all power were originally in the father" (O. 254). And that law is also delivered, say I, in the terms, "Honour thy mother," as if all power were originally in the mother. I'd like to know whether the argument isn't just as good on the one side as on the other, since father and mother are joined throughout the Old and New Testaments wherever honor or obedience is required of children.

Again, our author tells us (O. 254) "that this command, 'Honour thy father,' gives the right to govern, and makes the form of government monarchical." To which I answer: if "Honour thy father" means obedience to the political power of the ruler, then it has nothing to do with any duty we owe to our natural fathers who are themselves ordinary subjects. Because by our author's own doctrine, they've been stripped of all political power, since it's been placed entirely in the hands of the prince. Being equally subjects -- and, in his framework, slaves -- alongside their children, they can have no right, on that basis, to any honor or obedience that involves political subjection.

On the other hand, if "Honour thy father and mother" refers to the duty we owe our natural parents -- as it clearly does, based on our Savior's interpretation (Matthew 15:4) and all the other passages I've mentioned -- then it can't be about political obedience. It's a duty owed to people who have no claim to sovereignty and no political authority as government officials over subjects. The person of a private father and the title to obedience owed to the supreme ruler are incompatible things. Therefore this commandment, which necessarily applies to the persons of natural fathers, must refer to a duty we owe them that is distinct from our obedience to the government -- a duty that even the most absolute power of princes cannot release us from. What exactly this duty is, we'll examine in its proper place.

And so we've finally made it through everything in our author that even resembles an argument for the absolute, unlimited sovereignty he describes in section 8 -- the sovereignty he supposes Adam possessed, which would mean that all of humanity has ever since been born into slavery, with no claim to freedom.

But if creation, which gave nothing but mere existence, didn't make Adam prince of his descendants -- if Adam, at Genesis 1:28, was not established as lord of humanity, nor given a private dominion to the exclusion of his children, but only a right and power over the earth and lower creatures shared in common with all people -- if God, at Genesis 3:16, gave Adam no political power over his wife and children, but only subjected Eve to Adam as a punishment, or predicted the subordination of the weaker sex in managing the common affairs of their families, without giving Adam as husband the power of life and death that necessarily belongs to government -- if fathers, by fathering their children, acquire no such power over them -- and if the commandment "Honour thy father and mother" doesn't grant it either, but merely requires a duty owed equally to parents whether they're rulers or subjects, and to the mother as much as the father -- if all this is so, as I think what's been said makes very clear, then people have a natural freedom, despite everything our author so confidently asserts to the contrary.

Since all who share the same common nature, abilities, and powers are naturally equal and ought to share the same common rights and privileges, until someone can produce the clear appointment of God -- who is "Lord over all, blessed forever" -- to show any particular person's supremacy, or until a person's own consent places them under a superior. This is so obvious that our author himself admits that Sir John Hayward, Blackwood, and Barclay -- "the great champions of the right of kings" -- couldn't deny it, "but admit with one consent the natural liberty and equality of mankind" as an unquestionable truth.

And our author has been so far from producing anything that might support his grand claim -- "that Adam was absolute monarch" and therefore "men are not naturally free" -- that even his own evidence works against him. So, to use his own style of reasoning: "the first erroneous principle failing, the whole fabric of this vast engine of absolute power and tyranny drops down of itself," and there's no need to say anything more in response to everything he builds on such a false and fragile foundation.

But to save others the trouble -- if there were any need -- Filmer doesn't spare himself the effort of demonstrating, through his own contradictions, the weakness of his own theory. Adam's absolute and sole dominion is what he's constantly talking about and building on. And yet he tells us (p. 12) "that as Adam was lord of his children, so his children under him had a command and power over their own children." So the unlimited, undivided sovereignty of Adam's fatherhood, by our author's own account, lasted only a little while -- just through the first generation. As soon as Adam had grandchildren, Sir Robert could give only a very poor explanation of how this was supposed to work.

"Adam, as father of his children," he says, "has an absolute, unlimited royal power over them, and by virtue of that, over those that they fathered, and so on to all generations." And yet his children -- namely, Cain and Seth -- have paternal power over their own children at the same time. So they're simultaneously absolute lords and also subjects and slaves. Adam has all the authority as "grandfather of the people," and yet they have part of it as fathers of some of them. He is absolute over them and their descendants by having fathered them, and yet they are absolute over their own children by the same title.

"No," says our author, "Adam's children under him had power over their own children, but still with subordination to the first parent." A nice-sounding distinction, and it's a shame it means nothing and can't be reconciled with our author's own words.

I'll readily grant that if we assume Adam had absolute power over his descendants, any of his children might have received from him a delegated, and therefore subordinate, power over some or all of the rest. But that can't be the kind of power our author is talking about here. It's not a power by grant and commission -- it's the natural paternal power he supposes a father has over his children.

Here's why:

First, he says: "As Adam was lord of his children, so his children under him had a power over their own children." So they were lords over their own children in the same way, and by the same title, as Adam was -- that is, by right of reproduction, by right of fatherhood.

Second, it's clear he means the natural power of fathers because he limits it to being only "over their own children." A delegated power wouldn't have that restriction -- it could extend over other people's children as easily as one's own.

Third, if it were a delegated power, it would need to show up somewhere in scripture. But there's no scriptural basis for claiming that Adam's children had any other power over their own children than what they naturally had as fathers.

That he means paternal power here, and nothing else, is beyond doubt from the conclusion he draws in the words immediately following: "I see not then how the children of Adam, or of any man else, can be free from subjection to their parents." This makes clear that the power on one side and the subjection on the other that our author is talking about is the natural power and subjection between parents and children. It couldn't be anything else, because it's a duty that every person's children owe. And our author always insists this power is absolute and unlimited.

So here's the situation: this natural power of parents over their children, Adam had over his descendants, says our author. And this same power of parents over their children, his children had over theirs during Adam's lifetime, says our author. So Adam, by a natural right of fatherhood, had absolute, unlimited power over all his descendants. And at the same time, his children had, by the same right, absolute, unlimited power over theirs.

Here, then, are two absolute, unlimited powers existing at the same time, and I'd love for anyone to try reconciling them with each other -- or with common sense. The "subordination" escape hatch he's thrown in actually makes it worse: to have one absolute, unlimited -- no, unlimitable -- power subordinated to another is such an obvious contradiction that nothing could be more so.

"Adam is absolute prince with the unlimited authority of fatherhood over all his posterity." All his descendants are then absolutely his subjects and, as our author says, his slaves -- children and grandchildren equally in this state of subjection and slavery. And yet, says our author, "the children of Adam have paternal -- that is, absolute, unlimited -- power over their own children." In plain English, they're slaves and absolute princes at the same time, under the same government. One group of subjects has absolute, unlimited power over another group, by the natural right of parentage.

Now, if someone wants to charitably interpret our author as meaning only that parents who are themselves under the absolute authority of their father still have some power over their own children, I'll admit that's closer to the truth. But it won't help our author at all. Since he never talks about paternal power as anything other than absolute and unlimited authority, he can't be taken to mean anything less here -- not unless he'd explicitly set limits and shown how far it reaches. And that he does mean paternal authority in its fullest extent is clear from the words that come right after: "This subjection of children being the foundation of all regal authority" (p. 12). The subjection that, in the previous line, he says "every man is in to his parents" -- and consequently what Adam's grandchildren owed to their parents -- was, according to him, the very foundation of all regal authority. That means, in our author's system, absolute, unlimited authority. And so Adam's children had regal authority over their own children while they themselves were subjects of their father and fellow subjects with their children.

But let him mean whatever he pleases. It's clear that he allows "Adam's children to have paternal power" (p. 12), and he also allows all other fathers to have "paternal power over their children" (O. 156). From this, one of two things necessarily follows. Either Adam's children, even during his lifetime, had -- and therefore all other fathers also have, as he puts it (p. 12) -- "by right of fatherhood, royal authority over their children." Or else Adam himself, "by right of fatherhood, had not royal authority." Because paternal power either does or doesn't confer royal authority on those who possess it. If it doesn't, then Adam couldn't be sovereign by this title, and neither could anyone else -- and that's the end of all our author's political theory at once. If it does confer royal authority, then everyone who has paternal power has royal authority. And in that case, under our author's patriarchal system of government, there will be as many kings as there are fathers.

And so -- what a monarchy he's set up! Princes will certainly have great reason to thank him for this new political science, which creates as many absolute kings in every country as there are fathers of children. And yet who can blame our author for it? It follows unavoidably from his own principles. Having placed "absolute power in fathers by right of begetting," he couldn't easily work out how much of this power belonged to a son over the children he had fathered. And so it proved very difficult to give all the power to Adam, as he does, while also allowing a share of it during Adam's lifetime to his children when they became parents -- which he couldn't quite bring himself to deny them.

This is what makes him so vague in his language and so uncertain about where to locate this absolute natural power he calls fatherhood. Sometimes Adam alone has it all (pp. 13; O. 244, 245; and Preface).

Sometimes parents have it -- and that word hardly means the father alone (pp. 12, 19).

Sometimes children have it during their father's lifetime (p. 12).

Sometimes fathers of families have it (pp. 78, 79).

Sometimes fathers in general have it (O. 155).

Sometimes the heir to Adam has it (O. 253).

Sometimes the posterity of Adam have it (O. 244, 246).

Sometimes the prime fathers -- all sons or grandchildren of Noah -- have it (O. 244).

Sometimes the eldest parents have it (p. 12).

Sometimes all kings have it (p. 19).

Sometimes all who have supreme power have it (O. 245).

Sometimes heirs to those first ancestors "who were at first the natural parents of the whole people" have it (p. 19).

Sometimes an elected king has it (p. 23).

Sometimes those -- whether a few or many -- who govern the commonwealth have it (p. 23).

Sometimes whoever can grab it -- a usurper -- has it (p. 23; O. 155).

And so this brand-new nothing -- this concept that's supposed to carry with it all power, authority, and government; this "fatherhood" that's supposed to identify the rightful person and establish the throne of monarchs whom the people must obey -- may, according to Sir Robert, end up in anyone's hands, by any means whatsoever. His political theory would give royal authority to a democracy, and make a usurper a lawful prince. And if this magical fatherhood can perform all these marvelous tricks, then I wish our author and all his followers much joy of their omnipotent fatherhood -- which in practice can serve no purpose except to destabilize and destroy all the legitimate governments in the world, and to establish in their place disorder, tyranny, and usurpation.
