BOOK II

CHAPTER I

In the previous book, I showed that:

Adam never had any authority over his children or dominion over the world -- not by any natural right of fatherhood, and not by any direct grant from God. That whole claim falls apart.

Even if Adam had possessed such authority, his heirs still would have had no right to it.

Even if his heirs somehow did have a right to it, there is no law of nature and no law of God that tells us which heir gets the crown in every case that might come up. So the right of succession -- and therefore the right to rule -- could never have been determined with any certainty.

And even if that could have been settled, the knowledge of which family line is actually the oldest line of descent from Adam has been utterly lost for so long that no race or family on earth has even the slightest claim to being the eldest house with the right of inheritance.

All of these points having been, I believe, clearly established, it is impossible for any ruler on earth today to gain any benefit or derive even the faintest shadow of authority from what is supposed to be the wellspring of all power: "Adam's private dominion and fatherly jurisdiction."

So anyone who doesn't want to give the impression that all government in the world is nothing but the product of force and violence -- that people live together by no rules other than those of wild animals, where the strongest wins -- and thereby lay the groundwork for permanent chaos, conflict, rebellion, and disorder (the very things that the followers of this theory so loudly complain about) must necessarily find a different origin for government, a different source of political power, and a different way of identifying the people who hold it, than what Sir Robert Filmer taught us.

With that in mind, I think it would be useful to lay out what I understand political power to be. This way, the power of a government official over a citizen can be clearly distinguished from a father's power over his children, a master's over his servants, a husband's over his wife, and a lord's over his slave. All of these different kinds of power sometimes happen to be held by the same person, and if we think of that person in each of these different roles, it can help us tell these powers apart and see the difference between a ruler of a commonwealth, a head of a household, and a captain of a galley ship.

Political power, then, is what I take to be the right to make laws -- backed by the penalty of death, and therefore by all lesser penalties as well -- for the purpose of regulating and protecting property. It includes the right to use the force of the community to enforce those laws and to defend the commonwealth against foreign attack. And all of this is to be done only for the public good.