Knot One: Excelsior

[Figure 1: "At a pace of six miles in the hour." The two knights coming down off the mountain — the younger springing from crag to crag, the elder labouring after him in his chain mail.]

"Goblin, lead them up and down."

The red glow of sunset was already fading into the gloomy shadows of night when two travellers might have been observed descending the rugged side of a mountain at speed — at a pace of six miles in the hour — the younger bounding from crag to crag with the agility of a fawn, while his companion, whose aged limbs seemed thoroughly ill at ease in the heavy chain mail habitually worn by tourists in that district, toiled painfully along at his side.

As is always the way in such circumstances, the younger knight was the first to break the silence.

"A goodly pace, I trow!" he exclaimed. "We sped not thus in the ascent!"

"Goodly indeed!" the other echoed with a groan. "We clomb it but at three miles in the hour."

"And on the dead level our pace is —?" the younger suggested; for he was weak on statistics, and left all such details to his aged companion.

"Four miles in the hour," the other replied wearily. "Not an ounce more" — he added, with that love of metaphor so common in old age — "and not a farthing less!"

"'Twas three hours past high noon when we left our inn," said the young man, thoughtfully. "We shall scarce be back by supper-time. Perchance mine host will roundly deny us all food!"

"He will chide our tardy return," was the grave reply, "and such a rebuke will be meet."

"A brave conceit!" cried the other, with a merry laugh. "And should we bid him bring us yet another course, I trow his answer will be tart!"

"We shall but get our deserts," sighed the elder knight, who had never seen a joke in his life, and was somewhat displeased at his companion's untimely levity. "'Twill be nine of the clock," he added under his breath, "by the time we regain our inn. Full many a mile shall we have plodded this day!"

"How many? How many?" cried the eager youth, ever athirst for knowledge.

The old man was silent.

"Tell me," he answered, after a moment's thought, "what time it was when we stood together on yonder peak. Not exact to the minute!" he added hastily, reading a protest in the young man's face. "An' thy guess be within one poor half-hour of the mark, 'tis all I ask of thy mother's son. Then will I tell thee, true to the last inch, how far we shall have trudged betwixt three and nine of the clock."

A groan was the young man's only reply, while his convulsed features, and the deep wrinkles that chased one another across his manly brow, revealed the abyss of arithmetical agony into which a single chance question had plunged him.
