Knot Three: Mad Mathesis

"I waited for the train."

"Well, they call me that because I am a little mad, I suppose," she said good-humouredly, in answer to Clara's carefully worded question about how she had come by such a strange nickname. "You see, I never do what sane people are expected to do these days. I never wear long trains — talking of trains, that's the Charing Cross Metropolitan Station; I've something to tell you about that — and I never play lawn tennis. I can't cook an omelette. I can't even set a broken limb. There's an ignoramus for you!"

Clara was her niece, and a full twenty years younger; in fact she was still at a High School, an institution Mad Mathesis spoke of with undisguised loathing. "Let a woman be meek and lowly!" she would say. "None of your High Schools for me!" But it was the holidays just now, and Clara was her guest, and Mad Mathesis was showing her the sights of that Eighth Wonder of the world — London.

"The Charing Cross Metropolitan Station!" she went on, waving a hand towards the entrance as though introducing her niece to a friend. "The Bayswater and Birmingham Extension has just been finished, and the trains now run round and round continuously — skirting the border of Wales, just touching at York, and so round by the east coast back to London. The way the trains run is most peculiar. The westerly ones go round in two hours; the easterly ones take three; but they always contrive to start two trains from here, in opposite directions, punctually every quarter of an hour."

"They part to meet again," said Clara, her eyes filling with tears at the romance of the thought.

"No need to cry about it!" her aunt remarked grimly. "They don't meet on the same set of rails, you know. Talking of meeting — an idea strikes me!" she added, changing the subject with her usual abruptness. "Let's go round in opposite directions and see which of us can meet the most trains. No need for a chaperone — ladies' saloon, you know. You shall go whichever way you like, and we'll have a bet on it!"

"I never make bets," said Clara very gravely. "Our excellent headmistress has often warned us —"

"You'd be none the worse if you did!" Mad Mathesis interrupted. "In fact you'd be the better for it, I'm certain."

"Nor does our excellent headmistress approve of puns," said Clara. "But we'll have a match, if you like. Let me choose my train," she added, after a brief calculation in her head, "and I undertake to meet exactly half as many again as you do."

"Not if you count fairly," Mad Mathesis bluntly interrupted. "Remember, we only count the trains we meet on the way. You mustn't count the one that starts as you start, nor the one that arrives as you arrive."

"That will only make a difference of one train," said Clara, as they turned and went into the station. "But I've never travelled alone before. There'll be nobody to help me down. Still, I don't mind. Let's have a match."

A ragged little boy overheard her and came running after her. "Buy a box of cigar-lights, Miss!" he pleaded, tugging her shawl to get her attention. Clara stopped to explain.

"I never smoke cigars," she said, in a meekly apologetic tone. "Our excellent headmistress —" But Mad Mathesis impatiently hurried her on, and the little boy was left staring after her with round eyes of amazement.

The two ladies bought their tickets and moved slowly down the central platform, Mad Mathesis chattering away as usual and Clara silent, anxiously going back over the calculation on which she had pinned her hopes of winning.

"Mind where you're going, dear!" cried her aunt, stopping her just in time. "One step more and you'd have been in that pail of cold water!"

"I know, I know," said Clara dreamily. "The pale, the cold, and the moony —"

"Take your places on the springboards!" shouted a porter.

"What are they for?" Clara asked in a terrified whisper.

"Merely to help us into the trains." The elder lady spoke with the nonchalance of somebody quite used to the process. "Very few people can get into a carriage unaided in less than three seconds, and the trains only stop for one."

At that moment the whistle sounded and two trains rushed into the station. A moment's pause, and they were gone again; but in that brief interval several hundred passengers had been shot into them, each flying straight to his place with the accuracy of a rifle bullet — while an equal number were showered out onto the side platforms.

Three hours went by, and the two friends met again on the Charing Cross platform and eagerly compared notes. Then Clara turned away with a sigh. To young impulsive hearts like hers, disappointment is always a bitter pill. Mad Mathesis followed her, full of kindly sympathy.

"Try again, my love!" she said cheerily. "Let us vary the experiment. We will start as we did before, but not begin counting until our trains meet. When we catch sight of each other we will say 'One!' and count on from there until we get back here."

Clara brightened. "I shall win that," she exclaimed eagerly, "if I may choose my train!"

Another shriek of engine whistles, another heaving of springboards, another living avalanche flung into two trains as they flashed past; and the travellers were off again.

Each gazed eagerly out of her carriage window, holding up a handkerchief as a signal to her friend. A rush and a roar. Two trains shot past each other in a tunnel, and two travellers leaned back in their corners with a sigh — or rather with two sighs — of relief.

"One!" Clara murmured to herself. "Won! It's a word of good omen. This time, at any rate, the victory will be mine!"

But was it?
