Knot Four: The Dead Reckoning

"I did dream of money-bags to-night."

[Note on the money: the sums in this book are in the old British currency, and several of them come out the way they do precisely because of it. Twelve pence make a shilling, twenty shillings make a pound, and a guinea is twenty-one shillings.]

Noon on the open sea within a few degrees of the Equator is apt to be oppressively warm, and our two travellers were now lightly dressed in suits of dazzling white linen, having laid aside the chain mail they had found not merely bearable in the cold mountain air they had lately been breathing, but a necessary precaution against the daggers of the bandits who infested the heights. Their holiday was over, and they were on their way home in the monthly packet boat that ran between the two great ports of the island they had been exploring.

Along with their armour the tourists had laid aside the antiquated speech it had amused them to affect while in knightly disguise, and had gone back to the ordinary manner of two country gentlemen of the nineteenth century.

Stretched out on a pile of cushions in the shade of an enormous umbrella, they were lazily watching some native fishermen who had come aboard at the last landing place, each carrying a small but heavy sack over his shoulder. A large weighing machine that had been used for cargo at the last port stood on the deck, and the fishermen had gathered round it and, with a great deal of unintelligible jabber, seemed to be weighing their sacks.

"More like sparrows in a tree than human speech, isn't it?" the elder tourist remarked to his son, who smiled feebly but would not exert himself so far as to reply. The old man tried another listener.

"What have they got in those sacks, Captain?" he inquired, as that great being passed them on his never-ending parade up and down the deck.

The Captain paused in his march and towered over the travellers — tall, grave and serenely satisfied with himself.

"Fishermen," he explained, "are often passengers in My ship. These five are from Mhruxi, the place we last touched at, and that is how they carry their money. The money of this island is heavy, gentlemen, but it costs little, as you may guess. We buy it from them by weight — about five shillings a pound. I fancy a ten-pound note would buy all those sacks."

By this time the old man had shut his eyes — in order, no doubt, to concentrate on these interesting facts; but the Captain failed to grasp his motive, and with a grunt resumed his monotonous march.

Meanwhile the fishermen were getting so noisy round the weighing machine that one of the sailors took the precaution of carrying off all the weights, leaving them to amuse themselves with whatever substitutes they could find in the way of winch handles, belaying pins and so on. That brought their excitement to a rapid end. They carefully hid their sacks in the folds of the jib that lay on the deck near the tourists, and strolled away.

When the Captain's heavy tread next went by, the younger man roused himself enough to speak.

"What did you say the place those fellows came from was called, Captain?"

"Mhruxi, sir."

"And the one we're bound for?"

The Captain took a long breath, plunged into the word, and came out of it nobly. "They call it Kgovjni, sir."

"K — I give it up," said the young man faintly.

He stretched out a hand for a glass of iced water the compassionate steward had brought him a minute earlier and had unluckily set down just outside the shadow of the umbrella. It was scalding hot, and he decided not to drink it. The effort of arriving at this decision, coming so soon after the exhausting conversation he had just been through, was too much for him, and he sank back among the cushions in silence.

His father politely tried to make up for his indifference.

"Whereabouts are we now, Captain?" he said. "Have you any idea?"

The Captain cast a pitying look at the ignorant landsman. "I could tell you that, sir," he said, in a tone of lofty condescension, "to an inch."

"You don't say so!" the old man remarked, with languid surprise.

"And mean so," the Captain persisted. "Why, what do you suppose would become of My ship if I were to lose My Longitude and My Latitude? Could you make anything of My Dead Reckoning?"

"Nobody could, I'm sure!" the other agreed heartily.

But he had overdone it.

"It is perfectly intelligible," said the Captain, in an offended tone, "to anyone who understands such things." And with that he moved off and began giving orders to the men, who were getting ready to hoist the jib.

Our tourists watched the operation with such interest that neither of them remembered the five money bags — which, a moment later, as the wind filled out the jib, were whirled overboard and fell heavily into the sea.

But the poor fishermen had not forgotten their property so easily. In an instant they had rushed to the spot and stood there uttering cries of fury, pointing now at the sea and now at the sailors who had caused the disaster.

The old man explained the matter to the Captain. "Let us make it up between us," he added in conclusion. "Ten pounds will do it, I think you said?"

[Figure 3: The Captain on his own deck, waving aside the offer of compensation — the fishermen behind him, and the jib that carried their money overboard.]

But the Captain brushed the suggestion away with a wave of the hand.

"No, sir!" he said, in his grandest manner. "You will excuse Me, I am sure; but these are My passengers. The accident has happened aboard My ship and under My orders. It is for Me to make compensation."

He turned to the angry fishermen. "Come here, my men!" he said, in the Mhruxian dialect. "Tell me the weight of each sack. I saw you weighing them just now."

There followed a perfect Babel of noise, as the five natives explained, all screaming at once, how the sailors had carried off the weights and they had done what they could with whatever came to hand.

Two iron belaying pins, three blocks, six holystones, four winch handles and a large hammer were now carefully weighed, with the Captain supervising and noting the results. But even then the matter did not seem to be settled. An angry discussion broke out, in which the sailors and the five natives all joined; and at last the Captain came over to our tourists with a disconcerted look that he tried to hide under a laugh.

"It's an absurd difficulty," he said. "Perhaps one of you gentlemen can suggest something. It seems they weighed the sacks two at a time!"

"If they didn't do five separate weighings, then of course you can't value them separately," the youth decided hastily.

"Let's hear the whole of it," was the old man's more cautious remark.

"They did do five separate weighings," said the Captain, "but — well, it beats me entirely!" he added, in a sudden burst of candour. "Here is the result. The first and second sacks weighed twelve pounds; the second and third, thirteen and a half; the third and fourth, eleven and a half; the fourth and fifth, eight. And then they say they had only the large hammer left, and it took three sacks to weigh it down — the first, third and fifth — and those weighed sixteen pounds. There, gentlemen! Did you ever hear anything like it?"

The old man muttered under his breath, "If only my sister were here!" and looked helplessly at his son. His son looked at the five natives. The five natives looked at the Captain. The Captain looked at nobody. His eyes were cast down, and he seemed to be saying softly to himself, "Contemplate one another, gentlemen, if such be your good pleasure. I contemplate Myself."
