Knot Five: Oughts and Crosses

"Look here, upon this picture, and on this."

"And what made you choose the first train, Goosey?" said Mad Mathesis, as they got into the cab. "Couldn't you count better than that?"

"I took an extreme case," was the tearful reply. "Our excellent headmistress always says, 'When in doubt, my dears, take an extreme case.' And I was in doubt."

"Does it always work?" her aunt inquired.

Clara sighed. "Not always," she admitted reluctantly. "And I can't make out why. One day she was telling the little girls — they make such a noise at tea, you know — 'The more noise you make, the less jam you will have, and vice versa.' And I thought they wouldn't know what 'vice versa' meant, so I explained it to them. I said, 'If you make an infinite noise, you'll get no jam; and if you make no noise, you'll get an infinite quantity of jam.' But our excellent headmistress said that wasn't a good example. Why wasn't it?" she added plaintively.

Her aunt sidestepped the question. "One can see certain objections to it," she said. "But how did you work it with the Metropolitan trains? None of them go infinitely fast, I believe."

"I called them hares and tortoises," said Clara — a little timidly, because she dreaded being laughed at. "And I thought there couldn't be as many hares as tortoises on the line, so I took an extreme case: one hare and an infinite number of tortoises."

"An extreme case indeed," her aunt remarked with admirable gravity, "and a most dangerous state of affairs!"

"And I thought that if I went with a tortoise there would be only one hare to meet; but if I went with the hare — you know there were crowds of tortoises!"

"It wasn't a bad idea," said the elder lady, as they got out of the cab at the entrance to Burlington House. "You shall have another chance today. We'll have a match at marking pictures."

Clara brightened. "I should like to try again, very much," she said. "I'll be more careful this time. How do we play?"

To this question Mad Mathesis made no reply. She was busy ruling lines down the margins of the catalogue.

"There," she said after a minute. "I've drawn three columns against the names of the pictures in the long room, and I want you to fill them with oughts and crosses — crosses for good marks and oughts for bad. The first column is for choice of subject, the second for arrangement, the third for colouring. And these are the conditions of the match. You must give three crosses to two or three pictures. You must give two crosses to four or five —"

"Do you mean only two crosses?" said Clara. "Or may I count the three-cross pictures among the two-cross ones?"

"Of course you may," said her aunt. "Anybody who has three eyes may be said to have two eyes, I suppose?"

Clara followed her aunt's dreamy gaze across the crowded gallery, half afraid she might find there was a three-eyed person in sight.

"And you must give one cross to nine or ten."

"And who wins the match?" Clara asked, as she carefully copied down these conditions on a blank page of her catalogue.

"Whoever marks the fewest pictures."

"But suppose we mark the same number?"

"Then whoever uses the most marks."

Clara considered. "I don't think it's much of a match," she said. "I shall mark nine pictures, and give three crosses to three of them, two crosses to two more, and one cross each to all the rest."

"Will you indeed?" said her aunt. "Wait until you have heard all the conditions, my impetuous child. You must give three oughts to one or two pictures, two oughts to three or four, and one ought to eight or nine. I don't want you to be too hard on the Royal Academicians."

Clara positively gasped as she wrote down all these fresh conditions. "It's a great deal worse than Recurring Decimals!" she said. "But I'm determined to win, all the same."

Her aunt smiled grimly. "We can begin here," she said, as they stopped in front of an enormous picture which the catalogue informed them was the "Portrait of Lieutenant Brown, mounted on his favourite elephant."

"He looks awfully pleased with himself!" said Clara. "I don't think he was the elephant's favourite Lieutenant. What a hideous picture it is! And it takes up room enough for twenty!"

"Mind what you say, my dear!" her aunt put in. "It's by a Royal Academician!"

But Clara was quite reckless. "I don't care who it's by!" she cried. "And I shall give it three bad marks!"

Aunt and niece soon drifted apart in the crowd, and for the next half hour Clara was hard at work putting marks in and rubbing them out again, and hunting up and down for suitable pictures. This she found the hardest part of the whole business.

"I can't find the one I want!" she exclaimed at last, almost crying with vexation.

"What is it you want to find, my dear?"

The voice was strange to Clara, but so sweet and gentle that she felt drawn to its owner before she had even seen her; and when she turned and met the smiling faces of two little old ladies, whose round dimpled faces, exactly alike, seemed never to have known a care in the world, it was all she could do — as she confessed to Aunt Mattie afterwards — to stop herself hugging them both.

"I was looking for a picture," she said, "that has a good subject, and is well arranged, but is badly coloured."

The two little old ladies glanced at one another in some alarm. "Calm yourself, my dear," said the one who had spoken first, "and try to remember which it was. What was the subject?"

"Was it an elephant, for instance?" the other sister suggested. They were still within sight of Lieutenant Brown.

"I don't know, I'm sure!" Clara replied impetuously. "You know it doesn't matter a bit what the subject is, so long as it's a good one!"

Once more the sisters exchanged looks of alarm, and one whispered something to the other, of which Clara caught only the single word "mad."

"They mean Aunt Mattie, of course," she said to herself — imagining, in her innocence, that London was like her own home town, where everybody knew everybody else. "If you mean my aunt," she added aloud, "she's over there, just three pictures past Lieutenant Brown."

"Ah, well! Then you had better go to her, my dear," her new friend said soothingly. "She'll find you the picture you want. Goodbye, dear!"

"Goodbye, dear!" echoed the other sister. "Mind you don't lose sight of your aunt!"

And the pair trotted off into another room, leaving Clara rather puzzled by their manner.

"They're real darlings!" she said to herself. "I wonder why they pity me so." And she wandered on, murmuring, "It must have two good marks, and —"
