Knot Six: Her Radiancy

	"One piecee thing that my have got,
	Maskee that thing my no can do.
	You talkee you no sabey what?
	Bamboo."

[Note: "Maskee," in the pidgin English of the treaty ports, means "without."]

They landed, and were taken at once to the Palace. About halfway there they were met by the Governor, who welcomed them in English — a great relief to our travellers, whose guide could speak nothing but Kgovjnian.

"I don't half like the way they grin at us as we go by," the old man whispered to his son. "And why do they say 'Bamboo!' so often?"

"It refers to a local custom," replied the Governor, who had overheard the question. "Anyone who happens in any way to displease Her Radiancy is generally beaten with rods."

[Figure 4: "Why do they say 'Bamboo!' so often?" The travellers going up to the Palace between the grinning crowd.]

The old man shuddered. "A most objectionable local custom!" he remarked with strong emphasis. "I wish we had never landed. Did you notice that fellow, Norman, opening his great mouth at us? I truly believe he would like to eat us."

Norman appealed to the Governor, who was walking on his other side. "Do they often eat distinguished strangers here?" he said, in as unconcerned a tone as he could manage.

"Not often — not ever!" was the welcome reply. "They are not good for it. Pigs we eat, for they are fat. This old man is thin."

"And thankful to be so!" muttered the elder traveller. "Beaten we shall be, without a doubt. It is a comfort to know it will not be Beaten without the B. My dear boy, just look at the peacocks!"

They were now walking between two unbroken lines of those gorgeous birds, each held in check by a golden collar and chain in the hand of a slave who stood well back, so as not to block the view of the glittering tail with its net of rustling feathers and its hundred eyes.

The Governor smiled proudly. "In your honour," he said, "Her Radiancy has ordered up ten thousand additional peacocks. She will no doubt decorate you, before you go, with the usual Star and Feathers."

"It'll be Star without the S!" faltered one of his listeners.

"Come, come! Don't lose heart!" said the other. "All this is full of charm for me."

"You are young, Norman," sighed his father, "young and light-hearted. For me it is Charm without the C."

"The old one is sad," the Governor remarked with some anxiety. "He has, without doubt, committed some fearful crime?"

"But I haven't!" the poor old gentleman exclaimed hastily. "Tell him I haven't, Norman!"

"He has not, as yet," Norman explained gently. And the Governor repeated, in a satisfied tone, "Not as yet."

"Yours is a wondrous country!" the Governor resumed, after a pause. "Now here is a letter from a friend of mine, a merchant, in London. He and his brother went there a year ago with a thousand pounds apiece; and on New Year's Day they had sixty thousand pounds between them!"

"How did they do it?" Norman exclaimed eagerly. Even the elder traveller looked excited.

The Governor handed him the open letter. "Anybody can do it, once they know how," ran this oracular document. "We borrowed nothing; we stole nothing. We began the year with only a thousand pounds apiece, and last New Year's Day we had sixty thousand pounds between us — sixty thousand golden sovereigns!"

Norman looked grave and thoughtful as he handed the letter back. His father hazarded one guess. "Was it by gambling?"

"A Kgovjnian never gambles," said the Governor gravely, as he showed them through the palace gates.

They followed him in silence down a long passage, and soon found themselves in a lofty hall lined entirely with peacocks' feathers. In the middle was a heap of crimson cushions that almost hid the figure of Her Radiancy — a plump little girl in a robe of green satin dotted with silver stars, whose pale round face lit up for a moment with a half-smile as the travellers bowed before her, and then settled back into the exact expression of a wax doll, while she languidly murmured a word or two in the Kgovjnian dialect.

The Governor interpreted. "Her Radiancy welcomes you. She notes the Impenetrable Placidity of the old one, and the Imperceptible Acuteness of the youth."

Here the little potentate clapped her hands, and a troop of slaves instantly appeared carrying trays of coffee and sweets, which they offered to the guests, who at a signal from the Governor had seated themselves on the carpet.

"Sugar-plums!" muttered the old man. "One might as well be at a confectioner's. Ask for a penny bun, Norman!"

"Not so loud!" his son whispered. "Say something complimentary!" For the Governor was evidently expecting a speech.

"We thank Her Exalted Potency," the old man began timidly. "We bask in the light of her smile, which —"

"The words of old men are weak!" the Governor interrupted angrily. "Let the youth speak!"

"Tell her," cried Norman, in a wild burst of eloquence, "that, like two grasshoppers in a volcano, we are shrivelled up in the presence of Her Spangled Vehemence!"

"It is well," said the Governor, and translated this into Kgovjnian. "I am now to tell you," he went on, "what Her Radiancy requires of you before you go. The yearly competition for the post of Imperial Scarf-maker has just ended, and you are the judges. You will take account of the rate of work, the lightness of the scarves, and their warmth.

"Usually the competitors differ in one point only. Thus, last year, Fifi and Gogo made the same number of scarves in the trial week, and they were equally light; but Fifi's were twice as warm as Gogo's, and she was pronounced twice as good. But this year, woe is me, who can judge it? Three competitors are here, and they differ in every point! While you are settling their claims you shall be lodged, Her Radiancy bids me say, free of expense — in the best dungeon, and abundantly fed on the best bread and water."

The old man groaned. "All is lost!" he wildly exclaimed. But Norman paid no attention to him: he had taken out his notebook and was calmly jotting down the particulars.

"Three they be," the Governor continued: "Lolo, Mimi and Zuzu. Lolo makes five scarves while Mimi makes two; but Zuzu makes four while Lolo makes three. Again, so fairylike is Zuzu's handiwork that five of her scarves weigh no more than one of Lolo's; yet Mimi's are lighter still — five of hers will only balance three of Zuzu's. And for warmth, one of Mimi's is equal to four of Zuzu's; yet one of Lolo's is as warm as three of Mimi's!"

Here the little lady clapped her hands once more.

"It is our signal of dismissal!" the Governor said hastily. "Pay Her Radiancy your farewell compliments — and walk out backwards."

The walking part was all the elder tourist could manage. Norman simply said: "Tell Her Radiancy we are transfixed by the spectacle of Her Serene Brilliance, and bid an agonized farewell to Her Condensed Milkiness!"

"Her Radiancy is pleased," the Governor reported, after duly translating this. "She casts on you a glance from Her Imperial Eyes, and is confident that you will catch it!"

"That I warrant we shall!" the elder traveller moaned distractedly to himself.

Once more they bowed low, and then followed the Governor down a winding staircase to the Imperial Dungeon, which they found to be lined with coloured marble, lit from the roof, and splendidly if not luxuriously furnished with a bench of polished malachite.

"I trust you will not delay the calculation," the Governor said, ushering them in with much ceremony. "I have known great inconvenience — great and serious inconvenience — result to those unhappy ones who have delayed to carry out the commands of Her Radiancy. And on this occasion she is resolute: she says the thing must and shall be done; and she has ordered up ten thousand additional bamboos!"

With these words he left them, and they heard him lock and bar the door on the outside.

"I told you how it would end!" moaned the elder traveller, wringing his hands, and quite forgetting in his anguish that he had proposed the expedition himself, and had never predicted anything of the kind. "Oh, that we were well out of this miserable business!"

"Courage!" cried the younger cheerily. "Haec olim meminisse juvabit — one day it will be a pleasure to remember even this! The end of it all will be glory!"

"Glory without the L!" was all the poor old man could say, as he rocked himself to and fro on the malachite bench. "Glory without the L!"
