Knot Seven: Petty Cash

"Base is the slave that pays."

"Aunt Mattie!"

"My child?"

"Would you mind writing it down at once? I shall be quite certain to forget it if you don't!"

"My dear, we really must wait until the cab stops. How can I possibly write anything in the middle of all this jolting?"

"But I really shall be forgetting it!"

Clara's voice took on the plaintive tone her aunt never knew how to resist, and with a sigh the old lady drew out her ivory notebook and prepared to record the amount Clara had just spent at the confectioner's. Her spending was always done out of her aunt's purse, but the poor girl knew from bitter experience that sooner or later Mad Mathesis would want an exact account of every penny that had gone; and she waited with ill-concealed impatience while the old lady turned the leaves over and over until she found the one headed "PETTY CASH."

"Here's the place," she said at last, "and here is yesterday's lunch duly entered. One glass of lemonade — why can't you drink water, like me? — three sandwiches — they never put in half enough mustard; I told the young woman so to her face, and she tossed her head, the impudence of her! — and seven biscuits. Total, one shilling and twopence. Well, now for today's."

"One glass of lemonade —" Clara was beginning to say, when the cab suddenly drew up and a courteous railway porter was handing the bewildered girl out before she had had time to finish her sentence.

Her aunt pocketed the notebook instantly. "Business first," she said. "Petty cash — which is a form of pleasure, whatever you may think — afterwards."

And she went on to pay the driver and give voluminous instructions about the luggage, quite deaf to the pleas of her unhappy niece that she should enter the rest of the lunch account.

"My dear, you really must cultivate a more capacious mind!" was all the consolation she granted the poor girl. "Are the tablets of your memory not wide enough to hold the record of one single lunch?"

"Not wide enough! Not half wide enough!" was the passionate reply.

The words came in aptly enough, but the voice was not Clara's, and both ladies turned in some surprise to see who had struck so suddenly into their conversation. A fat little old lady was standing at the door of a cab, helping the driver to extract what seemed to be an exact duplicate of herself. It would have been no easy task to decide which of the two sisters was the fatter, or which looked the more good-humoured.

"I tell you the cab-door isn't half wide enough!" she repeated, as her sister finally emerged, rather in the manner of a pellet out of a popgun; and she turned to appeal to Clara. "Is it, dear?" she said, trying hard to bring a frown onto a face that dimpled all over with smiles.

"Some folks is too wide for 'em," growled the cab driver.

[Figure 5: "I tell you the cab-door isn't half wide enough!" The two fat sisters arriving at the station, and the driver who had better not have spoken.]

"Don't provoke me, man!" cried the little old lady, in what she meant for a tempest of fury. "Say another word and I'll put you into the County Court and sue you for a Habeas Corpus!"

The cabman touched his hat and marched off, grinning.

"Nothing like a little Law to cow the ruffians, my dear," she remarked confidentially to Clara. "You saw how he quailed when I mentioned the Habeas Corpus? Not that I have the least idea what it means, but it sounds very grand, doesn't it?"

"It's very provoking," Clara replied, a little vaguely.

"Very!" the little old lady repeated eagerly. "And we are very much provoked indeed. Aren't we, sister?"

"I never was so provoked in all my life!" the fatter sister assented, radiantly.

By this time Clara had recognized her acquaintances from the picture gallery, and drawing her aunt aside she hastily whispered her recollections. "I met them first at the Royal Academy — and they were very kind to me — and they were having lunch at the next table to us just now, you know — and they tried to help me find the picture I wanted — and I'm sure they're dear old things!"

"Friends of yours, are they?" said Mad Mathesis. "Well, I like their looks. You can be civil to them while I get the tickets. But do try to arrange your ideas a little more chronologically!"

And so it came about that the four ladies found themselves sitting side by side on the same bench waiting for the train, chatting as though they had known one another for years.

"Now this I call quite a remarkable coincidence!" exclaimed the smaller and more talkative of the two sisters — the one whose legal knowledge had annihilated the cab driver. "Not merely that we should be waiting for the same train, and at the same station — that would be curious enough — but actually on the same day, and at the same hour of the day! That is what strikes me so forcibly."

She glanced at the fatter and more silent sister, whose chief function in life seemed to be to support the family opinion, and who meekly responded: "And me too, sister!"

"Those are not independent coincidences —" Mad Mathesis was just beginning, when Clara ventured to interrupt.

"There's no jolting here," she pleaded meekly. "Would you mind writing it down now?"

Out came the ivory notebook once more. "What was it, then?" said her aunt.

"One glass of lemonade, one sandwich, one biscuit — oh dear me!" cried poor Clara, her historical tone suddenly turning into a wail of agony.

"Toothache?" said her aunt calmly, as she wrote down the items. The two sisters instantly opened their handbags and produced two different remedies for neuralgia, each labelled "unequalled."

"It isn't that!" said poor Clara. "Thank you very much. It's only that I can't remember how much I paid!"

"Well, try and work it out, then," said her aunt. "You've got yesterday's lunch to help you, you know. And here's the lunch we had the day before — the first day we went to that shop — one glass of lemonade, four sandwiches, ten biscuits. Total, one shilling and fivepence."

She handed the notebook to Clara, who gazed at it with eyes so dim with tears that at first she did not notice she was holding it upside down.

The two sisters had been listening to all this with the deepest interest, and at this point the smaller one laid a hand softly on Clara's arm.

"Do you know, my dear," she said coaxingly, "my sister and I are in the very same predicament? Quite identically the very same predicament! Aren't we, sister?"

"Quite identically and absolutely the very —" began the fatter sister; but she was constructing her sentence on too large a scale, and the little one would not wait for her to finish it.

"Yes, my dear," she went on. "We were having lunch at the very same shop as you were — and we had two glasses of lemonade and three sandwiches and five biscuits — and neither of us has the least idea what we paid. Have we, sister?"

"Quite identically and absolutely —" murmured the other, who evidently considered that she was now a whole sentence in arrears, and that she ought to discharge one obligation before taking on any fresh liabilities. But the little lady broke in again, and she retired from the conversation a bankrupt.

"Would you work it out for us, my dear?" the little old lady pleaded.

"You can do Arithmetic, I trust?" her aunt said, a little anxiously, as Clara turned from one page to the other, vainly trying to collect her thoughts. Her mind was a blank, and all human expression was rapidly fading out of her face.

A gloomy silence followed.
