Knot Ten: Chelsea Buns

"Yea, buns, and buns, and buns!"

Old Song.

"How very, very sad!" exclaimed Clara; and the gentle girl's eyes filled with tears as she spoke.

"Sad — but very curious, when you come to look at it arithmetically," was her aunt's less romantic reply. "Some of them have lost an arm in their country's service, some a leg, some an ear, some an eye —"

"And some, perhaps, all!" Clara murmured dreamily, as they passed the long rows of weather-beaten heroes basking in the sun. "Did you notice that very old one with the red face, who was drawing a map in the dust with his wooden leg while all the others watched? I think it was a plan of a battle —"

"The battle of Trafalgar, no doubt," her aunt interrupted briskly.

"Hardly that, I think," Clara ventured. "You see, in that case he couldn't very well be alive —"

"Couldn't very well be alive!" the old lady repeated contemptuously. "He's as lively as you and me put together! Why, if drawing a map in the dust — with one's wooden leg — doesn't prove one to be alive, perhaps you'll kindly mention what does prove it?"

Clara could not see her way out of that. Logic had never been her strong point.

"To return to the arithmetic," Mad Mathesis resumed — the eccentric old lady never let slip a chance of driving her niece into a calculation — "what percentage do you suppose must have lost all four: a leg, an arm, an eye and an ear?"

"How can I tell?" gasped the terrified girl. She knew perfectly well what was coming.

"You can't, of course, without data," her aunt replied. "But I'm just going to give you —"

"Give her a Chelsea bun, Miss! That's what most young ladies likes best!"

The voice was rich and musical, and the speaker deftly whipped back the snowy cloth that covered his basket to reveal a tempting array of the familiar square buns, joined together in rows, richly glazed and browned and glistening in the sun.

"No, sir! I shall give her nothing so indigestible! Be off!"

The old lady waved her parasol threateningly; but nothing seemed to disturb the good humour of the jolly old man, who marched on, chanting his melodious refrain:

[Figure 7: The Chelsea bun-seller's street cry, written down as music. "Chel-sea buns! Chel-sea buns hot! Chel-sea bun!" — and, in the second line, "Pi-ping hot! Chel-sea buns hot! Chel-sea buns!"]

"Far too indigestible, my love!" said the old lady. "Percentages will agree with you ever so much better."

Clara sighed, and there was a hungry look in her eyes as she watched the basket dwindling into the distance; but she listened meekly to the relentless old lady, who at once began counting off the data on her fingers.

"Say that seventy per cent have lost an eye — seventy-five per cent an ear — eighty per cent an arm — eighty-five per cent a leg. That'll do it beautifully. Now, my dear: what percentage, at the very least, must have lost all four?"

No further conversation took place — unless a smothered exclamation of "Piping hot!" that escaped Clara's lips as the basket disappeared round a corner can be counted as such — until they reached the old Chelsea mansion where Clara's father was then staying with his three sons and their old tutor.

Balbus, Lambert and Hugh had come into the house only a few minutes ahead of them. They had been out walking, and Hugh had been putting forward a difficulty that had reduced Lambert to the depths of gloom and had even puzzled Balbus.

"It changes from Wednesday to Thursday at midnight, doesn't it?" Hugh had begun.

"Sometimes," said Balbus cautiously.

"Always," said Lambert decisively.

"Sometimes," Balbus gently insisted. "Six midnights out of seven, it changes to some other name."

"I meant, of course," Hugh corrected himself, "that when it does change from Wednesday to Thursday, it does it at midnight — and only at midnight."

"Surely," said Balbus. Lambert was silent.

"Well then, suppose it's midnight here in Chelsea. Then it's Wednesday west of Chelsea — say in Ireland or America — where midnight hasn't arrived yet; and it's Thursday east of Chelsea — say in Germany or Russia — where midnight has just gone by."

"Surely," Balbus said again. Even Lambert nodded this time.

"But it isn't midnight anywhere else, so it can't be changing from one day to another anywhere else. And yet, if Ireland and America and the rest call it Wednesday, and Germany and Russia and the rest call it Thursday, there must be some place — not Chelsea — that has different days on the two sides of it. And the worst of it is, the people there get their days in the wrong order: they've got Wednesday to the east of them and Thursday to the west, just as if their day had changed from Thursday to Wednesday!"

"I've heard that puzzle before!" cried Lambert. "And I'll tell you the explanation. When a ship goes round the world from east to west, we know that it loses a day in its reckoning; so that when it gets home and calls its day Wednesday, it finds people here calling it Thursday, because we've had one more midnight than the ship has. And when you go the other way round, you gain a day."

"I know all that," said Hugh, in reply to this not very lucid explanation. "But it doesn't help me, because the ship hasn't proper days. One way round you get more than twenty-four hours to the day, and the other way you get less; so of course the names go wrong. But people who stay in one place always get twenty-four hours to the day."

"I suppose there is such a place," Balbus said meditatively, "though I never heard of it. And the people must find it very odd, as Hugh says, to have the old day east of them and the new one west — because when midnight comes round to them, with the new day in front of it and the old one behind it, one doesn't quite see what happens. I must think it over."

So they had come into the house in the state I have described: Balbus puzzled, and Lambert sunk in gloomy thought.

"Yes, m'm, Master is at home, m'm," said the stately old butler. (Note: only a butler of long experience can manage a run of three m's together without any intervening vowels.) "And the ole party is a-waiting for you in the libery."

"I don't like his calling your father an old party," Mad Mathesis whispered to her niece as they crossed the hall. And Clara had only just time to whisper back, "He meant the whole party," before they were shown into the library, and the sight of the five solemn faces assembled there chilled her into silence.

Her father sat at the head of the table and silently signed to the ladies to take the two empty chairs, one on each side of him. His three sons and Balbus made up the party. Writing materials had been laid round the table in the manner of a ghostly banquet; the butler had evidently given the grim design a great deal of thought. Sheets of quarto paper, each flanked by a pen on one side and a pencil on the other, stood in for the plates; pen-wipers did duty as bread rolls; and ink bottles occupied the places usually held by wine glasses. The centrepiece was a large green baize bag, which gave out, as the old man restlessly shifted it from side to side, a charming jingle as of innumerable golden guineas.

"Sister, daughter, sons — and Balbus —" the old man began, so nervously that Balbus put in a gentle "Hear, hear!" while Hugh drummed on the table with his fists. This disconcerted the unpractised orator.

"Sister —" he began again, then paused a moment, moved the bag to the other side, and went on in a rush, "I mean — this being — a critical occasion — more or less — being the year when one of my sons comes of age —" He paused again in some confusion, having plainly got into the middle of his speech sooner than he had intended; but it was too late to go back.

"Hear, hear!" cried Balbus.

"Quite so," said the old gentleman, recovering his composure a little. "When I first began this annual custom — my friend Balbus will correct me if I am wrong —" (Hugh whispered "with a strap!", but nobody heard him except Lambert, who only frowned and shook his head) "— this annual custom of giving each of my sons as many guineas as would represent his age — it was a critical time, so Balbus informed me, since the ages of two of you were together equal to that of the third. So on that occasion I made a speech —"

He paused so long that Balbus thought it well to come to the rescue with the words "It was a most —", but the old man checked him with a warning look. "Yes, made a speech," he repeated. "A few years after that, Balbus pointed out — I say pointed out —" ("Hear, hear!" cried Balbus. "Quite so," said the grateful old man) "— that it was another critical occasion. The ages of two of you were together double that of the third. So I made another speech — another speech. And now once again it is a critical occasion — so Balbus says — and I am making —"

Here Mad Mathesis pointedly consulted her watch.

"— all the haste I can!" the old man cried, with wonderful presence of mind. "Indeed, sister, I am coming to the point now! The number of years that have passed since that first occasion is just two-thirds of the number of guineas I gave you then. Now, my boys, calculate your ages from the data, and you shall have the money!"

"But we know our ages!" cried Hugh.

"Silence, sir!" thundered the old man, rising to his full height — he was exactly five foot five — in his indignation. "I say you must use the data only! You mustn't even assume which of you it is that comes of age!"

He clutched the bag as he spoke, and with tottering steps — it was about as much as he could do to carry it — he left the room.

"And you shall have a present just like it," the old lady whispered to her niece, "when you have calculated that percentage!" And she followed her brother out.

Nothing could have exceeded the solemnity with which the old couple rose from the table. And yet — was it, was it a grin with which the father turned away from his unhappy sons? Could it be — could it be a wink with which the aunt abandoned her despairing niece? And were those — were those sounds of suppressed chuckling that floated into the room just before Balbus, who had followed them out, closed the door? Surely not. And yet the butler told the cook — but no, that was merely idle gossip, and I will not repeat it.

The shades of evening granted their unspoken plea and closed not over them, for the butler brought in the lamp. The same obliging shades left them a lonely bark for a while — the wail of a dog in the back yard baying at the moon. But neither morning, alas, nor any other epoch seemed likely to restore them to that peace of mind which had once been theirs, before ever these problems swooped down on them and crushed them under a load of unfathomable mystery.

"It's hardly fair," muttered Hugh, "to give us such a jumble as this to work out!"

"Fair?" Clara echoed bitterly. "Well!"

And to all my readers I can only repeat gentle Clara's last words —

Fare-well!

"A knot!" said Alice. "Oh, do let me help to undo it!"
