Answers to Knot One

Problem. "Two travellers spend from 3 o'clock till 9 walking along a level road, up a hill, and home again. Their pace on the level is 4 miles an hour, uphill 3, and downhill 6. Find the distance walked; also, to within half an hour, the time of reaching the top of the hill."

Answer. "24 miles; half past 6."

Solution. A mile on the level takes a quarter of an hour, uphill a third, downhill a sixth. So to go out and come back over the same mile — whether on the level or on the hillside — takes half an hour either way. So in 6 hours they went 12 miles out and 12 back. If the 12 miles out had been nearly all level they would have taken a little over 3 hours; if nearly all uphill, a little under 4. So three and a half hours must be within half an hour of the time taken to reach the summit; and since they started at 3, they got there within half an hour of half past 6.

Twenty-seven answers have come in. Of these, 9 are right, 16 partly right, and 2 wrong. The 16 give the distance correctly, but they have failed to grasp that the top of the hill might have been reached at any moment between 6 o'clock and 7.

The two wrong answers are from Gerty Vernon and A Nihilist. The former makes the distance "23 miles," while her revolutionary companion puts it at "27."

Gerty Vernon says, "they had to go 4 miles along the plain, and got to the foot of the hill at 4 o'clock." They might have done so, I grant you; but you have no grounds for saying they did. "It was seven and a half miles to the top of the hill, and they reached that at a quarter to 7." Here you go wrong in your arithmetic, and I must, however reluctantly, bid you farewell. Seven and a half miles at 3 miles an hour would not take two and three-quarter hours.

A Nihilist says: "Let x denote the whole number of miles, y the number of hours to the hilltop; therefore 3y = the number of miles to the hilltop, and x − 3y = the number of miles on the other side." You bewilder me. The other side of what? "Of the hill," you say. But then, how did they get home again?

However, to accommodate your views, we will build a new inn at the foot of the hill on the far side, and also assume — what I grant you is possible, though not necessarily true — that there was no level road at all. Even then you go wrong. You say:

	y = 6 − (x − 3y)/6      (i)
	x / 4½ = 6              (ii)

I grant you (i), but I deny (ii). It rests on the assumption that going part of the time at 3 miles an hour and the rest at 6 miles an hour comes to the same thing as going the whole time at four and a half miles an hour. That would only be true if the "part" were an exact half — that is, if they went uphill for 3 hours and downhill for the other 3, which they certainly did not do.

The sixteen who are partly right are Agnes Bailey, F. K., Fifee, G. E. B., H. P., Kit, M. E. T., Mysie, A Mother's Son, Nairam, A Redruthian, A Socialist, Spear Maiden, T. B. C., Vis Inertiae, and Yak. Of these, F. K., Fifee, T. B. C. and Vis Inertiae do not attempt the second part at all. F. K. and H. P. show no working. The rest make particular assumptions — that there was no level road, that there were 6 miles of level road, and so on — all of which lead to particular times being fixed for reaching the hilltop.

The most curious assumption is Agnes Bailey's, who says: "Let x = the number of hours taken in the ascent; then x/2 = the hours taken in the descent, and 4x/3 = the hours spent on the level." I suppose you were thinking of the relative rates uphill and on the level, which we might express by saying that if they went x miles uphill in a certain time, they would go 4x/3 miles on the level in the same time. What you have in fact assumed is that they took the same time on the level as they took going up the hill.

Fifee assumes that when the aged knight said they had gone "four miles in the hour" on the level, he meant that four miles was the distance covered, and not merely the rate. That would have been — if Fifee will excuse the slang — a swindle, ill suited to the dignity of the hero.

And now, descend, ye classic Nine, who have solved the whole problem, and let me sing your praises. Your names are Blithe, E. W., L. B., A Marlborough Boy, O. V. L., Putney Walker, Rose, Sea Breeze, Simple Susan and Money Spinner. (These last two I count as one, since they send a joint answer.)

Rose, and Simple Susan and Co., do not actually state that the hilltop was reached some time between 6 and 7; but since they have clearly grasped that a mile ascended and descended takes the same time as two level miles, I mark them right.

A Marlborough Boy and Putney Walker deserve honourable mention for their algebraic solutions, being the only two who have seen that the question leads to an indeterminate equation.

E. W. brings a charge of untruthfulness against the aged knight — a serious charge, for he was the very pink of chivalry. She says: "According to the data given, the time at the summit affords no clue to the total distance. It does not enable us to state precisely, to an inch, how much level and how much hill there was on the road."

"Fair damsel," the aged knight replies, "if, as I surmise, thy initials denote Early Womanhood, bethink thee that the word 'enable' is thine, not mine. I did but ask the time of reaching the hilltop as my condition for further parley. If now thou wilt not grant that I am a truth-loving man, then will I affirm that those same initials denote Envenomed Wickedness!"

Class List

	I.
	A Marlborough Boy.
	Putney Walker.

	II.
	Blithe.
	E. W.
	L. B.
	O. V. L.
	Rose.
	Sea Breeze.
	{ Simple Susan.
	{ Money-Spinner.

Blithe has made so ingenious an addition to the problem, and Simple Susan and Co. have solved it in such tuneful verse, that I record both their answers in full. I have altered a word or two in Blithe's, which I trust she will excuse; it did not seem quite clear as it stood.

"Yet stay," said the youth, as a gleam of inspiration lit up the relaxing muscles of his quiescent features. "Stay. Methinks it matters little when we reached that summit, the crown of our toil. For in the space of time wherein we clambered up one mile and bounded down the same on our return, we could have trudged the two of them on the level. We have plodded, then, four-and-twenty miles in these six mortal hours; for never a moment did we stop, for catching of fleeting breath or for gazing on the scene around!"

"Very good," said the old man. "Twelve miles out and twelve miles in. And we reached the top some time between six and seven of the clock. Now mark me! For every five minutes that had fled since six of the clock when we stood on yonder peak, so many miles had we toiled upwards on the dreary mountainside!"

The youth moaned, and rushed into the inn.

Blithe.

	The elder and the younger knight,
	they sallied forth at three;
	how far they went on level ground
	it matters not to me;
	what time they reached the foot of hill,
	when they began to mount,
	are problems which I hold to be
	of very small account.

Simple Susan.
Money Spinner.
