Answers to Knot Three

Problem. (1) "Two travellers, starting at the same time, went opposite ways round a circular railway. Trains start each way every 15 minutes, the easterly ones going round in 3 hours, the westerly in 2. How many trains did each meet on the way, not counting trains met at the terminus itself?" (2) "They went round as before, each traveller counting as 'one' the train containing the other traveller. How many did each meet?"

Answers. (1) 19. (2) The easterly traveller met 12; the other 8.

The trains one way took 180 minutes, the other way 120. Take the lowest common multiple, 360, and divide the railway into 360 units. Then one set of trains went at the rate of 2 units a minute and at intervals of 30 units; the other at 3 units a minute and at intervals of 45 units.

An easterly train starting has 45 units between it and the first train it will meet. It covers two-fifths of this while the other covers three-fifths, and so meets it at the end of 18 units — and so on all the way round. A westerly train starting has 30 units between it and the first train it will meet. It covers three-fifths of this while the other covers two-fifths, and so meets it at the end of 18 units — and so on all the way round.

So if the railway is divided by 19 posts into 20 parts, each of 18 units, trains meet at every post; and in (1) each traveller passes 19 posts in going round, and therefore meets 19 trains.

But in (2) the easterly traveller only begins counting after covering two-fifths of the journey — that is, on reaching the 8th post — and so counts 12 posts; and similarly the other counts 8. They meet at the end of two-fifths of 3 hours, or three-fifths of 2 hours: that is, 72 minutes.

Forty-five answers have been received. Of these, 12 are beyond the reach of discussion, since they give no working. I can only list their names. Ardmore, E. A., F. A. D., L. D., Matthew Matticks, M. E. T., Poo-Poo and The Red Queen are all wrong. Beta and Rowena have got (1) right and (2) wrong. Cheeky Bob and Nairam give the right answers; but it may perhaps make the one less cheeky, and induce the other to take a less inverted view of things, to be told that if this had been a competition for a prize they would have got no marks. (I have not ventured to give E. A.'s name in full, as she only supplied it provisionally, in case her answer should turn out to be right.)

Of the 33 answers for which working is given, 10 are wrong; 11 are half wrong and half right; 3 are right except that they cherish the delusion that it was Clara who travelled in the easterly train — a point the data do not enable us to settle; and 9 are wholly right.

The 10 wrong answers are from Bo-Peep, Financier, I. W. T., Kate B., M. A. H., Q. Y. Z., Sea-Gull, Thistledown, Tom-Quad, and one unsigned.

Bo-Peep rightly says that the easterly traveller met all the trains which started during the 3 hours of her trip, as well as all which started during the previous 2 hours — that is, all which started at the beginnings of 20 periods of 15 minutes each. And she is right to strike out the one she met at the moment of starting; but wrong to strike out the last train, since she did not meet that at the terminus but 15 minutes before she got there. She makes the same mistake in (2).

Financier thinks that any train met for the second time is not to be counted. I. W. T. finds, by a process that is not stated, that the travellers met at the end of 71 minutes and 26½ seconds. Kate B. thinks that the trains met on starting and on arriving are never to be counted, even when met elsewhere. Q. Y. Z. tries a rather complex algebraic solution and succeeds in finding the time of meeting correctly; everything else is wrong. Sea-Gull seems to think that in (1) the easterly train stood still for 3 hours, and says that in (2) the travellers met at the end of 71 minutes 40 seconds.

Thistledown nobly confesses to having attempted no calculation at all, but merely to having drawn a picture of the railway and counted the trains. In (1) she counts wrong; in (2) she makes them meet in 75 minutes. Tom-Quad omits (1); in (2) he makes Clara count the train she met on arrival. The unsigned answer is also unintelligible: it states that the travellers go "one twenty-fourth more than the total distance to be traversed"!

The "Clara" theory already referred to is adopted by 5 of these — Bo-Peep, Financier, Kate B., Tom-Quad and the nameless writer.

The 11 half-right answers are from Bog-Oak, Bridget, Castor, Cheshire Cat, G. E. B., Guy, Mary, M. A. H., Old Maid, R. W. and Vendredi. All of these adopt the "Clara" theory. Castor omits (1). Vendredi gets (1) right, but in (2) makes the same mistake as Bo-Peep.

I notice in your solution, Vendredi, a marvellous proportion sum: "300 miles is to 2 hours as one mile is to 24 seconds." May I venture to advise you to acquire, as soon as possible, an utter disbelief in the possibility of a ratio existing between miles and hours? And do not be disheartened by your two friends' sarcastic remarks about your "roundabout ways." Their short method, of adding 12 and 8, has the slight disadvantage of producing the wrong answer. Even a roundabout method is better than that.

M. A. H., in (2), makes the travellers count "one" after they met rather than when they met. Cheshire Cat and Old Maid get 20 as the answer to (1) by forgetting to strike out the train met on arrival. The others all get 18, by various routes.

Bog-Oak, Guy and R. W. divide the trains the westerly traveller has to meet into two sets: those already on the line, which they rightly make 11, and those which started during her 2 hours' journey, excluding the train met on arrival, which they wrongly make 7. They make a similar mistake with the easterly train.

Bridget rightly says that the westerly traveller met a train every 6 minutes for 2 hours, but wrongly makes the number 20; it should be 21. G. E. B. adopts Bo-Peep's method, but wrongly strikes out, for the easterly traveller, the train that started at the beginning of the previous 2 hours. Mary thinks a train met on arrival must not be counted, even when it was met on an earlier occasion.

The 3 who are wholly right but for the unfortunate "Clara" theory are F. Lee, G. S. C. and X. A. B.

And now, descend, ye classic Ten, who have solved the whole problem. Your names are Aix-les-Bains, Algernon Bray (thanks for a friendly remark, which comes with a warmth of heart that not even the Atlantic could chill), Arvon, Bradshaw of the Future, Fifee, H. L. R., J. L. O., Omega, S. S. G., and Waiting for the Train. Several of these have put Clara provisionally into the easterly train, but they seem to have understood that the data do not settle the point.

Class List

	I.
	Aix-les-Bains.
	Algernon Bray.
	Bradshaw of the Future.
	Fifee.
	H. L. R.
	Omega.
	S. S. G.
	Waiting for the Train.

	II.
	Arvon.
	J. L. O.

	III.
	F. Lee.
	G. S. C.
	X. A. B.
