Answers to Knot Five

Problem. To mark pictures, giving 3 crosses to 2 or 3 of them, 2 crosses to 4 or 5, and 1 cross to 9 or 10; and also giving 3 oughts to 1 or 2, 2 oughts to 3 or 4, and 1 ought to 8 or 9 — so as to mark the smallest possible number of pictures, and to give them the largest possible number of marks.

Answer. 10 pictures; 29 marks.

Solution. By giving all the crosses possible, and putting the optional ones into brackets, we get 10 pictures marked. By then assigning the oughts in the same way, beginning from the other end, we get 9 pictures marked.

All we have to do now is to drive these two wedges as close together as they will go, so as to get the smallest number of pictures — erasing optional marks where by doing so we can drive them closer, but otherwise letting them stand. There are 10 necessary marks in the first row and in the third, but only 7 in the second. So we erase all the optional marks in the first and third rows, but let them stand in the second.

Twenty-two answers have been received. Of these, 11 give no working; so, in accordance with what I announced in my last review of answers, I leave them unnamed, merely mentioning that 5 are right and 6 wrong.

Of the eleven answers with which some working is supplied, 3 are wrong.

C. H. begins with the rash assertion that under the given conditions "the sum is impossible. For," he or she adds — these initialled correspondents are dismally vague beings to deal with; perhaps "it" would be the better pronoun — "10 is the least possible number of pictures" (granted), "therefore we must either give 2 crosses to 6, or 2 oughts to 5." Why "must," O alphabetical phantom? It is nowhere laid down that every picture "must" have 3 marks!

Fifee sends a folio page of solution, which deserved a better fate. She offers 3 answers, in each of which 10 pictures are marked with 30 marks: in one she gives 2 crosses to 6 pictures, in another to 7, and in the third she gives 2 oughts to 5 — thus in every case ignoring the conditions. (I pause to remark that the condition "2 crosses to 4 or 5 pictures" can only mean "either to 4 or else to 5." If, as one competitor holds, it might mean any number not less than 4, then the words "or 5" would be superfluous.)

I. E. A. — and I am happy to say that none of these bloodless phantoms appear this time in the class list; is it IDEA with the D left out? — gives 2 crosses to 6 pictures. She then takes me to task for using the word "ought" instead of "nought." No doubt, to one who thus rebels against the rules laid down for her guidance, the word must be distasteful. But does I. E. A. not remember the parallel case of "adder"? That creature was originally "a nadder"; then the two words took to batting the poor N backwards and forwards like a shuttlecock, the final state of the game being "an adder." May not "a nought" have similarly become "an ought"? At any rate, oughts and crosses is a very old game. I don't think I ever heard it called noughts and crosses.

In the following Class List, I hope the solitary occupant of Class III will sheathe her claws when she hears how narrow an escape she has had of not being named at all. Her account of the process by which she got the answer is so meagre that, like the nursery tale of "Jack-a-Minory" — I trust I. E. A. will be merciful about the spelling — it is scarcely to be distinguished from zero.

Class List

	I.
	Guy.
	Old Cat.
	Sea-Breeze.

	II.
	Ayr.
	Bradshaw of the Future.
	F. Lee.
	H. Vernon.

	III.
	Cat.
