Answers to Knot Six

Problem 1. A and B began the year with only £1,000 apiece. They borrowed nothing; they stole nothing. On the following New Year's Day they had £60,000 between them. How did they do it?

Solution. They went that day to the Bank of England. A stood in front of it, while B went round and stood behind it.

Two answers have been received, both worthy of great honour. Addlepate makes them borrow "0" and steal "0," and uses both ciphers by putting them at the right-hand end of the £1,000, thus producing £100,000, which is well over the mark. But — or, to put it in Latin, At — Spes Infracta has solved it even more ingeniously. With the first cipher she turns the 1 of the £1,000 into a 9 and adds the result to the original sum, thus getting £10,000; and in that, by means of the other 0, she turns the 1 into a 6, hitting the exact £60,000.

Class List

	I.
	At Spes Infracta.

	II.
	Addlepate.

Problem 2. Lolo makes 5 scarves while Mimi makes 2; Zuzu makes 4 while Lolo makes 3. Five of Zuzu's scarves weigh as much as one of Lolo's; 5 of Mimi's weigh as much as 3 of Zuzu's. One of Mimi's is as warm as 4 of Zuzu's, and one of Lolo's is as warm as 3 of Mimi's. Which is best, giving equal weight in the result to speed of work, lightness and warmth?

Answer. The order is Mimi, Lolo, Zuzu.

Solution. As to speed, other things being equal, Lolo's merit is to Mimi's as 5 to 2, and Zuzu's to Lolo's as 4 to 3. To get one set of three numbers satisfying these conditions, it is perhaps simplest to take the one that occurs twice as our unit and reduce the others to fractions. That gives, for Lolo, Mimi and Zuzu, the marks 1, ⅖, 4/3.

In estimating for lightness, we notice that the greater the weight the less the merit, so that Zuzu's merit is to Lolo's as 5 to 1. So the marks for lightness are ⅕, 5/3, 1. And similarly the marks for warmth are 3, 1, ¼.

To get the total result we must multiply Lolo's three marks together, and do the same for Mimi and for Zuzu. The final numbers are 1 × ⅕ × 3, ⅖ × 5/3 × 1, and 4/3 × 1 × ¼ — that is, ⅗, ⅔, ⅓; or, multiplying throughout by 15, which will not alter the proportion, 9, 10, 5. This shows the order of merit to be Mimi, Lolo, Zuzu.

Twenty-nine answers have been received, of which five are right and twenty-four wrong. These hapless ones have all, with three exceptions, fallen into the error of adding the proportional numbers together for each candidate instead of multiplying them.

Why the latter is right and the former wrong is fully proved in the textbooks, so I will not take up space stating it here; but it can be illustrated very easily by the case of length, breadth and depth. Suppose A and B are rival diggers of rectangular tanks. The amount of work done is obviously measured by the number of cubic feet dug out. Let A dig a tank 10 feet long, 10 wide and 2 deep; let B dig one 6 feet long, 5 wide and 10 deep. The cubic contents are 200 and 300; that is, B is the better digger in the ratio of 3 to 2. Now try marking for length, width and depth separately, giving a maximum of 10 marks to the better in each contest, and then adding the results!

Of the twenty-four malefactors, one gives no working and so has no real claim to be named; but I break the rule for once, out of respect for its success in Problem 1: he, she or it is Addlepate. The other twenty-three fall into five groups.

First and worst, I take it, are those who put the rightful winner last, arranging them as "Lolo, Zuzu, Mimi." The names of these desperate wrongdoers are Ayr, Bradshaw of the Future, Furze-Bush and Pollux (who send a joint answer), Greystead, Guy, Old Hen and Simple Susan. The last was once best of all; the Old Hen has taken advantage of her simplicity and beguiled her with the chaff that was the bane of her own chickenhood.

Second, I point the finger of scorn at those who have put the worst candidate at the top, arranging them as "Zuzu, Mimi, Lolo." They are Graecia, M. M., Old Cat and R. E. X. "'Tis Greece, but —."

The third set have avoided both these enormities, and have even managed to put the worst one last, their answer being "Lolo, Mimi, Zuzu." Their names are Ayr (who also appears among the quite-too-too), Clifton C., F. B., Fifee, Grig, Janet and Mrs. Sairey Gamp.

F. B. has not fallen into the common error: she multiplies together the proportional numbers she gets, but in getting them she goes wrong, by reckoning warmth as a demerit. Possibly she is Freshly Burnt, or comes From Bombay.

Janet and Mrs. Sairey Gamp have also avoided that error, but the method they have adopted is shrouded in mystery, and I scarcely feel competent to criticize it. Mrs. Gamp says that "if Zuzu makes 4 while Lolo makes 3, Zuzu makes 6 while Lolo makes 5" (bad reasoning), "while Mimi makes 2." From this she concludes, "therefore Zuzu excels in speed by 1" — that is, compared with Lolo; but what about Mimi? She then compares the three kinds of excellence, measured on this mystic scale.

Janet takes the statement that "Lolo makes 5 while Mimi makes 2" to prove that "Lolo makes 3 while Mimi makes 1 and Zuzu 4" — worse reasoning than Mrs. Gamp's — and from that concludes that "Zuzu excels in speed by ⅛"! Janet should have been Adeline, "mystery of mysteries!"

The fourth set actually put Mimi at the top, arranging them as "Mimi, Zuzu, Lolo." They are Marquis and Co., Martreb, S. B. B. (the first initial is scarcely legible; it may be meant for a J), and Stanza.

The fifth set consists of An Ancient Fish and Camel. These ill-assorted comrades, by dint of foot and fin, have scrambled into the right answer; but as their method is wrong, of course it counts for nothing. An Ancient Fish also has very ancient and fishlike ideas about how numbers represent merit: she says "Lolo gains 2½ on Mimi." Two and a half what? Fish, fish, art thou in thy duty?

Of the five winners I put Balbus and The Elder Traveller slightly below the other three — Balbus for defective reasoning, the other for scanty working. Balbus gives two reasons for saying that adding the marks is not the right method, and then adds, "it follows that the decision must be made by multiplying the marks together." This is hardly more logical than saying, "This is not Spring; therefore it must be Autumn."

Class List

	I.
	Dinah Mite.
	E. B. D. L.
	Joram.

	II.
	Balbus.
	The Elder Traveller.

With regard to Knot Five, I beg to express to Vis Inertiae, and to any others who like her understood the condition to be that every marked picture must have three marks, my sincere regret that the unfortunate phrase "fill the columns with oughts and crosses" should have caused them to waste so much time and trouble. I can only repeat that a literal reading of "fill" would seem to me to require that every picture in the gallery be marked. Vis Inertiae would have been in the First Class if she had sent in the solution she now offers.
