Answers to Knot Seven

Problem. Given that one glass of lemonade, 3 sandwiches and 7 biscuits cost 1s. 2d., and that one glass of lemonade, 4 sandwiches and 10 biscuits cost 1s. 5d., find the cost of (1) a glass of lemonade, a sandwich and a biscuit; and (2) 2 glasses of lemonade, 3 sandwiches and 5 biscuits.

Answer. (1) 8d.; (2) 1s. 7d.

Solution. This is best treated algebraically. Let x be the cost in pence of a glass of lemonade, y of a sandwich, and z of a biscuit. Then we have x + 3y + 7z = 14, and x + 4y + 10z = 17. And we want the values of x + y + z, and of 2x + 3y + 5z.

Now from two equations only we cannot find the values of three unknowns separately; certain combinations of them may, however, be found. We also know that with the help of the given equations we can eliminate two of the three unknowns from the quantity whose value is wanted, which will then contain only one. So if the required value can be found at all, it can only be by the third unknown vanishing of its own accord; otherwise the problem is impossible.

Let us then eliminate lemonade and sandwiches and reduce everything to biscuits — a state of affairs even more depressing than "if all the world were apple pie." Subtracting the first equation from the second eliminates lemonade and gives y + 3z = 3, or y = 3 − 3z. Substituting this value of y in the first gives x − 2z = 5, that is x = 5 + 2z.

Now if we substitute these values of x and y in the quantities whose values are wanted, the first becomes (5 + 2z) + (3 − 3z) + z, that is 8; and the second becomes 2(5 + 2z) + 3(3 − 3z) + 5z, that is 19. Hence the answers are (1) 8d. and (2) 1s. 7d.

The above is a universal method: that is, it is absolutely certain either to produce the answer or to prove that no answer is possible. The question may also be solved by combining the quantities whose values are given so as to make up those whose values are wanted. That is merely a matter of ingenuity and good luck; and as it may fail even when the thing is possible, and is of no use in proving it impossible, I cannot rank this method as equal in value to the other. Even when it succeeds it may prove a very tedious business. Suppose the 26 competitors who have sent in what I may call accidental solutions had had a question to deal with in which every number ran to 8 or 10 digits! I suspect it would have been a case of "silvered is the raven hair" — see Patience — before any solution had been hit on by the most ingenious of them.

Forty-five answers have come in, of which 44 give, I am happy to say, some sort of working, and therefore deserve to be named and to have their virtues, or their vices as the case may be, discussed. Thirteen have made assumptions they have no right to, and so cannot figure in the Class List even though in 10 of the 13 cases the answer is right. Of the remaining 28, no fewer than 26 have sent in accidental solutions and therefore fall short of the highest honours.

I will now discuss individual cases, taking the worst first, as is my custom.

Froggy gives no working — at least, this is all he gives. After stating the given equations he says "therefore the difference, 1 sandwich + 3 biscuits, = 3d."; then follow the amounts of the unknown bills, with no further hint as to how he got them. Froggy has had a very narrow escape of not being named at all.

Of those who are wrong, Vis Inertiae has sent in a piece of incorrect working. Peruse the horrid details, and shudder. She takes x — call it y — as the cost of a sandwich, and concludes, rightly enough, that a biscuit will cost (3 − y)/3. She then subtracts the second equation from the first and deduces 3y + 7 × (3 − y)/3 − 4y + 10 × (3 − y)/3 = 3. By making two mistakes in this line she brings out y = 2/2.

Try it again, O Vis Inertiae! Away with the Inertia; infuse a little more Vis; and you will bring out the correct, though uninteresting, result 0 = 0. That will show you that it is hopeless to try to coax any one of these three unknowns into revealing its separate value.

The other competitor who is wrong throughout is either J. M. C. or T. M. C.; but whether he is a Juvenile Mis-Calculator or a True Mathematician Confused, he makes the answers 7d. and 1s. 5d. He assumes, with Too Much Confidence, that biscuits were a halfpenny each, and that Clara paid for 8 when she only ate 7.

We will now consider the 13 whose working is wrong although the answer is right; and, so as not to measure their demerits too exactly, I will take them in alphabetical order.

Anita finds, rightly, that "1 sandwich and 3 biscuits cost 3d.," and proceeds: "therefore 1 sandwich = 1½d., 3 biscuits = 1½d., 1 lemonade = 6d."

Dinah Mite begins like Anita, and from that proves, rightly, that a biscuit costs less than a penny — from which she concludes, wrongly, that it must cost a halfpenny.

F. C. W. is so beautifully resigned to the certainty of a verdict of guilty that I have hardly the heart to say the word without adding "recommended to mercy on account of extenuating circumstances." But really, you know — where are the extenuating circumstances? She begins by assuming that lemonade is 4d. a glass and sandwiches 3d. each, making, with the two given equations, four conditions to be satisfied by three miserable unknowns. And having, naturally, developed this into a contradiction, she then tries 5d. and 2d., with a similar result. (This process might have been carried on right through the Tertiary Period without gratifying one single Megatherium.) Then, by a happy thought, she tries halfpenny biscuits, and so gets a consistent result. That may be a good solution if you regard the problem as a riddle; but it is not scientific.

Janet identifies sandwiches with biscuits! "One sandwich + 3 biscuits" she makes equal to "4." Four what?

Mayfair makes the astounding assertion that the equation s + 3b = 3 "is evidently only satisfied by s = 2/2, b = ½"!

Old Cat believes that assuming a sandwich costs 1½d. is "the only way to avoid unmanageable fractions." But why avoid them? Is there not a certain glow of triumph in taming such a fraction? "Ladies and gentlemen, the fraction now before you is one that for years defied every effort of a refining nature. It was, in a word, hopelessly vulgar. Treating it as a recurring decimal — the treadmill of fractions — only made matters worse. As a last resort, I reduced it to its lowest terms and extracted its square root!" Joking apart, let me thank Old Cat for some very kind words of sympathy about a correspondent — whose name, I am happy to say, I have now forgotten — who had found fault with me as a discourteous critic.

O. V. L. is beyond my comprehension. He takes the given equations as (1) and (2); from these, by the process (2) − (1), he deduces, rightly, equation (3), namely s + 3b = 3; and from that again, by the process "× 33" — a hopeless mystery — he deduces 3s + 4b = 4. I have nothing to say about it. I give it up.

Sea-Breeze says "it is immaterial to the answer" — why? — "in what proportion 3d. is divided between the sandwich and the 3 biscuits"; so she assumes s = 1½d., b = ½d.

Stanza is one of a very irregular metre. At first she, like Janet, identifies sandwiches with biscuits. She then tries two assumptions (s = 1, b = 2/3; and s = ½, b = 2/6) and, naturally, ends in contradictions. Then she returns to the first assumption and finds the three unknowns separately — which is absurd.

Stiletto identifies sandwiches and biscuits as "articles." Is the word ever used by confectioners? I had fancied that "What is the next article, Ma'am?" was confined to drapers.

Two Sisters first assume that biscuits are four a penny, and then that they are two a penny, adding that "the answer will of course be the same in both cases." It is a dreamy remark, and makes one feel something like Macbeth grasping at the spectral dagger: "Is this a statement that I see before me?" If you were to say "we both walked the same way this morning," and I were to say "one of you walked the same way, but the other didn't," which of the three of us would be the most hopelessly confused?

Turtle Pyate — what is a Turtle Pyate, please? — and Old Crow, who send a joint answer, and Y. Y., all adopt the same method. Y. Y. gets the equation s + 3b = 3 and then says "this sum must be apportioned in one of the three following ways." It may be, I grant you; but Y. Y., do you say "must"? I fear it is possible for Y. Y. to be two Y's. The other two conspirators are less positive: they say it "can" be so divided — but they add "either of the three prices being right"! This is bad grammar and bad arithmetic at once, O mysterious birds.

Of those who win honours, The Shetland Snark must have the third class all to himself. He has only answered half the question, namely the amount of Clara's lunch; the two little old ladies he pitilessly abandons in the middle of their difficulty. I beg to assure him, with thanks for his friendly remarks, that entrance fees and subscriptions are things unknown in that most economical of clubs, the Knot-Untiers.

The authors of the 26 accidental solutions differ only in the number of steps they have taken between the data and the answers. In order to do them full justice I have arranged the second class in sections, according to the number of steps. The two Kings are fearfully deliberate! I suppose that walking quickly, or taking short cuts, is inconsistent with kingly dignity; but really, reading Theseus's solution, one almost fancied he was marking time and making no advance at all.

The other King will, I hope, forgive me for having altered "Coal" into "Cole." King Coilus, or Coil, seems to have reigned soon after Arthur's time. Henry of Huntingdon identifies him with the King Coël who first built walls round Colchester, which was named after him. In the Chronicle of Robert of Gloucester we read:

	"Aftur Kyng Aruirag, of wam we habbeth y told,
	Marius ys sone was kyng, quoynte mon & bold.
	And ys sone was aftur hym, Coil was ys name,
	Bothe it were quoynte men, & of noble fame."

Balbus lays it down as a general principle that "in order to ascertain the cost of any one luncheon, it must come to the same amount upon two different assumptions." (Query: should not "it" be "we"? Otherwise the luncheon is represented as wishing to ascertain its own cost.) He then makes two assumptions — one, that sandwiches cost nothing; the other, that biscuits cost nothing; either arrangement would lead to the shop being inconveniently crowded — and brings out the unknown luncheons as 8d. and 19d. on each assumption. He then concludes that this agreement of results "shows that the answers are correct."

Now I propose to disprove his general law simply by giving one instance of its failing. One instance is quite enough. In logical language, in order to disprove a universal affirmative it is enough to prove its contradictory, which is a particular negative.

(I must pause for a digression on Logic, and especially on Ladies' Logic. The universal affirmative "everybody says he's a duck" is crushed instantly by proving the particular negative "Peter says he's a goose," which is equivalent to "Peter does not say he's a duck." And the universal negative "nobody calls on her" is well met by the particular affirmative "I called yesterday." In short, either of two contradictories disproves the other; and the moral is that, since a particular proposition is much more easily proved than a universal one, the wisest course in arguing with a Lady is to limit one's own assertions to particulars and leave her to prove the universal contradictory, if she can. You will thus generally secure a logical victory. A practical victory is not to be hoped for, since she can always fall back on the crushing remark "that has nothing to do with it!" — a move for which Man has not yet discovered any satisfactory answer. Now let us return to Balbus.)

Here is my particular negative, on which to test his rule. Suppose the two recorded lunches to have been "2 buns, one queen-cake, 2 sausage rolls and a bottle of Zoëdone: total, one and ninepence," and "one bun, 2 queen-cakes, a sausage roll and a bottle of Zoëdone: total, one and fourpence." And suppose Clara's unknown lunch to have been "3 buns, one queen-cake, one sausage roll and 2 bottles of Zoëdone," while the two little sisters had been indulging in "8 buns, 4 queen-cakes, 2 sausage rolls and 6 bottles of Zoëdone." (Poor souls, how thirsty they must have been!)

If Balbus will kindly try this by his principle of two assumptions — first assuming that a bun is 1d. and a queen-cake 2d., and then that a bun is 3d. and a queen-cake 3d. — he will bring out the other two lunches, on each assumption, as one and ninepence and four and tenpence respectively; which harmony of results, he will say, "shows that the answers are correct." And yet, as a matter of fact, the buns were 2d. each, the queen-cakes 3d., the sausage rolls 6d., and the Zoëdone 2d. a bottle — so that Clara's third lunch had cost one and sevenpence, and her thirsty friends had spent four and fourpence.

Another remark of Balbus's I will quote and discuss, because I think it may also carry a moral for some of my readers. He says "it is the same thing in substance whether in solving this problem we use words and call it Arithmetic, or use letters and signs and call it Algebra."

Now this does not seem to me a correct description of the two methods. The arithmetical method is that of synthesis only: it goes from one known fact to another until it reaches its goal. Whereas the algebraical method is that of analysis: it begins with the goal, represented symbolically, and works backwards, dragging its veiled victim along with it, until it has reached the full daylight of known facts, in which it can tear off the veil and say "I know you!"

Take an illustration. Your house has been broken into and robbed, and you appeal to the policeman who was on duty that night. "Well, Mum, I did see a chap getting out over your garden wall; but I was a good bit off, so I didn't chase him, like. I just cut down the short way to the Chequers, and who should I meet but Bill Sykes, coming full split round the corner. So I just ups and says, 'My lad, you're wanted.' That's all I says. And he says, 'I'll go along quiet, Bobby,' he says, 'without the darbies,' he says." There is your arithmetical policeman.

Now try the other method. "I seed somebody a-running, but he was well gone before ever I got nigh the place. So I just took a look round in the garden. And I noticed the footmarks, where the chap had come right across your flower beds. They was good big footmarks, sure-ly. And I noticed as the left foot went down at the heel ever so much deeper than the other. And I says to myself, 'The chap's been a big hulking chap, and he goes lame on his left foot.' And I rubs my hand on the wall where he got over, and there was soot on it, and no mistake. So I says to myself, 'Now where can I light on a big man, in the chimbley-sweep line, what's lame of one foot?' And I flashes up permiscuous, and I says, 'It's Bill Sykes!' says I." There is your algebraical policeman — a higher intellectual type, to my thinking, than the other.

Little Jack's solution calls for a word of praise, as he has written out what really is an algebraical proof in words, without representing any of his facts as equations. If it is all his own, he will make a good algebraist in time to come. I beg to thank Simple Susan for some kind words of sympathy, to the same effect as those received from Old Cat.

Hecla and Martreb are the only two who have used a method certain either to produce the answer or else to prove it impossible; so they must share the highest honours between them.

Class List

	I.
	Hecla.
	Martreb.

	II, section 1 (2 steps).
	Adelaide.
	Clifton C.
	E. K. C.
	Guy.
	L'Inconnu.
	Little Jack.
	Nil Desperandum.
	Simple Susan.
	Yellow-Hammer.
	Woolly One.

	II, section 2 (3 steps).
	A. A.
	A Christmas Carol.
	Afternoon Tea.
	An Appreciative Schoolma'am.
	Baby.
	Balbus.
	Bog-Oak.
	The Red Queen.
	Wall-flower.

	II, section 3 (4 steps).
	Hawthorn.
	Joram.
	S. S. G.

	II, section 4 (5 steps).
	A Stepney Coach.

	II, section 5 (6 steps).
	Bay Laurel.
	Bradshaw of the Future.

	II, section 6 (9 steps).
	Old King Cole.

	II, section 7 (14 steps).
	Theseus.
