Answers to Correspondents

I have received several letters on the subjects of Knots Two and Six, which make me think some further explanation desirable.

In Knot Two I had intended the numbering of the houses to begin at one corner of the Square, and this was assumed by most, if not all, of the competitors. Trojanus, however, says: "assuming, in the absence of any information, that the street enters the square in the middle of each side, it may be supposed that the numbering begins at a street." But surely the other is the more natural assumption?

In Knot Six, the first problem was of course a mere play on words, whose presence I thought excusable in a series of problems whose aim is to entertain rather than to instruct. But it has not escaped the contemptuous criticism of two of my correspondents, who seem to think that Apollo is duty bound to keep his bow always at full stretch. Neither of them has guessed it — and that is true human nature.

Only the other day — the 31st of September, to be quite exact — I met my old friend Brown and gave him a riddle I had just heard. With one great effort of his colossal mind, Brown guessed it. "Right!" said I. "Ah," said he, "it's very neat — very neat. And it isn't an answer that would occur to everybody. Very neat indeed." A few yards further on I fell in with Smith, and to him I put the same riddle. He frowned over it for a minute and then gave it up. Meekly I faltered out the answer. "A poor thing, sir!" Smith growled, as he turned away. "A very poor thing! I wonder you care to repeat such rubbish!" Yet Smith's mind is, if anything, even more colossal than Brown's.

The second problem of Knot Six is an example of the ordinary Double Rule of Three, whose essential feature is that the result depends on the variation of several elements, so related to it that if all but one are held constant it varies as that one — and hence, if none are constant, it varies as their product. Thus, for instance, the cubic contents of a rectangular tank vary as its length if breadth and depth are constant, and so on; so that if none are constant, the contents vary as the product of length, breadth and depth.

When the result is not connected with the varying elements in this way, the problem stops being Double Rule of Three and often becomes one of great complexity.

To illustrate this, let us take two candidates for a prize, A and B, who are to compete in French, German and Italian.

(a) Let it be laid down that the result is to depend on their relative knowledge of each subject, so that whether their marks for French are "1, 2" or "100, 200" the result will be the same; and let it also be laid down that if they get equal marks on two papers, the final marks are to stand in the same ratio as those of the third. This is a case of ordinary Double Rule of Three. We multiply A's three marks together and do the same for B. Note that if A gets a single nought his final mark is nought, even if he gets full marks for two papers while B gets only one mark on each. This would of course be very unfair on A, though it is a correct solution under the stated conditions.

(b) The result is to depend, as before, on relative knowledge; but French is to carry twice the weight of German or Italian. This is an unusual form of question. I should be inclined to say that the resulting ratio is to be nearer to the French ratio than it would be if we multiplied as in (a), and so much nearer that one would have to use the other multipliers twice over to produce the same result as in (a). For example, if the French ratio were 2/10, and the others 2/9 and 1/9 — so that the final ratio by method (a) would be 2/45 — I should multiply instead by 2/3 and 1/3, giving the result 1/3, which is nearer to 2/10 than method (a) would have made it.

(c) The result is to depend on the actual amount of knowledge of the three subjects collectively. Here we have to ask two questions. First, what is to be the "unit" — that is, the standard to measure by — in each subject? Second, are these units to be of equal or unequal value? The usual unit is the knowledge shown by answering the whole paper correctly; calling this 100, all lower amounts are represented by numbers between 0 and 100. Then, if these units are to be of equal value, we simply add A's three marks together and do the same for B.

(d) The conditions are the same as in (c), but French is to have double weight. Here we simply double the French marks and add as before.

(e) French is to carry such weight that, if the other marks are equal, the final ratio is to be that of the French paper — so that a nought in French would sink the candidate; but the other two subjects are only to affect the result collectively, by the amount of knowledge shown, the two being reckoned of equal value. Here I should add A's German and Italian marks together and multiply by his French mark.

But I need not go on. The problem may evidently be set with a great many varying conditions, each needing its own method of solution. The problem in Knot Six was meant to belong to variety (a), and to make that clear I put in the following passage:

"Usually the competitors differ in one point only. Thus, last year, Fifi and Gogo made the same number of scarves in the trial week, and they were equally light; but Fifi's were twice as warm as Gogo's, and she was pronounced twice as good."

What I have said will serve, I hope, as an answer to Balbus, who holds that (a) and (c) are the only possible varieties of the problem, and that to say "we cannot use addition, therefore we must be intended to use multiplication" is "no more illogical than inferring, from the knowledge that a man was not born in the night, that he was born in the daytime." And it will serve as an answer too to Fifee, who says: "I think a little more consideration will show you that our 'error of adding the proportional numbers together for each candidate instead of multiplying' is no error at all." Why, even if addition had been the right method to use, not one of the writers — I speak from memory — showed any awareness of the necessity of fixing a unit for each subject. No error at all! They were positively steeped in error.

One correspondent — I do not name him, as the letter is not quite friendly in tone — writes as follows. "I wish to add, very respectfully, that I think it would be in better taste if you were to abstain from the very trenchant expressions which you are accustomed to indulge in when criticising the answers. That such a tone must not be agreeable to the persons concerned who have made mistakes may possibly carry no great weight with you; but I hope you will feel that it would be as well not to employ it, unless you are quite certain of being correct yourself."

The only instances the writer gives of these "trenchant expressions" are "hapless" and "malefactors." I beg to assure him — and any others who may need the assurance; I trust there are none — that all such words have been used in jest, with no idea that they could possibly annoy anybody, and that I sincerely regret any annoyance I may have inadvertently given.

May I hope that in future they will recognize the distinction between severe language used in sober earnest and the "words of unmeant bitterness" that Coleridge alludes to in that lovely passage beginning "A little child, a limber elf"? If the writer will look up that passage, or the preface to "Fire, Famine and Slaughter," he will find the distinction I am pleading for drawn out far better than I could hope to do in any words of my own.

The writer's insinuation that I do not care how much annoyance I give my readers I think it best to pass over in silence. But to his concluding remark I must entirely object. I hold that using language likely to annoy any of my correspondents would not be in the least justified by the plea that I was "quite certain of being correct." I trust that the knot-untiers and I are not on such terms as those.

I beg to thank G. B. for the offer of a puzzle — which, however, is too like the old one, "Make four 9's into 100."
