Answers to Knot Ten

The Chelsea Pensioners

Problem. If 70 per cent have lost an eye, 75 per cent an ear, 80 per cent an arm, and 85 per cent a leg, what percentage, at the very least, must have lost all four?

Answer. Ten.

Solution. I adopt Polar Star's, as being better than my own. Adding the wounds together we get 70 + 75 + 80 + 85 = 310, among 100 men; which gives 3 to each, and 4 to 10 men. So the least percentage is 10.

Nineteen answers have been received. One is "5"; but as no working is given with it, it must, in accordance with the rule, remain a deed without a name.

Janet makes it "35 and 2/10ths." I am sorry she has misunderstood the question and has supposed that those who had lost an ear were 75 per cent of those who had lost an eye, and so on. On that supposition the percentages must of course all be multiplied together. She has done this correctly, but I can give her no honours, as I do not think the question will fairly bear her interpretation.

Three Score and Ten makes it "19 and 2/8ths." Her solution has given me — I will not say many anxious days and sleepless nights, since I wish to be strictly truthful, but — some trouble in making any sense of it at all. She makes the number of "pensioners wounded once" 310 ("per cent," I suppose!); dividing by 4, she gets 77½ as the "average percentage"; dividing again by 4, she gets 19 and 2/8ths as the "percentage wounded four times."

Does she suppose wounds of different kinds to absorb each other, so to speak? Then no doubt the data would be equivalent to 77 pensioners with one wound each and a half-pensioner with a half-wound. And does she then suppose these concentrated wounds to be transferable, so that two-quarters of these unfortunates could obtain perfect health by handing over their wounds to the remaining quarter? Granting these suppositions, her answer is right — or rather, if the question had been "A road is covered with one inch of gravel along 77½ per cent of its length. How much of it could be covered four inches deep with the same material?", her answer would have been right. But alas, that was not the question.

Delta makes some most amazing assumptions: "let everyone who has not lost an eye have lost an ear"; "let everyone who has not lost both eyes and ears have lost an arm." Her ideas of a battlefield are grim indeed. Fancy a warrior who would go on fighting after losing both eyes, both ears and both arms! This is a case which she — or it? — evidently considers possible.

Next come eight writers who have made the unwarrantable assumption that because 70 per cent have lost an eye, therefore 30 per cent have not lost one, and so have both eyes. This is illogical. If you give me a bag containing 100 sovereigns, and if in an hour I come to you — my face beaming with gratitude nothing like as much as when I received the bag — to say "I am sorry to tell you that 70 of these sovereigns are bad," do I thereby guarantee the other 30 to be good? Perhaps I have not tested them yet.

The sides of this illogical octagon are as follows, in alphabetical order: Algernon Bray, Dinah Mite, G. S. C., Jane E., J. D. W., Magpie (who makes the delightful remark "therefore 90 per cent have two of something," recalling to memory that fortunate monarch with whom Xerxes was so pleased that "he gave him ten of everything!"), S. S. G., and Tokio.

Bradshaw of the Future and T. R. do the question piecemeal — on the principle that the 70 per cent and the 75 per cent, though begun from opposite ends of the 100, must overlap by at least 45 per cent, and so on. This is quite correct working, but not, I think, quite the best way of doing it.

The other five competitors will, I hope, feel themselves sufficiently glorified by being placed in the first class, without my composing a Triumphal Ode for each.

Class List

	I.
	Old Cat.
	Old Hen.
	Polar Star.
	Simple Susan.
	White Sugar.

	II.
	Bradshaw of the Future.
	T. R.

	III.
	Algernon Bray.
	Dinah Mite.
	G. S. C.
	Jane E.
	J. D. W.
	Magpie.
	S. S. G.
	Tokio.

Change of Day

I must postpone indefinitely the geographical problem — partly because I have not yet received the statistics I am hoping for, and partly because I am so entirely puzzled by it myself. When an examiner is himself dimly hovering between a second class and a third, how is he to decide anybody else's position?

The Sons' Ages

Problem. "At first, two of the ages are together equal to the third. A few years afterwards, two of them are together double the third. When the number of years since the first occasion is two-thirds of the sum of the ages on that occasion, one age is 21. What are the other two?"

Answer. "15 and 18."

Solution. Let the ages at first be x, y and (x + y). Now if a + b = 2c, then (a − n) + (b − n) = 2(c − n), whatever the value of n. So the second relationship, if it was ever true, was always true; and therefore it was true at the start. But it cannot be true that x and y together are double (x + y). So it must be true of (x + y) together with either x or y, and it does not matter which we take. Assume, then, that (x + y) + x = 2y; that is, y = 2x.

So the three ages were at first x, 2x and 3x; and the number of years since that time is two-thirds of 6x, that is 4x. So the present ages are 5x, 6x and 7x. The ages are clearly whole numbers, since this is only "the year when one of my sons comes of age." So 7x = 21, x = 3, and the other ages are 15 and 18.

Eighteen answers have been received.

One of the writers merely asserts that the first occasion was 12 years ago, that the ages were then 9, 6 and 3, and that on the second occasion they were 14, 11 and 8. As a Roman father I ought to withhold the name of the rash writer; but respect for age makes me break the rule — it is Three Score and Ten.

Jane E. also asserts that the ages at first were 9, 6 and 3, and then calculates the present ages, leaving the second occasion unnoticed. Old Hen is nearly as bad: she "tried various numbers till I found one that fitted all the conditions." But merely scratching up the earth and pecking about is not the way to solve a problem, O venerable bird!

And close after Old Hen prowls, with hungry eyes, Old Cat, who calmly assumes to begin with that the son who comes of age is the eldest. Eat your bird, Puss — you will get nothing from me.

There are yet two zeroes to dispose of. Minerva assumes that on every occasion a son comes of age, and that only such a son is tipped with gold. Is that a wise reading of "now, my boys, calculate your ages, and you shall have the money"? Bradshaw of the Future says "let" the ages at first be 9, 6 and 3, then assumes that the second occasion was 6 years later, and on these baseless assumptions brings out the right answers. Guide future travellers if thou wilt: thou art no Bradshaw for this Age.

Of those who win honours, the merely honourable are two. Dinah Mite works out, rightly, the relationship between the three ages at first, but then assumes one of them to be 6, which makes the rest of her solution guesswork. M. F. C. does the algebra correctly as far as the conclusion that the present ages are 5z, 6z and 7z, and then assumes, without giving any reason, that 7z = 21.

Of the more honourable, Delta attempts a novelty: to discover which son comes of age by elimination. It assumes in turn that it is the middle one and that it is the youngest, and in each case apparently brings out an absurdity. Still, as the proof contains the following piece of algebra — "63 = 7x + 4y; therefore 21 = x + four sevenths of y" — I trust it will admit that its proof is not quite conclusive. The rest of its work is good.

Magpie betrays the deplorable tendency of her tribe: to appropriate any stray conclusion she comes across, without having any strict logical right to it. Taking A, B and C as the ages at first, and D as the number of years elapsed since, she finds, rightly, the three equations 2A = B, C = B + A, D = 2B. She then says: "supposing that A = 1, then B = 2, C = 3, and D = 4. Therefore for A, B, C, D four numbers are wanted which shall be to each other as 1:2:3:4."

It is in the "therefore" that I detect the unconscientiousness of this bird. The conclusion is true, but only because the equations are homogeneous — that is, they have one unknown in each term — a fact which I strongly suspect had not been grasped, I beg pardon, clawed, by her. Were I to lay this little pitfall — "A + 1 = B, B + 1 = C; supposing A = 1, then B = 2 and C = 3; therefore for A, B, C three numbers are wanted which shall be to one another as 1:2:3" — would you not flutter down into it, O Magpie, as amiably as a Dove?

Simple Susan is anything but simple to me. Having established that the three ages at first are as 3:2:1, she says, "then, as two-thirds of their sum, added to one of them, equals 21, the sum cannot exceed 30, and consequently the highest cannot exceed 15." I suppose her mental argument runs something like this: "two-thirds of the sum, plus one age, equals 21; therefore the sum, plus three halves of one age, equals 31½. But three halves of one age cannot be less than 1½" — here I perceive that Simple Susan would on no account present a guinea to a newborn baby! — "hence the sum cannot exceed 30." This is ingenious; but her proof after that is, as she candidly admits, "clumsy and roundabout." She finds that there are 5 possible sets of ages and eliminates four of them. Suppose that instead of 5 there had been 5 million possible sets. Would Simple Susan have courageously ordered in the necessary gallon of ink and ream of paper?

The solution sent in by C. R. is, like Simple Susan's, partly guesswork, and so rises no higher than being Clumsily Right.

Among those who have earned the highest honours, Algernon Bray solves the problem quite correctly, but adds that there is nothing to rule out the supposition that all the ages were fractional. This would make the number of answers infinite. Let me meekly protest that I never intended my readers to devote the rest of their lives to writing out answers.

E. M. Rix points out that if fractional ages are allowed, any one of the three sons might be the one coming of age; but she rightly rejects this on the ground that it would make the problem indeterminate.

White Sugar is the only one to have detected an oversight of mine. I had forgotten the possibility — which of course ought to be allowed for — that the son who came of age that year need not have done so by that day, so that he might be only 20. This gives a second solution: 20, 24, 28. Well said, pure Crystal! Verily, thy fair discourse hath been as sugar.

Class List

	I.
	Algernon Bray.
	An Old Fogey.
	E. M. Rix.
	G. S. C.
	S. S. G.
	Tokio.
	T. R.
	White Sugar.

	II.
	C. R.
	Delta.
	Magpie.
	Simple Susan.

	III.
	Dinah Mite.
	M. F. C.

I have received more than one remonstrance about my assertion, in the Chelsea Pensioners problem, that it was illogical to conclude from the datum "70 per cent have lost an eye" that 30 per cent have not. Algernon Bray offers as a parallel case: "suppose Tommy's father gives him 4 apples and he eats one of them — how many has he left?", and says "I think we are justified in answering, 3." I think so too. There is no "must" there, and the data are evidently meant to fix the answer exactly. But if the question set me were "how many must he have left?", I should understand the data to mean that his father gave him 4 at least, and may have given him more.

I take this opportunity of thanking those who have sent, along with their answers to the Tenth Knot, either regrets that there are no more Knots to come or petitions that I should go back on my decision to bring them to an end. I am most grateful for their kind words; but I think it wisest to end what was at best a lame attempt. "The stretched metre of an antique song" is beyond my compass, and my puppets were neither distinctly in my life, like those I now address, nor yet distinctly out of it, like Alice and the Mock Turtle.

Yet let me at least imagine, as I lay down the pen, that I carry with me into my silent life, dear reader, a farewell smile from your unseen face, and a kindly farewell pressure from your unfelt hand. And so, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow that I shall say "good night" till it be morrow.

THE END
