Proposition 18

God is the indwelling and not the transient cause of all things.

Proof. All things which are, are in God, and must be conceived through God (by Proposition 15 of this Part), therefore (by Proposition 16 of this Part, Corollary 1) God is the cause of those things which are in him. This is our first point.  Further, besides God there can be no substance (by Proposition 14 of this Part), that is nothing in itself external to God.  This is our second point.  God, therefore, is the indwelling and not the transient cause of all things.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 19

God, and all the attributes of God, are eternal.

Proof. God (by Definition 6 of this Part) is substance, which (by Proposition 11 of this Part) necessarily exists, that is (by Proposition 7 of this Part) existence appertains to its nature, or (what is the same thing) follows from its definition; therefore, God is eternal (by Definition 8 of this Part).  Further, by the attributes of God we must understand that which (by Definition 4 of this Part) expresses the essence of the divine substance—in other words, that which appertains to substance: that, I say, should be involved in the attributes of substance.  Now eternity appertains to the nature of substance (as I have already shown in Proposition 7 of this Part); therefore, eternity must appertain to each of the attributes, and thus all are eternal.  Q.E.D.

Note. This proposition is also evident from the manner in which (in Proposition 11 of this Part) I demonstrated the existence of God; it is evident, I repeat, from that proof, that the existence of God, like his essence, is an eternal truth.  Further (in Proposition 19 of my Principles of the Cartesian Philosophy), I have proved the eternity of God, in another manner, which I need not here repeat.

Proposition 20

The existence of God and his essence are one and the same.

Proof. God (by Proposition 19 of this Part) and all his attributes are eternal, that is (by Definition 8 of this Part) each of his attributes expresses existence.  Therefore the same attributes of God which explain his eternal essence, explain at the same time his eternal existence—in other words, that which constitutes God's essence constitutes at the same time his existence.  Wherefore God's existence and God's essence are one and the same.  Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. Hence it follows that God's existence, like his essence, is an eternal truth.

Corollary 2. Secondly, it follows that God, and all the attributes of God, are unchangeable.  For if they could be changed in respect to existence, they must also be able to be changed in respect to essence—that is, obviously, be changed from true to false, which is absurd.

Proposition 21

All things which follow from the absolute nature of any attribute of God must always exist and be infinite, or, in other words, are eternal and infinite through the said attribute.

Proof. Conceive, if it be possible (supposing the proposition to be denied), that something in some attribute of God can follow from the absolute nature of the said attribute, and that at the same time it is finite, and has a conditioned existence or duration; for instance, the idea of God expressed in the attribute thought.  Now thought, in so far as it is supposed to be an attribute of God, is necessarily (by Proposition 11 of this Part) in its nature infinite. But, in so far as it possesses the idea of God, it is supposed finite.  It cannot, however, be conceived as finite, unless it be limited by thought (by Definition 2 of this Part); but it is not limited by thought itself, in so far as it has constituted the idea of God (for so far it is supposed to be finite); therefore, it is limited by thought, in so far as it has not constituted the idea of God, which nevertheless (by Proposition 11 of this Part) must necessarily exist.

We have now granted, therefore, thought not constituting the idea of God, and, accordingly, the idea of God does not naturally follow from its nature in so far as it is absolute thought (for it is conceived as constituting, and also as not constituting, the idea of God), which is against our hypothesis.  Wherefore, if the idea of God expressed in the attribute thought, or, indeed, anything else in any attribute of God (for we may take any example, as the proof is of universal application) follows from the necessity of the absolute nature of the said attribute, the said thing must necessarily be infinite, which was our first point.

Furthermore, a thing which thus follows from the necessity of the nature of any attribute cannot have a limited duration.  For if it can, suppose a thing, which follows from the necessity of the nature of some attribute, to exist in some attribute of God, for instance, the idea of God expressed in the attribute thought, and let it be supposed at some time not to have existed, or to be about not to exist.

Now thought being an attribute of God, must necessarily exist unchanged (by Proposition 11 of this Part; Proposition 20 of this Part, Corollary 2); and beyond the limits of the duration of the idea of God (supposing the latter at some time not to have existed, or not to be going to exist) thought would perforce have existed without the idea of God, which is contrary to our hypothesis, for we supposed that, thought being given, the idea of God necessarily flowed therefrom.  Therefore the idea of God expressed in thought, or anything which necessarily follows from the absolute nature of some attribute of God, cannot have a limited duration, but through the said attribute is eternal, which is our second point. Bear in mind that the same proposition may be affirmed of anything, which in any attribute necessarily follows from God's absolute nature.

Proposition 22

Whatsoever follows from any attribute of God, in so far as it is modified by a modification, which exists necessarily and as infinite, through the said attribute, must also exist necessarily and as infinite.

Proof. The proof of this proposition is similar to that of the preceding one.

Proposition 23

Every mode, which exists both necessarily and as infinite, must necessarily follow either from the absolute nature of some attribute of God, or from an attribute modified by a modification which exists necessarily, and as infinite.

Proof. A mode exists in something else, through which it must be conceived (Definition 5 of this Part), that is (Proposition 15 of this Part), it exists solely in God, and solely through God can be conceived. If therefore a mode is conceived as necessarily existing and infinite, it must necessarily be inferred or perceived through some attribute of God, in so far as such attribute is conceived as expressing the infinity and necessity of existence, in other words (Definition 8 of this Part) eternity; that is, in so far as it is considered absolutely.  A mode, therefore, which necessarily exists as infinite, must follow from the absolute nature of some attribute of God, either immediately (Proposition 21 of this Part) or through the means of some modification, which follows from the absolute nature of the said attribute; that is (by Proposition 22 of this Part), which exists necessarily and as infinite.

Proposition 24

The essence of things produced by God does not involve existence.

Proof. This proposition is evident from Definition 1 of this Part  For that of which the nature (considered in itself) involves existence is self-caused, and exists by the sole necessity of its own nature.

Corollary. Hence it follows that God is not only the cause of things coming into existence, but also of their continuing in existence, that is, in scholastic phraseology, God is cause of the being of things (essendi rerum).  For whether things exist, or do not exist, whenever we contemplate their essence, we see that it involves neither existence nor duration; consequently, it cannot be the cause of either the one or the other.  God must be the sole cause, inasmuch as to him alone does existence appertain.  (Proposition 14 of this Part, Corollary 1) Q.E.D.

Proposition 25

God is the efficient cause not only of the existence of things, but also of their essence.

Proof. If this be denied, then God is not the cause of the essence of things; and therefore the essence of things can (by Axiom 4 of this Part) be conceived without God.  This (by Proposition 15 of this Part) is absurd.  Therefore, God is the cause of the essence of things. Q.E.D.

Note. This proposition follows more clearly from Proposition 16 of this Part For it is evident thereby that, given the divine nature, the essence of things must be inferred from it, no less than their existence—in a word, God must be called the cause of all things, in the same sense as he is called the cause of himself.  This will be made still clearer by the following corollary.

Corollary. Individual things are nothing but modifications of the attributes of God, or modes by which the attributes of God are expressed in a fixed and definite manner.  The proof appears from Proposition 15 of this Part and Definition 5 of this Part

Proposition 26

A thing which is conditioned to act in a particular manner, has necessarily been thus conditioned by God; and that which has not been conditioned by God cannot condition itself to act.

Proof. That by which things are said to be conditioned to act in a particular manner is necessarily something positive (this is obvious); therefore both of its essence and of its existence God by the necessity of his nature is the efficient cause (Proposition 25 of this Part; Proposition 16 of this Part); this is our first point.  Our second point is plainly to be inferred therefrom.  For if a thing, which has not been conditioned by God, could condition itself, the first part of our proof would be false, and this, as we have shown is absurd.

Proposition 27

A thing, which has been conditioned by God to act in a particular way, cannot render itself unconditioned.

Proof. This proposition is evident from the third axiom.

Proposition 28

Every individual thing, or everything which is finite and has a conditioned existence, cannot exist or be conditioned to act, unless it be conditioned for existence and action by a cause other than itself, which also is finite, and has a conditioned existence; and likewise this cause cannot in its turn exist, or be conditioned to act, unless it be conditioned for existence and action by another cause, which also is finite, and has a conditioned existence, and so on to infinity.

Proof. Whatsoever is conditioned to exist and act, has been thus conditioned by God (by Proposition 26 of this Part; Proposition 24 of this Part, Corollary).

But that which is finite, and has a conditioned existence, cannot be produced by the absolute nature of any attribute of God; for whatsoever follows from the absolute nature of any attribute of God is infinite and eternal (by Proposition 21 of this Part).  It must, therefore, follow from some attribute of God, in so far as the said attribute is considered as in some way modified; for substance and modes make up the sum total of existence (by Axiom 1 of this Part; Definition 3 of this Part; Definition 5 of this Part), while modes are merely modifications of the attributes of God.  But from God, or from any of his attributes, in so far as the latter is modified by a modification infinite and eternal, a conditioned thing cannot follow.  Wherefore it must follow from, or be conditioned for, existence and action by God or one of his attributes, in so far as the latter are modified by some modification which is finite, and has a conditioned existence.  This is our first point.  Again, this cause or this modification (for the reason by which we established the first part of this proof) must in its turn be conditioned by another cause, which also is finite, and has a conditioned existence, and, again, this last by another (for the same reason); and so on (for the same reason) to infinity. Q.E.D.

Note. As certain things must be produced immediately by God, namely those things which necessarily follow from his absolute nature, through the means of these primary attributes, which, nevertheless, can neither exist nor be conceived without God, it follows:—1. That God is absolutely the proximate cause of those things immediately produced by him.  I say absolutely, not after his kind, as is usually stated.  For the effects of God cannot either exist or be conceived without a cause (Proposition 15 of this Part; Proposition 24 of this Part, Corollary).  2. That God cannot properly be styled the remote cause of individual things, except for the sake of distinguishing these from what he immediately produces, or rather from what follows from his absolute nature.  For, by a remote cause, we understand a cause which is in no way conjoined to the effect. But all things which are, are in God, and so depend on God, that without him they can neither be nor be conceived.

Proposition 29

Nothing in the universe is contingent, but all things are conditioned to exist and operate in a particular manner by the necessity of the divine nature.

Proof. Whatsoever is, is in God (Proposition 15 of this Part).  But God cannot be called a thing contingent.  For (by Proposition 11 of this Part) he exists necessarily, and not contingently.  Further, the modes of the divine nature follow therefrom necessarily, and not contingently (Proposition 16 of this Part); and they thus follow, whether we consider the divine nature absolutely, or whether we consider it as in any way conditioned to act (Proposition 27 of this Part).  Further, God is not only the cause of these modes, in so far as they simply exist (by Proposition 24 of this Part, Corollary), but also in so far as they are considered as conditioned for operating in a particular manner (Proposition 26 of this Part). If they be not conditioned by God (Proposition 26 of this Part), it is impossible, and not contingent, that they should condition themselves; contrariwise, if they be conditioned by God, it is impossible, and not contingent, that they should render themselves unconditioned. Wherefore all things are conditioned by the necessity of the divine nature, not only to exist, but also to exist and operate in a particular manner, and there is nothing that is contingent.  Q.E.D.

Note. Before going any further, I wish here to explain, what we should understand by nature viewed as active (natura naturans), and nature viewed as passive (natura naturata).  I say to explain, or rather call attention to it, for I think that, from what has been said, it is sufficiently clear, that by nature viewed as active we should understand that which is in itself, and is conceived through itself, or those attributes of substance, which express eternal and infinite essence, in other words (Proposition 14 of this Part, Corollary 1; Proposition 17 of this Part, Corollary 2) God, in so far as he is considered as a free cause.

By nature viewed as passive I understand all that which follows from the necessity of the nature of God, or of any of the attributes of God, that is, all the modes of the attributes of God, in so far as they are considered as things which are in God, and which without God cannot exist or be conceived.

Proposition 30

Intellect, in function (actu) finite, or in function infinite, must comprehend the attributes of God and the modifications of God, and nothing else.

Proof. A true idea must agree with its object (Axiom 6 of this Part); in other words (obviously), that which is contained in the intellect in representation must necessarily be granted in nature.  But in nature (by Proposition 14 of this Part, Corollary 1) there is no substance save God, nor any modifications save those (Proposition 15 of this Part) which are in God, and cannot without God either be or be conceived.  Therefore the intellect, in function finite, or in function infinite, must comprehend the attributes of God and the modifications of God, and nothing else.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 31

The intellect in function, whether finite or infinite, as will, desire, love, &c., should be referred to passive nature and not to active nature.

Proof. By the intellect we do not (obviously) mean absolute thought, but only a certain mode of thinking, differing from other modes, such as love, desire, &c., and therefore (Definition 5 of this Part) requiring to be conceived through absolute thought.  It must (by Proposition 15 of this Part; Definition 6 of this Part), through some attribute of God which expresses the eternal and infinite essence of thought, be so conceived, that without such attribute it could neither be nor be conceived.  It must therefore be referred to nature passive rather than to nature active, as must also the other modes of thinking.  Q.E.D.

Note. I do not here, by speaking of intellect in function, admit that there is such a thing as intellect in potentiality: but, wishing to avoid all confusion, I desire to speak only of what is most clearly perceived by us, namely, of the very act of understanding, than which nothing is more clearly perceived.  For we cannot perceive anything without adding to our knowledge of the act of understanding.

Proposition 32

Will cannot be called a free cause, but only a necessary cause.

Proof. Will is only a particular mode of thinking, like intellect; therefore (by Proposition 28 of this Part) no volition can exist, nor be conditioned to act, unless it be conditioned by some cause other than itself, which cause is conditioned by a third cause, and so on to infinity.  But if will be supposed infinite, it must also be conditioned to exist and act by God, not by virtue of his being substance absolutely infinite, but by virtue of his possessing an attribute which expresses the infinite and eternal essence of thought (by Proposition 23 of this Part).  Thus, however it be conceived, whether as finite or infinite, it requires a cause by which it should be conditioned to exist and act.  Thus (Definition 7 of this Part) it cannot be called a free cause, but only a necessary or constrained cause.  Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. Hence it follows, first, that God does not act according to freedom of the will.

Corollary 2. It follows, secondly, that will and intellect stand in the same relation to the nature of God as do motion, and rest, and absolutely all natural phenomena, which must be conditioned by God (Proposition 29 of this Part) to exist and act in a particular manner.  For will, like the rest, stands in need of a cause, by which it is conditioned to exist and act in a particular manner. And although, when will or intellect be granted, an infinite number of results may follow, yet God cannot on that account be said to act from freedom of the will, any more than the infinite number of results from motion and rest would justify us in saying that motion and rest act by free will.  Wherefore will no more appertains to God than does anything else in nature, but stands in the same relation to him as motion, rest, and the like, which we have shown to follow from the necessity of the divine nature, and to be conditioned by it to exist and act in a particular manner.

Proposition 33

Things could not have been brought into being by God in any manner or in any order different from that which has in fact obtained.

Proof. All things necessarily follow from the nature of God (Proposition 16 of this Part), and by the nature of God are conditioned to exist and act in a particular way (Proposition 29 of this Part).  If things, therefore, could have been of a different nature, or have been conditioned to act in a different way, so that the order of nature would have been different, God's nature would also have been able to be different from what it now is; and therefore (by Proposition 11 of this Part) that different nature also would have perforce existed, and consequently there would have been able to be two or more Gods. This (by Proposition 14 of this Part, Corollary 1) is absurd.  Therefore things could not have been brought into being by God in any other manner, &c.  Q.E.D.

Note 1. As I have thus shown, more clearly than the sun at noonday, that there is nothing to justify us in calling things contingent, I wish to explain briefly what meaning we shall attach to the word contingent; but I will first explain the words necessary and impossible.

A thing is called necessary either in respect to its essence or in respect to its cause; for the existence of a thing necessarily follows, either from its essence and definition, or from a given efficient cause.  For similar reasons a thing is said to be impossible; namely, inasmuch as its essence or definition involves a contradiction, or because no external cause is granted, which is conditioned to produce such an effect; but a thing can in no respect be called contingent, save in relation to the imperfection of our knowledge.

A thing of which we do not know whether the essence does or does not involve a contradiction, or of which, knowing that it does not involve a contradiction, we are still in doubt concerning the existence, because the order of causes escapes us,—such a thing, I say, cannot appear to us either necessary or impossible.  Wherefore we call it contingent or possible.

Note 2. It clearly follows from what we have said, that things have been brought into being by God in the highest perfection, inasmuch as they have necessarily followed from a most perfect nature.  Nor does this prove any imperfection in God, for it has compelled us to affirm his perfection.  From its contrary proposition, we should clearly gather (as I have just shown), that God is not supremely perfect, for if things had been brought into being in any other way, we should have to assign to God a nature different from that, which we are bound to attribute to him from the consideration of an absolutely perfect being.

I do not doubt, that many will scout this idea as absurd, and will refuse to give their minds up to contemplating it, simply because they are accustomed to assign to God a freedom very different from that which we (Definition 7 of this Part) have deduced.  They assign to him, in short, absolute free will.  However, I am also convinced that if such persons reflect on the matter, and duly weigh in their minds our series of propositions, they will reject such freedom as they now attribute to God, not only as nugatory, but also as a great impediment to organized knowledge.  There is no need for me to repeat what I have said in the note to Proposition 17 of this Part  But, for the sake of my opponents, I will show further, that although it be granted that will pertains to the essence of God, it nevertheless follows from his perfection, that things could not have been by him created other than they are, or in a different order; this is easily proved, if we reflect on what our opponents themselves concede, namely, that it depends solely on the decree and will of God, that each thing is what it is.  If it were otherwise, God would not be the cause of all things. Further, that all the decrees of God have been ratified from all eternity by God himself.  If it were otherwise, God would be convicted of imperfection or change.  But in eternity there is no such thing as when, before, or after; hence it follows solely from the perfection of God, that God never can decree, or never could have decreed anything but what is; that God did not exist before his decrees, and would not exist without them.  But, it is said, supposing that God had made a different universe, or had ordained other decrees from all eternity concerning nature and her order, we could not therefore conclude any imperfection in God.  But persons who say this must admit that God can change his decrees.  For if God had ordained any decrees concerning nature and her order, different from those which he has ordained—in other words, if he had willed and conceived something different concerning nature—he would perforce have had a different intellect from that which he has, and also a different will.  But if it were allowable to assign to God a different intellect and a different will, without any change in his essence or his perfection, what would there be to prevent him changing the decrees which he has made concerning created things, and nevertheless remaining perfect?  For his intellect and will concerning things created and their order are the same, in respect to his essence and perfection, however they be conceived.

Further, all the philosophers whom I have read admit that God's intellect is entirely actual, and not at all potential; as they also admit that God's intellect, and God's will, and God's essence are identical, it follows that, if God had had a different actual intellect and a different will, his essence would also have been different; and thus, as I concluded at first, if things had been brought into being by God in a different way from that which has obtained, God's intellect and will, that is (as is admitted) his essence would perforce have been different, which is absurd.

As these things could not have been brought into being by God in any but the actual way and order which has obtained; and as the truth of this proposition follows from the supreme perfection of God; we can have no sound reason for persuading ourselves to believe that God did not wish to create all the things which were in his intellect, and to create them in the same perfection as he had understood them.

But, it will be said, there is in things no perfection nor imperfection; that which is in them, and which causes them to be called perfect or imperfect, good or bad, depends solely on the will of God.  If God had so willed, he might have brought it about that what is now perfection should be extreme imperfection, and vice versâ.  What is such an assertion, but an open declaration that God, who necessarily understands that which he wishes, might bring it about by his will, that he should understand things differently from the way in which he does understand them?  This (as we have just shown) is the height of absurdity.  Wherefore, I may turn the argument against its employers, as follows:—All things depend on the power of God. In order that things should be different from what they are, God's will would necessarily have to be different.  But God's will cannot be different (as we have just most clearly demonstrated) from God's perfection.  Therefore neither can things be different.  I confess, that the theory which subjects all things to the will of an indifferent deity, and asserts that they are all dependent on his fiat, is less far from the truth than the theory of those, who maintain that God acts in all things with a view of promoting what is good.  For these latter persons seem to set up something beyond God, which does not depend on God, but which God in acting looks to as an exemplar, or which he aims at as a definite goal.  This is only another name for subjecting God to the dominion of destiny, an utter absurdity in respect to God, whom we have shown to be the first and only free cause of the essence of all things and also of their existence.  I need, therefore, spend no time in refuting such wild theories.

Proposition 34

God's power is identical with his essence.

Proof. From the sole necessity of the essence of God it follows that God is the cause of himself (Proposition 11 of this Part) and of all things (Proposition 16 of this Part, Corollary).  Wherefore the power of God, by which he and all things are and act, is identical with his essence.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 35

Whatsoever we conceive to be in the power of God, necessarily exists.

Proof. Whatsoever is in God's power, must (by Proposition 34 of this Part) be comprehended in his essence in such a manner, that it necessarily follows therefrom, and therefore necessarily exists. Q.E.D.

Proposition 36

There is no cause from whose nature some effect does not follow.

Proof. Whatsoever exists expresses God's nature or essence in a given conditioned manner (by Proposition 25 of this Part, Corollary); that is, (by Proposition 34 of this Part), whatsoever exists, expresses in a given conditioned manner God's power, which is the cause of all things, therefore an effect must (by Proposition 16 of this Part) necessarily follow. Q.E.D.
