Proposition 14

The human mind is capable of perceiving a great number of things, and is so in proportion as its body is capable of receiving a great number of impressions.

Proof. The human body (by Postulate 3 of this Part; Postulate 6 of this Part) is affected in very many ways by external bodies, and is capable in very many ways of affecting external bodies.  But (II. xii.)  the human mind must perceive all that takes place in the human body; the human mind is, therefore, capable of perceiving a great number of things, and is so in proportion, &c.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 15

The idea, which constitutes the actual being of the human mind, is not simple, but compounded of a great number of ideas.

Proof. The idea constituting the actual being of the human mind is the idea of the body (II. xiii.), which (Postulate 1 of this Part) is composed of a great number of complex individual parts.  But there is necessarily in God the idea of each individual part whereof the body is composed (Proposition 8 of this Part, Corollary); therefore (II. vii.), the idea of the human body is composed of these numerous ideas of its component parts.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 16

The idea of every mode, in which the human body is affected by external bodies, must involve the nature of the human body, and also the nature of the external body.

Proof. All the modes, in which any given body is affected, follow from the nature of the body affected, and also from the nature of the affecting body (by Axiom 1, after the Corollary to Lemma 3), wherefore their idea also necessarily (by Part 1, Axiom 4) involves the nature of both bodies; therefore, the idea of every mode, in which the human body is affected by external bodies, involves the nature of the human body and of the external body.  Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. Hence it follows, first, that the human mind perceives the nature of a variety of bodies, together with the nature of its own.

Corollary 2. It follows, secondly, that the ideas, which we have of external bodies, indicate rather the constitution of our own body than the nature of external bodies.  I have amply illustrated this in the Appendix to Part I.

Proposition 17

If the human body is affected in a manner which involves the nature of any external body, the human mind will regard the said external body as actually existing, or as present to itself, until the human body be affected in such a way, as to exclude the existence or the presence of the said external body.

Proof. This proposition is self-evident, for so long as the human body continues to be thus affected, so long will the human mind (II. xii.) regard this modification of the body—that is (by Proposition 16 of this Part), it will have the idea of the mode as actually existing, and this idea involves the nature of the external body. In other words, it will have the idea which does not exclude, but postulates the existence or presence of the nature of the external body; therefore the mind (by Proposition 16 of this Part, Corollary 1) will regard the external body as actually existing, until it is affected, &c.  Q.E.D.

Corollary. The mind is able to regard as present external bodies, by which the human body has once been affected, even though they be no longer in existence or present.

Proof. When external bodies determine the fluid parts of the human body, so that they often impinge on the softer parts, they change the surface of the last named (Postulate 5 of this Part); hence (Axiom 2, after the Corollary to Lemma 3) they are refracted therefrom in a different manner from that which they followed before such change; and, further, when afterwards they impinge on the new surfaces by their own spontaneous movement, they will be refracted in the same manner, as though they had been impelled towards those surfaces by external bodies; consequently, they will, while they continue to be thus refracted, affect the human body in the same manner, whereof the mind (II. xii.) will again take cognizance—that is (II. xvii.), the mind will again regard the external body as present, and will do so, as often as the fluid parts of the human body impinge on the aforesaid surfaces by their own spontaneous motion.  Wherefore, although the external bodies, by which the human body has once been affected, be no longer in existence, the mind will nevertheless regard them as present, as often as this action of the body is repeated. Q.E.D.

Note. We thus see how it comes about, as is often the case, that we regard as present many things which are not.  It is possible that the same result may be brought about by other causes; but I think it suffices for me here to have indicated one possible explanation, just as well as if I had pointed out the true cause.  Indeed, I do not think I am very far from the truth, for all my assumptions are based on postulates, which rest, almost without exception, on experience, that cannot be controverted by those who have shown, as we have, that the human body, as we feel it, exists (Proposition 13 of this Part, Corollary). Furthermore (Proposition 7 of this Part, Corollary 2; Proposition 16 of this Part, Corollary 2), we clearly understand what is the difference between the idea, say, of Peter, which constitutes the essence of Peter's mind, and the idea of the said Peter, which is in another man, say, Paul.  The former directly answers to the essence of Peter's own body, and only  implies existence so long as Peter exists; the latter indicates rather the disposition of Paul's body than the nature of Peter, and, therefore, while this disposition of Paul's body lasts, Paul's mind will regard Peter as present to itself, even though he no longer exists.  Further, to retain the usual phraseology,  the modifications of the human body, of which the ideas represent external bodies as present to us, we will call the images of things, though they do not recall the figure of things.  When the mind regards bodies in this fashion, we say that it imagines.  I will here draw attention to the fact, in order to indicate where error lies, that the imaginations of the mind, looked at in themselves, do not contain error.  The mind does not err in the mere act of imagining, but only in so far as it is regarded as being without the idea, which excludes the existence of such things as it imagines to be present to it.  If the mind, while imagining non-existent things as present to it, is at the same time conscious that they do not really exist, this power of imagination must be set down to the efficacy of its nature, and not to a fault, especially if this faculty of imagination depend solely on its own nature—that is (Part 1, Definition 7), if this faculty of imagination be free.

Proposition 18

If the human body has once been affected by two or more bodies at the same time, when the mind afterwards imagines any of them, it will straightway remember the others also.

Proof. The mind (Proposition 17 of this Part, Corollary) imagines any given body, because the human body is affected and disposed by the impressions from an external body, in the same manner as it is affected when certain of its parts are acted on by the said external body; but (by our hypothesis) the body was then so disposed, that the mind imagined two bodies at once; therefore, it will also in the second case imagine two bodies at once, and the mind, when it imagines one, will straightway remember the other.  Q.E.D.

Note. We now clearly see what Memory is.  It is simply a certain association of ideas involving the nature of things outside the human body, which association arises in the mind according to the order and association of the modifications (affectiones) of the human body.  I say, first, it is an association of those ideas only, which involve the nature of things outside the human body: not of ideas which answer to the nature of the said things: ideas of the modifications of the human body are, strictly speaking (II. xvi.), those which involve the nature both of the human body and of external bodies.  I say, secondly, that this association arises according to the order and association of the modifications of the human body, in order to distinguish it from that association of ideas, which arises from the order of the intellect, whereby the mind perceives things through their primary causes, and which is in all men the same. And hence we can further clearly understand, why the mind from the thought of one thing, should straightway arrive at the thought of another thing, which has no similarity with the first; for instance, from the thought of the word pomum (an apple), a Roman would straightway arrive at the thought of the fruit apple, which has no similitude with the articulate sound in question, nor anything in common with it, except that the body of the man has often been affected by these two things; that is, that the man has often heard the word pomum, while he was looking at the fruit; similarly every man will go on from one thought to another, according as his habit has ordered the images of things in his body.  For a soldier, for instance, when he sees the tracks of a horse in sand, will at once pass from the thought of a horse to the thought of a horseman, and thence to the thought of war, &c.; while a countryman will proceed from the thought of a horse to the thought of a plough, a field, &c.  Thus every man will follow this or that train of thought, according as he has been in the habit of conjoining and associating the mental images of things in this or that manner.

Proposition 19

The human mind has no knowledge of the body, and does not know it to exist, save through the ideas of the modifications whereby the body is affected.

Proof. The human mind is the very idea or knowledge of the human body (II. xiii.), which (II. ix.) is in God, in so far as he is regarded as affected by another idea of a particular thing actually existing: or, inasmuch as (Postulate 4 of this Part) the human body stands in need of very many bodies whereby it is, as it were, continually regenerated; and the order and connection of ideas is the same as the order and connection of causes (II. vii.); this idea will therefore be in God, in so far as he is regarded as affected by the ideas of very many particular things.  Thus God has the idea of the human body, or knows the human body, in so far as he is affected by very many other ideas, and not in so far as he constitutes the nature of the human mind; that is (by Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), the human mind does not know the human body. But the ideas of the modifications of body are in God, in so far as  he constitutes the nature of the human mind, or the human mind perceives those modifications (II. xii.), and consequently (II. xvi.) the human body itself, and as actually existing; therefore the mind perceives thus far only the human body. Q.E.D.

Proposition 20

The idea or knowledge of the human mind is also in God, following in God in the same manner, and being referred to God in the same manner, as the idea or knowledge of the human body.

Proof. Thought is an attribute of God (II. i.); therefore (II. iii.) there must necessarily be in God the idea both of thought itself and of all its modifications, consequently also of the human mind (II. xi.).  Further, this idea or knowledge of the mind does not follow from God, in so far as he is infinite, but in so far as he is affected by another idea of an individual thing (II. ix.).  But (II. vii.) the order and connection of ideas is the same as the order and connection of causes; therefore this idea or knowledge of the mind is in God and is referred to God, in the same manner as the idea or knowledge of the body.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 21

This idea of the mind is united to the mind in the same way as the mind is united to the body.

Proof. That the mind is united to the body we have shown from the fact, that the body is the object of the mind (II. xii. and xiii.); and so for the same reason the idea of the mind must be united with its object, that is, with the mind in the same manner as the mind is united to the body.  Q.E.D.

Note. This proposition is comprehended much more clearly from what we have said in the note to II. vii.  We there showed that the idea of body and body, that is, mind and body (II. xiii.), are one and the same individual conceived now under the attribute of thought, now under the attribute of extension; wherefore the idea of the mind and the mind itself are one and the same thing, which is conceived under one and the same attribute, namely, thought.  The idea of the mind, I repeat, and the mind itself are in God by the same necessity and follow from him from the same power of thinking.  Strictly speaking, the idea of the mind, that is, the idea of an idea, is nothing but the distinctive quality (forma) of the idea in so far as it is conceived as a mode of thought without reference to the object; if a man knows anything, he, by that very fact, knows that he knows it, and at the same time knows that he knows that he knows it, and so on to infinity.  But I will treat of this hereafter.

Proposition 22

The human mind perceives not only the modifications of the body, but also the ideas of such modifications.

Proof. The ideas of the ideas of modifications follow in God in the same manner, and are referred to God in the same manner, as the ideas of the said modifications.  This is proved in the same way as II. xx.  But the ideas of the modifications of the body are in the human mind (II. xii.), that is, in God, in so far as he constitutes the essence of the human mind; therefore the ideas of these ideas will be in God, in so far as he has the knowledge or idea of the human mind, that is (II. xxi.), they will be in the human mind itself, which therefore perceives not only the modifications of the body, but also the ideas of such modifications.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 23

The mind does not know itself, except in so far as it perceives the ideas of the modifications of the body.

Proof. The idea or knowledge of the mind (II. xx.) follows in God in the same manner, and is referred to God in the same manner, as the idea or knowledge of the body.  But since (II. xix.) the human mind does not know the human body itself, that is (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), since the knowledge of the human body is not referred to God, in so far as he constitutes the nature of the human mind; therefore, neither is the knowledge of the mind referred to God, in so far as he constitutes the essence of the human mind; therefore (by Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), the human mind thus far has no knowledge of itself.  Further the ideas of the modifications, whereby the body is affected, involve the nature of the human body itself (II. xvi.), that is (II. xiii.), they agree with the nature of the mind; wherefore the knowledge of these ideas necessarily involves knowledge of the mind; but (by Proposition 22 of this Part) the knowledge of these ideas is in the human mind itself; wherefore the human mind thus far only has knowledge of itself.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 24

The human mind does not involve an adequate knowledge of the parts composing the human body.

Proof. The parts composing the human body do not belong to the essence of that body, except in so far as they communicate their motions to one another in a certain fixed relation (the Definition after Lemma 3), not in so far as they can be regarded as individuals without relation to the human body.  The parts of the human body are highly complex individuals  (Postulate 1 of this Part), whose parts (Lemma 4 of this Part) can be separated from the human body without in any way destroying the nature and distinctive quality of the latter, and they can communicate their motions (Axiom 1, after Lemma 3) to other bodies in another relation; therefore (II. iii.)  the idea or knowledge of each part will be in God, inasmuch (II. ix.) as he is regarded as affected by another idea of a particular thing, which particular thing is prior in the order of nature to the aforesaid part (II. vii.).  We may affirm the same thing of each part of each individual composing the human body; therefore, the knowledge of each part composing the human body is in God, in so far as he is affected by very many ideas of things, and not in so far as he has the idea of the human body only, in other words, the idea which constitutes the nature of the human mind (II. xiii); therefore (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), the human mind does not involve an adequate knowledge of the human body.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 25

The idea of each modification of the human body does not involve an adequate knowledge of the external body.

Proof. We have shown that the idea of a modification of the human body involves the nature of an external body, in so far as that external body conditions the human body in a given manner. But, in so far as the external body is an individual, which has no reference to the human body, the knowledge or idea thereof is in God (II. ix.), in so far as God is regarded as affected by the idea of a further thing, which (II. vii.) is naturally prior to the said external body.  Wherefore an adequate knowledge of the external body is not in God, in so far as he has the idea of the modification of the human body; in other words, the idea of the modification of the human body does not involve an adequate knowledge of the external body.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 26

The human mind does not perceive any external body as actually existing, except through the ideas of the modifications of its own body.

Proof. If the human body is in no way affected by a given external body, then  (II. vii.) neither is the idea of the human body, in other words, the human mind, affected in any way by the idea of the existence of the said external body, nor does it in any manner perceive its existence.  But, in so far as the human body is affected in any way by a given external body, thus far (Proposition 16 of this Part, Corollary) it perceives that external body.  Q.E.D.

Corollary. In so far as the human mind imagines an external body, it has not an adequate knowledge thereof.

Proof. When the human mind regards external bodies through the ideas of the modifications of its own body, we say that it imagines (see Proposition 17 of this Part, Note); now the mind can only imagine external bodies as actually existing.  Therefore (by II. xxv.), in so far as the mind imagines external bodies, it has not an adequate knowledge of them.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 27

The idea of each modification of the human body does not involve an adequate knowledge of the human body itself.

Proof. Every idea of a modification of the human body involves the nature of the human body, in so far as the human body is regarded as affected in a given manner (II. xvi.).  But, inasmuch as the human body is an individual which may be affected in many other ways, the idea of the said modification, &c. Q.E.D.

Proposition 28

The ideas of the modifications of the human body, in so far as they have reference only to the human mind, are not clear and distinct, but confused.

Proof. The ideas of the modifications of the human body involve the nature both of the human body and of external bodies (II. xvi.); they must involve the nature not only of the human body but also of its parts; for the modifications are modes (Postulate 3 of this Part), whereby the parts of the human body, and, consequently, the human body as a whole are affected.   But (by II. xxiv., xxv.) the adequate knowledge of external bodies, as also of the parts composing the human body, is not in God, in so far as he is regarded as affected by the human mind, but in so far as he is regarded as affected by other ideas.  These ideas of modifications, in so far as they are referred to the human mind alone, are as consequences without premisses, in other words, confused ideas.  Q.E.D.

Note. The idea which constitutes the nature of the human mind is, in the same manner, proved not to be, when considered in itself alone, clear and distinct; as also is the case with the idea of the human mind, and the ideas of the ideas of the modifications of the human body, in so far as they are referred to the mind only, as everyone may easily see.

Proposition 29

The idea of the idea of each modification of the human body does not involve an adequate knowledge of the human mind.

Proof. The idea of a modification of the human body (II. xxvii.) does not involve an adequate knowledge of the said body, in other words, does not adequately express its nature; that is (II. xiii.) it does not agree with the nature of the mind adequately; therefore (Part 1, Axiom 6) the idea of this idea does not adequately express the nature of the human mind, or does not involve an adequate knowledge thereof.

Corollary. Hence it follows that the human mind, when it perceives things after the common order of nature, has not an adequate but only a confused and fragmentary knowledge of itself, of its own body, and of external bodies.  For the mind does not know itself, except in so far as it perceives the ideas of the modifications of body (II. xxiii.).  It only perceives its own body (II. xix.) through the ideas of the modifications, and only perceives external bodies through the same means; thus, in so far as it has such ideas of modification, it has not an adequate knowledge of itself (II. xxix.), nor of its own body (II. xxvii.), nor of external bodies (II. xxv.), but only a fragmentary and confused knowledge thereof (Proposition 28 of this Part, Note).  Q.E.D.

Note. I say expressly, that the mind has not an adequate but only a confused knowledge of itself, its own body, and of external bodies, whenever it perceives things after the common order of nature; that is, whenever it is determined from without, namely, by the fortuitous play of circumstance, to regard this or that; not at such times as it is determined from within, that is, by the fact of regarding several things at once, to understand their points of agreement, difference, and contrast.  Whenever it is determined in anywise from within, it regards things clearly and distinctly, as I will show below.

Proposition 30

We can only have a very inadequate knowledge of the duration of our body.

Proof. The duration of our body does not depend on its essence (Axiom 1 of this Part), nor on the absolute nature of God (I. xxi.).  But (I. xxviii.) it is conditioned to exist and operate by causes, which in their turn are conditioned to exist and operate in a fixed and definite relation by other causes, these last again being conditioned by others, and so on to infinity. The duration of our body therefore depends on the common order of nature, or the constitution of things.  Now, however a thing may be constituted, the adequate knowledge of that thing is in God, in so far as he has the ideas of all things, and not in so far as he has the idea of the human body only.  (Proposition 9 of this Part, Corollary) Wherefore the knowledge of the duration of our body is in God very inadequate, in so far as he is only regarded as constituting the nature of the human mind; that is (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), this knowledge is very inadequate to our mind.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 31

We can only have a very inadequate knowledge of the duration of particular things external to ourselves.

Proof. Every particular thing, like the human body, must be conditioned by another particular thing to exist and operate in a fixed and definite relation; this other particular thing must likewise be conditioned by a third, and so on to infinity.  (I. xxviii.)  As we have shown in the foregoing proposition, from this common property of particular things, we have only a very inadequate knowledge of the duration of our body; we must draw a similar conclusion with regard to the duration of particular things, namely, that we can only have a very inadequate knowledge of the duration thereof.  Q.E.D.

Corollary. Hence it follows that all particular things are contingent and perishable.  For we can have no adequate idea of their duration (by Proposition 31 of this Part), and this is what we must understand by the contingency and perishableness of things.  (Part 1, Proposition 33, Note 1)  For (I. xxix.), except in this sense, nothing is contingent.

Proposition 32

All ideas, in so far as they are referred to God, are true.

Proof. All ideas which are in God agree in every respect with their objects (Proposition 7 of this Part, Corollary), therefore (Part 1, Axiom 6) they are all true.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 33

There is nothing positive in ideas, which causes them to be called false.

Proof. If this be denied, conceive, if possible, a positive mode of thinking, which should constitute the distinctive quality of falsehood.  Such a mode of thinking cannot be in God (II. xxxii.); external to God it cannot be or be conceived (I. xv.). Therefore there is nothing positive in ideas which causes them to be called false.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 34

Every idea, which in us is absolute or adequate and perfect, is true.

Proof. When we say that an idea in us is adequate and perfect, we say, in other words (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), that the idea is adequate and perfect in God, in so far as he constitutes the essence of our mind; consequently (II. xxxii.), we say that such an idea is true.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 35

Falsity consists in the privation of knowledge, which inadequate, fragmentary, or confused ideas involve.

Proof. There is nothing positive in ideas, which causes them to be called false (II. xxxiii.); but falsity cannot consist in simple privation (for minds, not bodies, are said to err and to be mistaken), neither can it consist in absolute ignorance, for ignorance and error are not identical; wherefore it consists in the privation of knowledge, which inadequate, fragmentary, or confused ideas involve.  Q.E.D.

Note. In the note to II. xvii. I explained how error consists in the privation of knowledge, but in order to throw more light on the subject I will give an example.  For instance, men are mistaken in thinking themselves free; their opinion is made up of consciousness of their own actions, and ignorance of the causes by which they are conditioned.  Their idea of freedom, therefore, is simply their ignorance of any cause for their actions.  As for their saying that human actions depend on the will, this is a mere phrase without any idea to correspond thereto.  What the will is, and how it moves the body, they none of them know; those who boast of such knowledge, and feign dwellings and habitations for the soul, are wont to provoke either laughter or disgust.  So, again, when we look at the sun, we imagine that it is distant from us about two hundred feet; this error does not lie solely in this fancy, but in the fact that, while we thus imagine, we do not know the sun's true distance or the cause of the fancy.  For although we afterwards learn, that the sun is distant from us more than six hundred of the earth's diameters, we none the less shall fancy it to be near; for we do not imagine the sun as near us, because we are ignorant of its true distance, but because the modification of our body involves the essence of the sun, in so far as our said body is affected thereby.

Proposition 36

Inadequate and confused ideas follow by the same necessity, as adequate or clear and distinct ideas.

Proof. All ideas are in God (I. xv.), and in so far as they are referred to God are true (II. xxxii.) and (Proposition 7 of this Part, Corollary) adequate; therefore there are no ideas confused or inadequate, except in respect to a particular mind (cf. II. xxiv. and xxviii.); therefore all ideas, whether adequate or inadequate, follow by the same necessity (II. vi.).  Q.E.D.

Proposition 37

That which is common to all (cf. Lemma 2 of this Part), and which is equally in a part and in the whole, does not constitute the essence of any particular thing.

Proof. If this be denied, conceive, if possible, that it constitutes the essence of some particular thing; for instance, the essence of B.  Then (Definition 2 of this Part) it cannot without B either exist or be conceived; but this is against our hypothesis. Therefore it does not appertain to B's essence, nor does it constitute the essence of any particular thing.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 38

Those things, which are common to all, and which are equally in a part and in the whole, cannot be conceived except adequately.

Proof. Let A be something, which is common to all bodies, and which is equally present in the part of any given body and in the whole.  I say A cannot be conceived except adequately.  For the idea thereof in God will necessarily be adequate (Proposition 7 of this Part, Corollary), both in so far as God has the idea of the human body, and also in so far as he has the idea of the modifications of the human body, which (II. xvi., xxv., xxvii.) involve in part the nature of the human body and the nature of external bodies; that is (II. xii., xiii.), the idea in God will necessarily be adequate, both in so far as he constitutes the human mind, and in so far as he has the ideas, which are in the human mind. Therefore the mind (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary) necessarily perceives A adequately, and has this adequate perception, both in so far as it perceives itself, and in so far as it perceives its own or any external body, nor can A be conceived in any other manner. Q.E.D.

Corollary. Hence it follows that there are certain ideas or notions common to all men; for (by Lemma 2 of this Part) all bodies agree in certain respects, which (by Proposition 38 of this Part) must be adequately or clearly and distinctly perceived by all.

Proposition 39

That, which is common to and a property of the human body and such other bodies as are wont to affect the human body, and which is present equally in each part of either, or in the whole, will be represented by an adequate idea in the mind.

Proof. If A be that, which is common to and a property of the human body and external bodies, and equally present in the human body and in the said external bodies, in each part of each external body and in the whole, there will be an adequate idea of A in God (Proposition 7 of this Part, Corollary), both in so far as he has the idea of the human body, and in so far as he has the ideas of the given external bodies.  Let it now be granted, that the human body is affected by an external body through that, which it has in common therewith, namely, A; the idea of this modification will involve the property A (II. xvi.), and therefore (Proposition 7 of this Part, Corollary) the idea of this modification, in so far as it involves the property A, will be adequate in God, in so far as God is affected by the idea of the human body; that is (II. xiii.), in so far as he constitutes the nature of the human mind; therefore (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary) this idea is also adequate in the human mind.  Q.E.D.

Corollary. Hence it follows that the mind is fitted to perceive adequately more things, in proportion as its body has more in common with other bodies.

Proposition 40

Whatsoever ideas in the mind follow from ideas which are therein adequate, are also themselves adequate.

Proof. This proposition is self-evident.  For when we say that an idea in the human mind follows from ideas which are therein adequate, we say, in other words (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), that an idea is in the divine intellect, whereof God is the cause, not in so far as he is infinite, nor in so far as he is affected by the ideas of very many particular things, but only in so far as he constitutes the essence of the human mind.

Note 1. I have thus set forth the cause of those notions, which are common to all men, and which form the basis of our ratiocination.  But there are other causes of certain axioms or notions, which it would be to the purpose to set forth by this method of ours; for it would thus appear what notions are more useful than others, and what notions have scarcely any use at all.  Furthermore, we should see what notions are common to all men, and what notions are only clear and distinct to those who are unshackled by prejudice, and we should detect those which are ill-founded.  Again we should discern whence the notions called secondary derived their origin, and consequently the axioms on which they are founded, and other points of interest connected with these questions.  But I have decided to pass over the subject here, partly because I have set it aside for another treatise, partly because I am afraid of wearying the reader by too great prolixity.  Nevertheless, in order not to omit anything necessary to be known, I will briefly set down the causes, whence are derived the terms styled transcendental, such as Being, Thing, Something.  These terms arose from the fact, that the human body, being limited, is only capable of distinctly forming a certain number of images (Proposition 17 of this Part, Note) within itself at the same time; if this number be exceeded, the images will begin to be confused; if this number of images, of which the body is capable of forming distinctly within itself, be largely exceeded, all will become entirely confused one with another.  This being so, it is evident (from Proposition 17 of this Part, Corollary 18) that the human mind can distinctly imagine as many things simultaneously, as its body can form images simultaneously.  When the images become quite confused in the body, the mind also imagines all bodies confusedly without any distinction, and will comprehend them, as it were, under one attribute, namely, under the attribute of Being, Thing, &c.  The same conclusion can be drawn from the fact that images are not always equally vivid, and from other analogous causes, which there is no need to explain here; for the purpose which we have in view it is sufficient for us to consider one only.  All may be reduced to this, that these terms represent ideas in the highest degree confused.  From similar causes arise those notions, which we call general, such as man, horse, dog, &c.  They arise, to wit, from the fact that so many images, for instance, of men, are formed simultaneously in the human mind, that the powers of imagination break down, not indeed utterly, but to the extent of the mind losing count of small differences between individuals (e.g. colour, size, &c.) and their definite number, and only distinctly imagining that, in which all the individuals, in so far as the body is affected by them, agree; for that is the point, in which each of the said individuals chiefly affected the body; this the mind expresses by the name man, and this it predicates of an infinite number of particular individuals.  For, as we have said, it is unable to imagine the definite number of individuals.  We must, however, bear in mind, that these general notions are not formed by all men in the same way, but vary in each individual according as the point varies, whereby the body has been most often affected and which the mind most easily imagines or remembers.  For instance, those who have most often regarded with admiration the stature of man, will by the name of man understand an animal of erect stature; those who have been accustomed to regard some other attribute, will form a different general image of man, for instance, that man is a laughing animal, a two—footed animal without feathers, a rational animal, and thus, in other cases, everyone will form general images of things according to the habit of his body.

It is thus not to be wondered at, that among philosophers, who seek to explain things in nature merely by the images formed of them, so many controversies should have arisen.

Note 2. From all that has been said above it is clear, that we, in many cases, perceive and form our general notions:—(1.) From particular things represented to our intellect fragmentarily, confusedly, and without order through our senses (Proposition 29 of this Part, Corollary); I have settled to call such perceptions by the name of knowledge from the mere suggestions of experience.

Footnote: A Baconian phrase. Nov. Org. Aph. 100. [Pollock, p. 126, n.]

 A Baconian phrase.  Nov. Org. Aph. 100.  [Pollock, p. 126, n.]

(2.) From symbols, e.g., from the fact of having read or heard certain words we remember things and form certain ideas concerning them, similar to those through which we imagine things (Proposition 18 of this Part, Note).  I shall call both these ways of regarding things knowledge of the first kind, opinion, or imagination. (3.) From the fact that we have notions common to all men, and adequate ideas of the properties of things (Proposition 38 of this Part, Corollary 39, Corollary 40); this I call reason and knowledge of the second kind.  Besides these two kinds of knowledge, there is, as I will hereafter show, a third kind of knowledge, which we will call intuition.  This kind of knowledge proceeds from an adequate idea of the absolute essence of certain attributes of God to the adequate knowledge of the essence of things.  I will illustrate all three kinds of knowledge by a single example. Three numbers are given for finding a fourth, which shall be to the third as the second is to the first.  Tradesmen without hesitation multiply the second by the third, and divide the product by the first; either because they have not forgotten the rule which they received from a master without any proof, or because they have often made trial of it with simple numbers, or by virtue of the proof of the nineteenth proposition of the seventh book of Euclid, namely, in virtue of the general property of proportionals.

But with very simple numbers there is no need of this.  For instance, one, two, three, being given, everyone can see that the fourth proportional is six; and this is much clearer, because we infer the fourth number from an intuitive grasping of the ratio, which the first bears to the second.
