Proposition 41

Knowledge of the first kind is the only source of falsity, knowledge of the second and third kinds is necessarily true.

Proof. To knowledge of the first kind we have (in Proposition 40 of this Part, Note 2) assigned all those ideas, which are inadequate and confused; therefore this kind of knowledge is the only source of falsity (Proposition 35 of this Part).  Furthermore, we assigned to the second and third kinds of knowledge those ideas which are adequate; therefore these kinds are necessarily true (Proposition 34 of this Part).  Q.E.D.

Proposition 42

Knowledge of the second and third kinds, not knowledge of the first kind, teaches us to distinguish the true from the false.

Proof. This proposition is self-evident.  He, who knows how to distinguish between true and false, must have an adequate idea of true and false.  That is (Proposition 40 of this Part, Note 2), he must know the true and the false by the second or third kind of knowledge.

Proposition 43

He, who has a true idea, simultaneously knows that he has a true idea, and cannot doubt of the truth of the thing perceived.

Proof. A true idea in us is an idea which is adequate in God, in so far as he is displayed through the nature of the human mind (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary).  Let us suppose that there is in God, in so far as he is displayed through the human mind, an adequate idea, A.  The idea of this idea must also necessarily be in God, and be referred to him in the same way as the idea A (by II. xx., whereof the proof is of universal application).  But the idea A is supposed to be referred to God, in so far as he is displayed through the human mind; therefore, the idea of the idea A must be referred to God in the same manner; that is (by Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary), the adequate idea of the idea A will be in the mind, which has the adequate idea A; therefore he, who has an adequate idea or knows a thing truly (Proposition 34 of this Part), must at the same time have an adequate idea or true knowledge of his knowledge; that is, obviously, he must be assured.  Q.E.D.

Note. I explained in the note to II. xxi. what is meant by the idea of an idea; but we may remark that the foregoing proposition is in itself sufficiently plain.  No one, who has a true idea, is ignorant that a true idea involves the highest certainty.  For to have a true idea is only another expression for knowing a thing perfectly, or as well as possible.  No one, indeed, can doubt of this, unless he thinks that an idea is something lifeless, like a picture on a panel, and not a mode of thinking—namely, the very act of understanding.  And who, I ask, can know that he understands anything, unless he do first understand it?  In other words, who can know that he is sure of a thing, unless he be first sure of that thing?  Further, what can there be more clear, and more certain, than a true idea as a standard of truth?  Even as light displays both itself and darkness, so is truth a standard both of itself and of falsity.

I think I have thus sufficiently answered these questions—namely, if a true idea is distinguished from a false idea, only in so far as it is said to agree with its object, a true idea has no more reality or perfection than a false idea (since the two are only distinguished by an extrinsic mark); consequently, neither will a man who has a true idea have any advantage over him who has only false ideas.  Further, how comes it that men have false ideas?  Lastly, how can anyone be sure, that he has ideas which agree with their objects?  These questions, I repeat, I have, in my opinion, sufficiently answered.  The difference between a true idea and a false idea is plain: from what was said in II. xxxv., the former is related to the latter as being is to not-being.  The causes of falsity I have set forth very clearly in II. xix. and II. xxxv. with the note.  From what is there stated, the difference between a man who has true ideas, and a man who has only false ideas, is made apparent.  As for the last question—as to how a man can be sure that he has ideas that agree with their objects, I have just pointed out, with abundant clearness, that his knowledge arises from the simple fact, that he has an idea which corresponds with its object—in other words, that truth is its own standard.  We may add that our mind, in so far as it perceives things truly, is part of the infinite intellect of God (Proposition 11 of this Part, Corollary); therefore, the clear and distinct ideas of the mind are as necessarily true as the ideas of God.

Proposition 44

It is not in the nature of reason to regard things as contingent, but as necessary.

Proof. It is in the nature of reason to perceive things truly (Proposition 41 of this Part), namely (Part 1, Axiom 6), as they are in themselves—that is (Part 1, Proposition 29), not as contingent, but as necessary.  Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. Hence it follows, that it is only through our imagination that we consider things, whether in respect to the future or the past, as contingent.

Note. How this way of looking at things arises, I will briefly explain.  We have shown above (Proposition 17 of this Part, Corollary) that the mind always regards things as present to itself, even though they be not in existence, until some causes arise which exclude their existence and presence.  Further (Proposition 18 of this Part), we showed that, if the human body has once been affected by two external bodies simultaneously, the mind, when it afterwards imagines one of the said external bodies, will straightway remember the other—that is, it will regard both as present to itself, unless there arise causes which exclude their existence and presence.  Further, no one doubts that we imagine time, from the fact that we imagine bodies to be moved some more slowly than others, some more quickly, some at equal speed.  Thus, let us suppose that a child yesterday saw Peter for the first time in the morning, Paul at noon, and Simon in the evening; then, that today he again sees Peter in the morning.  It is evident, from II. Prop. xviii., that, as soon as he sees the morning light, he will imagine that the sun will traverse the same parts of the sky, as it did when he saw it on the preceding day; in other words, he will imagine a complete day, and, together with his imagination of the morning, he will imagine Peter; with noon, he will imagine Paul; and with evening, he will imagine Simon—that is, he will imagine the existence of Paul and Simon in relation to a future time; on the other hand, if he sees Simon in the evening, he will refer Peter and Paul to a past time, by imagining them simultaneously with the imagination of a past time.  If it should at any time happen, that on some other evening the child should see James instead of Simon, he will, on the following morning, associate with his imagination of evening sometimes Simon, sometimes James, not both together: for the child is supposed to have seen, at evening, one or other of them, not both together.  His imagination will therefore waver; and, with the imagination of future evenings, he will associate first one, then the other—that is, he will imagine them in the future, neither of them as certain, but both as contingent.  This wavering of the imagination will be the same, if the imagination be concerned with things which we thus contemplate, standing in relation to time past or time present: consequently, we may imagine things as contingent, whether they be referred to time present, past, or future.

Corollary 2. It is in the nature of reason to perceive things under a certain form of eternity (sub quâdam æternitatis specie).

Proof. It is in the nature of reason to regard things, not as contingent, but as necessary (Proposition 44 of this Part).  Reason perceives this necessity of things (Proposition 41 of this Part) truly—that is (Part 1, Axiom 6), as it is in itself.  But (Part 1, Proposition 16) this necessity of things is the very necessity of the eternal nature of God; therefore, it is in the nature of reason to regard things under this form of eternity. We may add that the bases of reason are the notions (Proposition 38 of this Part), which answer to things common to all, and which (Proposition 37 of this Part) do not answer to the essence of any particular thing: which must therefore be conceived without any relation to time, under a certain form of eternity.

Proposition 45

Every idea of every body, or of every particular thing actually existing, necessarily involves the eternal and infinite essence of God.

Proof. The idea of a particular thing actually existing necessarily involves both the existence and the essence of the said thing (Proposition 8 of this Part).  Now particular things cannot be conceived without God (Part 1, Proposition 15); but, inasmuch as (Proposition 6 of this Part) they have God for their cause, in so far as he is regarded under the attribute of which the things in question are modes, their ideas must necessarily involve (Part 1, Axiom 4) the conception of the attributes of those ideas—that is (Part 1, Proposition 6), the eternal and infinite essence of God.  Q.E.D.

Note. By existence I do not here mean duration—that is, existence in so far as it is conceived abstractedly, and as a certain form of quantity.  I am speaking of the very nature of existence, which is assigned to particular things, because they follow in infinite numbers and in infinite ways from the eternal necessity of God's nature (Part 1, Proposition 16).  I am speaking, I repeat, of the very existence of particular things, in so far as they are in God.  For although each particular thing be conditioned by another particular thing to exist in a given way, yet the force whereby each particular thing perseveres in existing follows from the eternal necessity of God's nature (cf. Part 1, Proposition 24, Corollary).

Proposition 46

The knowledge of the eternal and infinite essence of God which every idea involves is adequate and perfect.

Proof. The proof of the last proposition is universal; and whether a thing be considered as a part or a whole, the idea thereof, whether of the whole or of a part (by Proposition 45 of this Part), will involve God's eternal and infinite essence.  Wherefore, that, which gives knowledge of the eternal and infinite essence of God, is common to all, and is equally in the part and in the whole; therefore (Proposition 38 of this Part) this knowledge will be adequate. Q.E.D.

Proposition 47

The human mind has an adequate knowledge of the eternal and infinite essence of God.

Proof. The human mind has ideas (Proposition 22 of this Part), from which (Proposition 23 of this Part) it perceives itself and its own body (Proposition 19 of this Part) and external bodies (Proposition 16 of this Part, Corollary 1; Proposition 17 of this Part) as actually existing; therefore (Proposition 45 of this Part; Proposition 46 of this Part) it has an adequate knowledge of the eternal and infinite essence of God.  Q.E.D.

Note. Hence we see, that the infinite essence and the eternity of God are known to all.  Now as all things are in God, and are conceived through God, we can from this knowledge infer many things, which we may adequately know, and we may form that third kind of knowledge of which we spoke in the note to II. xl., and of the excellence and use of which we shall have occasion to speak in Part V.  Men have not so clear a knowledge of God as they have of general notions, because they are unable to imagine God as they do bodies, and also because they have associated the name God with images of things that they are in the habit of seeing, as indeed they can hardly avoid doing, being, as they are, men, and continually affected by external bodies.  Many errors, in truth, can be traced to this head, namely, that we do not apply names to things rightly.  For instance, when a man says that the lines drawn from the centre of a circle to its circumference are not equal, he then, at all events, assuredly attaches a meaning to the word circle different from that assigned by mathematicians.  So again, when men make mistakes in calculation, they have one set of figures in their mind, and another on the paper.  If we could see into their minds, they do not make a mistake; they seem to do so, because we think, that they have the same numbers in their mind as they have on the paper.  If this were not so, we should not believe them to be in error, any more than I thought that a man was in error, whom I lately heard exclaiming that his entrance hall had flown into a neighbour's hen, for his meaning seemed to me sufficiently clear. Very many controversies have arisen from the fact, that men do not rightly explain their meaning, or do not rightly interpret the meaning of others.  For, as a matter of fact, as they flatly contradict themselves, they assume now one side, now another, of the argument, so as to oppose the opinions, which they consider mistaken and absurd in their opponents.

Proposition 48

In the mind there is no absolute or free will; but the mind is determined to wish this or that by a cause, which has also been determined by another cause, and this last by another cause, and so on to infinity.

Proof. The mind is a fixed and definite mode of thought (Proposition 11 of this Part), therefore it cannot be the free cause of its actions (Part 1, Proposition 17, Corollary 2); in other words, it cannot have an absolute faculty of positive or negative volition; but (by Part 1, Proposition 28) it must be determined by a cause, which has also been determined by another cause, and this last by another, &c.  Q.E.D.

Note. In the same way it is proved, that there is in the mind no absolute faculty of understanding, desiring, loving, &c. Whence it follows, that these and similar faculties are either entirely fictitious, or are merely abstract and general terms, such as we are accustomed to put together from particular things. Thus the intellect and the will stand in the same relation to this or that idea, or this or that volition, as "lapidity" to this or that stone, or as "man" to Peter and Paul.  The cause which leads men to consider themselves free has been set forth in the Appendix to Part I.  But, before I proceed further, I would here remark that, by the will to affirm and decide, I mean the faculty, not the desire.  I mean, I repeat, the faculty, whereby the mind affirms or denies what is true or false, not the desire, wherewith the mind wishes for or turns away from any given thing. After we have proved, that these faculties of ours are general notions, which cannot be distinguished from the particular instances on which they are based, we must inquire whether volitions themselves are anything besides the ideas of things. We must inquire, I say, whether there is in the mind any affirmation or negation beyond that, which the idea, in so far as it is an idea, involves.  On which subject see the following proposition, and II. Def. iii., lest the idea of pictures should suggest itself.  For by ideas I do not mean images such as are formed at the back of the eye, or in the midst of the brain, but the conceptions of thought.

Proposition 49

There is in the mind no volition or affirmation and negation, save that which an idea, inasmuch as it is an idea, involves.

Proof. There is in the mind no absolute faculty of positive or negative volition, but only particular volitions, namely, this or that affirmation, and this or that negation.  Now let us conceive a particular volition, namely, the mode of thinking whereby the mind affirms, that the three interior angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles.  This affirmation involves the conception or idea of a triangle, that is, without the idea of a triangle it cannot be conceived.  It is the same thing to say, that the concept A must involve the concept B, as it is to say, that A cannot be conceived without B.  Further, this affirmation cannot be made (Axiom 3 of this Part) without the idea of a triangle.  Therefore, this affirmation can neither be nor be conceived, without the idea of a triangle.  Again, this idea of a triangle must involve this same affirmation, namely, that its three interior angles are equal to two right angles.  Wherefore, and vice versâ, this idea of a triangle can neither be nor be conceived without this affirmation, therefore, this affirmation belongs to the essence of the idea of a triangle, and is nothing besides.  What we have said of this volition (inasmuch as we have selected it at random) may be said of any other volition, namely, that it is nothing but an idea.  Q.E.D.

Corollary. Will and understanding are one and the same.

Proof. Will and understanding are nothing beyond the individual volitions and ideas (Proposition 48 of this Part, Note).  But a particular volition and a particular idea are one and the same (by Proposition 48 of this Part); therefore, will and understanding are one and the same.  Q.E.D.

Note. We have thus removed the cause which is commonly assigned for error.  For we have shown above, that falsity consists solely in the privation of knowledge involved in ideas which are fragmentary and confused.  Wherefore, a false idea, inasmuch as it is false, does not involve certainty.  When we say, then, that a man acquiesces in what is false, and that he has no doubts on the subject, we do not say that he is certain, but only that he does not doubt, or that he acquiesces in what is false, inasmuch as there are no reasons, which should cause his imagination to waver (see Proposition 44 of this Part, Note).  Thus, although the man be assumed to acquiesce in what is false, we shall never say that he is certain.  For by certainty we mean something positive (Proposition 43 of this Part, Note), not merely the absence of doubt.

However, in order that the foregoing proposition may be fully explained, I will draw attention to a few additional points, and I will furthermore answer the objections which may be advanced against our doctrine.  Lastly, in order to remove every scruple, I have thought it worth while to point out some of the advantages, which follow therefrom.  I say "some," for they will be better appreciated from what we shall set forth in the fifth part.

I begin, then, with the first point, and warn my readers to make an accurate distinction between an idea, or conception of the mind, and the images of things which we imagine.  It is further necessary that they should distinguish between idea and words, whereby we signify things.  These three—namely, images, words, and ideas—are by many persons either entirely confused together, or not distinguished with sufficient accuracy or care, and hence people are generally in ignorance, how absolutely necessary is a knowledge of this doctrine of the will, both for philosophic purposes and for the wise ordering of life.  Those who think that ideas consist in images which are formed in us by contact with external bodies, persuade themselves that the ideas of those things, whereof we can form no mental picture, are not ideas, but only figments, which we invent by the free decree of our will; they thus regard ideas as though they were inanimate pictures on a panel, and, filled with this misconception, do not see that an idea, inasmuch as it is an idea, involves an affirmation or negation.  Again, those who confuse words with ideas, or with the affirmation which an idea involves, think that they can wish something contrary to what they feel, affirm, or deny.  This misconception will easily be laid aside by one, who reflects on the nature of knowledge, and seeing that it in no wise involves the conception of extension, will therefore clearly understand, that an idea (being a mode of thinking) does not consist in the image of anything, nor in words.  The essence of words and images is put together by bodily motions, which in no wise involve the conception of thought.

These few words on this subject will suffice: I will therefore pass on to consider the objections, which may be raised against our doctrine.  Of these, the first is advanced by those, who think that the will has a wider scope than the understanding, and that therefore it is different therefrom.  The reason for their holding the belief, that the will has wider scope than the understanding, is that they assert, that they have no need of an increase in their faculty of assent, that is of affirmation or negation, in order to assent to an infinity of things which we do not perceive, but that they have need of an increase in their faculty of understanding.  The will is thus distinguished from the intellect, the latter being finite and the former infinite. Secondly, it may be objected that experience seems to teach us especially clearly, that we are able to suspend our judgment before assenting to things which we perceive; this is confirmed by the fact that no one is said to be deceived, in so far as he perceives anything, but only in so far as he assents or dissents.

For instance, he who feigns a winged horse, does not therefore admit that a winged horse exists; that is, he is not deceived, unless he admits in addition that a winged horse does exist.  Nothing therefore seems to be taught more clearly by experience, than that the will or faculty of assent is free and different from the faculty of understanding.  Thirdly, it may be objected that one affirmation does not apparently contain more reality than another; in other words, that we do not seem to need for affirming, that what is true is true, any greater power than for affirming, that what is false is true.  We have, however, seen that one idea has more reality or perfection than another, for as objects are some more excellent than others, so also are the ideas of them some more excellent than others; this also seems to point to a difference between the understanding and the will.  Fourthly, it may be objected, if man does not act from free will, what will happen if the incentives to action are equally balanced, as in the case of Buridan's ass?  Will he perish of hunger and thirst?  If I say that he would, I shall seem to have in my thoughts an ass or the statue of a man rather than an actual man.  If I say that he would not, he would then determine his own action, and would consequently possess the faculty of going and doing whatever he liked.  Other objections might also be raised, but, as I am not bound to put in evidence everything that anyone may dream, I will only set myself to the task of refuting those I have mentioned, and that as briefly as possible.

To the first objection I answer, that I admit that the will has a wider scope than the understanding, if by the understanding be meant only clear and distinct ideas; but I deny that the will has a wider scope than the perceptions, and the faculty of forming conceptions; nor do I see why the faculty of volition should be called infinite, any more than the faculty of feeling: for, as we are able by the same faculty of volition to affirm an infinite number of things (one after the other, for we cannot affirm an infinite number simultaneously), so also can we, by the same faculty of feeling, feel or perceive (in succession) an infinite number of bodies.  If it be said that there is an infinite number of things which we cannot perceive, I answer, that we cannot attain to such things by any thinking, nor, consequently, by any faculty of volition.  But, it may still be urged, if God wished to bring it about that we should perceive them, he would be obliged to endow us with a greater faculty of perception, but not a greater faculty of volition than we have already.  This is the same as to say that, if God wished to bring it about that we should understand an infinite number of other entities, it would be necessary for him to give us a greater understanding, but not a more universal idea of entity than that which we have already, in order to grasp such infinite entities. We have shown that will is a universal entity or idea, whereby we explain all particular volitions—in other words, that which is common to all such volitions.

As, then, our opponents maintain that this idea, common or universal to all volitions, is a faculty, it is little to be wondered at that they assert, that such a faculty extends itself into the infinite, beyond the limits of the understanding: for what is universal is predicated alike of one, of many, and of an infinite number of individuals.

To the second objection I reply by denying, that we have a free power of suspending our judgment: for, when we say that anyone suspends his judgment, we merely mean that he sees, that he does not perceive the matter in question adequately. Suspension of judgment is, therefore, strictly speaking, a perception, and not free will.  In order to illustrate the point, let us suppose a boy imagining a horse, and perceive nothing else.  Inasmuch as this imagination involves the existence of the horse (Proposition 17 of this Part, Corollary), and the boy does not perceive anything which would exclude the existence of the horse, he will necessarily regard the horse as present: he will not be able to doubt of its existence, although he be not certain thereof.  We have daily experience of such a state of things in dreams; and I do not suppose that there is anyone, who would maintain that, while he is dreaming, he has the free power of suspending his judgment concerning the things in his dream, and bringing it about that he should not dream those things, which he dreams that he sees; yet it happens, notwithstanding, that even in dreams we suspend our judgment, namely, when we dream that we are dreaming.

Further, I grant that no one can be deceived, so far as actual perception extends—that is, I grant that the mind's imaginations, regarded in themselves, do not involve error (Proposition 17 of this Part, Note); but I deny, that a man does not, in the act of perception, make any affirmation.  For what is the perception of a winged horse, save affirming that a horse has wings?  If the mind could perceive nothing else but the winged horse, it would regard the same as present to itself: it would have no reasons for doubting its existence, nor any faculty of dissent, unless the imagination of a winged horse be joined to an idea which precludes the existence of the said horse, or unless the mind perceives that the idea which it possess of a winged horse is inadequate, in which case it will either necessarily deny the existence of such a horse, or will necessarily be in doubt on the subject.

I think that I have anticipated my answer to the third objection, namely, that the will is something universal which is predicated of all ideas, and that it only signifies that which is common to all ideas, namely, an affirmation, whose adequate essence must, therefore, in so far as it is thus conceived in the abstract, be in every idea, and be, in this respect alone, the same in all, not in so far as it is considered as constituting the idea's essence: for, in this respect, particular affirmations differ one from the other, as much as do ideas.  For instance, the affirmation which involves the idea of a circle, differs from that which involves the idea of a triangle, as much as the idea of a circle differs from the idea of a triangle.

Further, I absolutely deny, that we are in need of an equal power of thinking, to affirm that that which is true is true, and to affirm that that which is false is true.  These two affirmations, if we regard the mind, are in the same relation to one another as being and not-being; for there is nothing positive in ideas, which constitutes the actual reality of falsehood (Proposition 35 of this Part, Note; Proposition 47 of this Part, Note).

We must therefore conclude, that we are easily deceived, when we confuse universals with singulars, and the entities of reason and abstractions with realities.  As for the fourth objection, I am quite ready to admit, that a man placed in the equilibrium described  (namely, as perceiving nothing but hunger and thirst, a certain food and a certain drink, each equally distant from him) would die of hunger and thirst.  If I am asked, whether such an one should not rather be considered an ass than a man; I answer, that I do not know, neither do I know how a man should be considered, who hangs himself, or how we should consider children, fools, madmen, &c.

It remains to point out the advantages of a knowledge of this doctrine as bearing on conduct, and this may be easily gathered from what has been said.  The doctrine is good,

1. Inasmuch as it teaches us to act solely according to the decree of God, and to be partakers in the Divine nature, and so much the more, as we perform more perfect actions and more and more understand God.  Such a doctrine not only completely tranquilizes our spirit, but also shows us where our highest happiness or blessedness is, namely, solely in the knowledge of God, whereby we are led to act only as love and piety shall bid us.  We may thus clearly understand, how far astray from a true estimate of virtue are those who expect to be decorated by God with high rewards for their virtue, and their best actions, as for having endured the direst slavery; as if virtue and the service of God were not in itself happiness and perfect freedom.

2. Inasmuch as it teaches us, how we ought to conduct ourselves with respect to the gifts of fortune, or matters which are not in our power, and do not follow from our nature.  For it shows us, that we should await and endure fortune's smiles or frowns with an equal mind, seeing that all things follow from the eternal decree of God by the same necessity, as it follows from the essence of a triangle, that the three angles are equal to two right angles.

3. This doctrine raises social life, inasmuch as it teaches us to hate no man, neither to despise, to deride, to envy, or to be angry with any.  Further, as it tells us that each should be content with his own, and helpful to his neighbour, not from any womanish pity, favour, or superstition, but solely by the guidance of reason, according as the time and occasion demand, as I will show in Part III.

4. Lastly, this doctrine confers no small advantage on the commonwealth; for it teaches how citizens should be governed and led, not so as to become slaves, but so that they may freely do whatsoever things are best.

I have thus fulfilled the promise made at the beginning of this note, and I thus bring the second part of my treatise to a close.  I think I have therein explained the nature and properties of the human mind at sufficient length, and, considering the difficulty of the subject, with sufficient clearness.  I have laid a foundation, whereon may be raised many excellent conclusions of the highest utility and most necessary to be known, as will, in what follows, be partly made plain.
