Proposition 18

A man is as much affected pleasurably or painfully by the image of a thing past or future as by the image of a thing present.

Proof. So long as a man is affected by the image of anything, he will regard that thing as present, even though it be non-existent (Part 2, Proposition 17, Corollary), he will not conceive it as past or future, except in so far as its image is joined to the image of time past or future (Part 2, Proposition 44, Note).  Wherefore the image of a thing, regarded in itself alone, is identical, whether it be referred to time past, time future, or time present; that is (Part 2, Proposition 16, Corollary), the disposition or emotion of the body is identical, whether the image be of a thing past, future, or present.  Thus the emotion of pleasure or pain is the same, whether the image be of a thing past or future.  Q.E.D.

Note 1. I call a thing past or future, according as we either have been or shall be affected thereby.  For instance, according as we have seen it, or are about to see it, according as it has recreated us, or will recreate us, according as it has harmed us, or will harm us.  For, as we thus conceive it, we affirm its existence; that is, the body is affected by no emotion which excludes the existence of the thing, and therefore (Part 2, Proposition 17) the body is affected by the image of the thing, in the same way as if the thing were actually present.  However, as it generally happens that those, who have had many experiences, vacillate, so long as they regard a thing as future or past, and are usually in doubt about its issue (Part 2, Proposition 44, Note); it follows that the emotions which arise from similar images of things are not so constant, but are generally disturbed by the images of other things, until men become assured of the issue.

Note 2. From what has just been said, we understand what is meant by the terms Hope, Fear, Confidence, Despair, Joy, and Disappointment.  Hope is nothing else but an inconstant pleasure, arising from the image of something future or past, whereof we do not yet know the issue.  Fear, on the other hand, is an inconstant pain also arising from the image of something concerning which we are in doubt.  If the element of doubt be removed from these emotions, hope becomes Confidence and fear becomes Despair.  In other words, Pleasure or Pain arising from the image of something concerning which we have hoped or feared. Again, Joy is Pleasure arising from the image of something past whereof we have doubted the issue.  Disappointment is the Pain opposed to Joy.

Footnote: Conscientiæ morsus—thus rendered by Mr. Pollock.

Proposition 19

He who conceives that the object of his love is destroyed will feel pain; if he conceives that it is preserved he will feel pleasure.

Proof. The mind, as far as possible, endeavours to conceive those things which increase or help the body's power of activity (Proposition 12 of this Part); in other words (Proposition 12 of this Part, Note), those things which it loves.  But conception is helped by those things which postulate the existence of a thing, and contrariwise is hindered by those which exclude the existence of a thing (Part 2, Proposition 17); therefore the images of things, which postulate the existence of an object of love, help the mind's endeavour to conceive the object of love, in other words (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), affect the mind pleasurably; contrariwise those things, which exclude the existence of an object of love, hinder the aforesaid mental endeavour; in other words, affect the mind painfully.  He, therefore, who conceives that the object of his love is destroyed will feel pain, &c.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 20

He who conceives that the object of his hate is destroyed will also feel pleasure.

Proof. The mind (Proposition 13 of this Part) endeavours to conceive those things, which exclude the existence of things whereby the body's power of activity is diminished or constrained; that is (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note), it endeavours to conceive such things as exclude the existence of what it hates; therefore the image of a thing, which excludes the existence of what the mind hates, helps the aforesaid mental effort, in other words (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), affects the mind pleasurably.  Thus he who conceives that the object of his hate is destroyed will feel pleasure.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 21

He who conceives, that the object of his love is affected pleasurably or painfully, will himself be affected pleasurably or painfully; and the one or the other emotion will be greater or less in the lover according as it is greater or less in the thing loved.

Proof. The images of things (as we showed in III. xix.) which postulate the existence of the object of love, help the mind's endeavour to conceive the said object.  But pleasure postulates the existence of something feeling pleasure, so much the more in proportion as the emotion of pleasure is greater; for it is (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note) a transition to a greater perfection; therefore the image of pleasure in the object of love helps the mental endeavour of the lover; that is, it affects the lover pleasurably, and so much the more, in proportion as this emotion may have been greater in the object of love.  This was our first point.  Further, in so far as a thing is affected with pain, it is to that extent destroyed, the extent being in proportion to the amount of pain (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note); therefore (Proposition 19 of this Part) he who conceives, that the object of his love is affected painfully, will himself be affected painfully, in proportion as the said emotion is greater or less in the object of love.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 22

If we conceive that anything pleasurably affects some object of our love, we shall be affected with love towards that thing.  Contrariwise, if we conceive that it affects an object of our love painfully, we shall be affected with hatred towards it.

Proof. He, who affects pleasurably or painfully the object of our love, affects us also pleasurably or painfully—that is, if we conceive the loved object as affected with the said pleasure or pain (Proposition 21 of this Part). But this pleasure or pain is postulated to come to us accompanied by the idea of an external cause; therefore (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note), if we conceive that anyone affects an object of our love pleasurably or painfully, we shall be affected with love or hatred towards him.  Q.E.D.

Note. Proposition 21 of this Part explains to us the nature of Pity, which we may define as pain arising from another's hurt.  What term we can use for pleasure arising from another's gain, I know not.

We will call the love towards him who confers a benefit on another, Approval; and the hatred towards him who injures another, we will call Indignation.  We must further remark, that we not only feel pity for a thing which we have loved (as shown in III. xxi.), but also for a thing which we have hitherto regarded without emotion, provided that we deem that it resembles ourselves (as I will show presently).  Thus, we bestow approval on one who has benefited anything resembling ourselves, and, contrariwise, are indignant with him who has done it an injury.

Proposition 23

He who conceives, that an object of his hatred is painfully affected, will feel pleasure.  Contrariwise, if he thinks that the said object is pleasurably affected, he will feel pain.  Each of these emotions will be greater or less, according as its contrary is greater or less in the object of hatred.

Proof. In so far as an object of hatred is painfully affected, it is destroyed, to an extent proportioned to the strength of the pain (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note).  Therefore, he (Proposition 20 of this Part) who conceives, that some object of his hatred is painfully affected, will feel pleasure, to an extent proportioned to the amount of pain he conceives in the object of his hatred.  This was our first point.  Again, pleasure postulates the existence of the pleasurably affected thing (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), in proportion as the pleasure is greater or less.  If anyone imagines that an object of his hatred is pleasurably affected, this conception (Proposition 13 of this Part) will hinder his own endeavour to persist; in other words (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), he who hates will be painfully affected. Q.E.D.

Note. This pleasure can scarcely be felt unalloyed, and without any mental conflict.  For (as I am about to show in Proposition 27 of this Part), in so far as a man conceives that something similar to himself is affected by pain, he will himself be affected in like manner; and he will have the contrary emotion in contrary circumstances.  But here we are regarding hatred only.

Proposition 24

If we conceive that anyone pleasurably affects an object of our hate, we shall feel hatred towards him also.  If we conceive that he painfully affects that said object, we shall feel love towards him.

Proof. This proposition is proved in the same way as Proposition 22 of this Part, which see.

Note. These and similar emotions of hatred are attributable to envy, which, accordingly, is nothing else but hatred, in so far as it is regarded as disposing a man to rejoice in another's hurt, and to grieve at another's advantage.

Proposition 25

We endeavour to affirm, concerning ourselves, and concerning what we love, everything that we can conceive to affect pleasurably ourselves, or the loved object.  Contrariwise, we endeavour to negative everything, which we conceive to affect painfully ourselves or the loved object.

Proof. That, which we conceive to affect an object of our love pleasurably or painfully, affects us also pleasurably or painfully (Proposition 21 of this Part).  But the mind (Proposition 12 of this Part) endeavours, as far as possible, to conceive those things which affect us pleasurably; in other words (Part 2, Proposition 17, Corollary), it endeavours to regard them as present.  And, contrariwise (Proposition 13 of this Part), it endeavours to exclude the existence of such things as affect us painfully; therefore, we endeavour to affirm concerning ourselves, and concerning the loved object, whatever we conceive to affect ourselves, or the love object pleasurably. Q.E.D.

Proposition 26

We endeavour to affirm, concerning that which we hate, everything which we conceive to affect it painfully; and, contrariwise, we endeavour to deny, concerning it, everything which we conceive to affect it pleasurably.

Proof. This proposition follows from Proposition 23 of this Part, as the foregoing proposition followed from Proposition 21 of this Part, Note—Thus we see that it may readily happen, that a man may easily think too highly of himself, or a loved object, and, contrariwise, too meanly of a hated object.  This feeling is called pride, in reference to the man who thinks too highly of himself, and is a species of madness, wherein a man dreams with his eyes open, thinking that he can accomplish all things that fall within the scope of his conception, and thereupon accounting them real, and exulting in them, so long as he is unable to conceive anything which excludes their existence, and determines his own power of action.  Pride, therefore, is pleasure springing from a man thinking too highly of himself.  Again, the pleasure which arises from a man thinking too highly of another is called over-esteem.  Whereas the pleasure which arises from thinking too little of a man is called disdain.

Proposition 27

By the very fact that we conceive a thing, which is like ourselves, and which we have not regarded with any emotion, to be affected with any emotion, we are ourselves affected with a like emotion (affectus).

Proof. The images of things are modifications of the human body, whereof the ideas represent external bodies as present to us (Part 2, Proposition 17); in other words (Part 2, Proposition 10), whereof the ideas involve the nature of our body, and, at the same time, the nature of the external bodies as present.  If, therefore, the nature of the external body be similar to the nature of our body, then the idea which we form of the external body will involve a modification of our own body similar to the modification of the external body.  Consequently, if we conceive anyone similar to ourselves as affected by any emotion, this conception will express a modification of our body similar to that emotion. Thus, from the fact of conceiving a thing like ourselves to be affected with any emotion, we are ourselves affected with a like emotion.  If, however, we hate the said thing like ourselves, we shall, to that extent, be affected by a contrary, and not similar, emotion.  Q.E.D.

Note 1. This imitation of emotions, when it is referred to pain, is called compassion (cf. Proposition 22 of this Part, Note); when it is referred to desire, it is called emulation, which is nothing else but the desire of anything, engendered in us by the fact that we conceive that others have the like desire.

Corollary 1. If we conceive that anyone, whom we have hitherto regarded with no emotion, pleasurably affects something similar to ourselves, we shall be affected with love towards him. If, on the other hand, we conceive that he painfully affects the same, we shall be affected with hatred towards him.

Proof. This is proved from the last proposition in the same manner as Proposition 22 of this Part is proved from Proposition 21 of this Part, Corollary II.—We cannot hate a thing which we pity, because its misery affects us painfully.

Proof. If we could hate it for this reason, we should rejoice in its pain, which is contrary to the hypothesis.

Corollary 3. We seek to free from misery, as far as we can, a thing which we pity.

Proof. That, which painfully affects the object of our pity, affects us also with similar pain (by Proposition 26 of this Part); therefore, we shall endeavour to recall everything which removes its existence, or which destroys it (cf. Proposition 13 of this Part); in other words (Proposition 9 of this Part, Note), we shall desire to destroy it, or we shall be determined for its destruction; thus, we shall endeavour to free from misery a thing which we pity.  Q.E.D.

Note 2. This will or appetite for doing good, which arises from pity of the thing whereon we would confer a benefit, is called benevolence, and is nothing else but desire arising from compassion.  Concerning love or hate towards him who has done good or harm to something, which we conceive to be like ourselves, see Proposition 22 of this Part, Note.

Proposition 28

We endeavour to bring about whatsoever we conceive to conduce to pleasure; but we endeavour to remove or destroy whatsoever we conceive to be truly repugnant thereto, or to conduce to pain.

Proof. We endeavour, as far as possible, to conceive that which we imagine to conduce to pleasure (Proposition 12 of this Part); in other words (Part 2, Proposition 17) we shall endeavour to conceive it as far as possible as present or actually existing.  But the endeavour of the mind, or the mind's power of thought, is equal to, and simultaneous with, the endeavour of the body, or the body's power of action.  (This is clear from Part 2, Proposition 7, Corollary, and Part 2, Proposition 11, Corollary).  Therefore we make an absolute endeavour for its existence, in other words (Proposition 9 of this Part, Note) we desire and strive for it; this was our first point.  Again, if we conceive that something, which we believed to be the cause of pain, that is (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note), which we hate, is destroyed, we shall rejoice (Proposition 20 of this Part).  We shall, therefore (by the first part of this proof), endeavour to destroy the same, or (Proposition 13 of this Part) to remove it from us, so that we may not regard it as present; this was our second point.  Wherefore whatsoever conduces to pleasure, &c.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 29

We shall also endeavour to do whatsoever we conceive men to regard with pleasure, and contrariwise we shall shrink from doing that which we conceive men to shrink from.

Footnote: By "men" in this and the following propositions, I mean men whom we regard without any particular emotion.

Proof. From the fact of imagining, that men love or hate anything, we shall love or hate the same thing (Proposition 27 of this Part). That is (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note), from this mere fact we shall feel pleasure or pain at the thing's presence.  And so we shall endeavour to do whatsoever we conceive men to love or regard with pleasure, etc.  Q.E.D.

Note. This endeavour to do a thing or leave it undone, solely in order to please men, we call ambition, especially when we so eagerly endeavour to please the vulgar, that we do or omit certain things to our own or another's hurt: in other cases it is generally called kindliness.  Furthermore I give the name of praise to the pleasure, with which we conceive the action of another, whereby he has endeavoured to please us; but of blame to the pain wherewith we feel aversion to his action.

Proposition 30

If anyone has done something which he conceives as affecting other men pleasurably, he will be affected by pleasure, accompanied by the idea of himself as cause; in other words, he will regard himself with pleasure.  On the other hand, if he has done anything which he conceives as affecting others painfully, he will regard himself with pain.

Proof. He who conceives, that he affects others with pleasure or pain, will, by that very fact, himself be affected with pleasure or pain (Proposition 27 of this Part), but, as a man (Part 2, Proposition 19; Part 2, Proposition 23) is conscious of himself through the modifications whereby he is determined to action, it follows that he who conceives, that he affects others pleasurably, will be affected with pleasure accompanied by the idea of himself as cause; in other words, he will regard himself with pleasure.  And so mutatis mutandis in the case of pain.  Q.E.D.

Note. As love (Proposition 13 of this Part) is pleasure accompanied by the idea of an external cause, and hatred is pain accompanied by the idea of an external cause; the pleasure and pain in question will be a species of love and hatred.  But, as the terms love and hatred are used in reference to external objects, we will employ other names for the emotions now under discussion: pleasure accompanied by the idea of an external cause we will style Honour, and the emotion contrary thereto we will style Shame: I mean in such cases as where pleasure or pain arises from a man's belief, that he is being praised or blamed: otherwise pleasure accompanied by the idea of an external cause is called self-complacency, and its contrary pain is called repentance. Again, as it may happen (Part 2, Proposition 17, Corollary) that the pleasure, wherewith a man conceives that he affects others, may exist solely in his own imagination, and as (Proposition 25 of this Part) everyone endeavours to conceive concerning himself that which he conceives will affect him with pleasure, it may easily come to pass that a vain man may be proud and may imagine that he is pleasing to all, when in reality he may be an annoyance to all.

Footnote: So Van Vloten and Bruder. The Dutch version and Camerer read, "an internal cause." "Honor" = Gloria.

Footnote: See previous endnote.

Proposition 31

If we conceive that anyone loves, desires, or hates anything which we ourselves love, desire, or hate, we shall thereupon regard the thing in question with more steadfast love, &c.  On the contrary, if we think that anyone shrinks from something that we love, we shall undergo vacillations of soul.

Proof. From the mere fact of conceiving that anyone loves anything we shall ourselves love that thing (Proposition 27 of this Part): but we are assumed to love it already; there is, therefore, a new cause of love, whereby our former emotion is fostered; hence we shall thereupon love it more steadfastly.  Again, from the mere fact of conceiving that anyone shrinks from anything, we shall ourselves shrink from that thing (Proposition 27 of this Part).  If we assume that we at the same time love it, we shall then simultaneously love it and shrink from it; in other words, we shall be subject to vacillation (Proposition 17 of this Part, Note).  Q.E.D.

Corollary. From the foregoing, and also from Proposition 28 of this Part it follows that everyone endeavours, as far as possible, to cause others to love what he himself loves, and to hate what he himself hates: as the poet says:  "As lovers let us share every hope and every fear: ironhearted were he who should love what the other leaves."

Footnote: Ovid, "Amores," II. xix. 4,5. Spinoza transposes the verses. "Speremus pariter, pariter metuamus amantes; Ferreus est, si quis, quod sinit alter, amat."

"Speremus pariter, pariter metuamus amantes;

Ferreus est, si quis, quod sinit alter, amat."

Note. This endeavour to bring it about, that our own likes and dislikes should meet with universal approval, is really ambition (see Proposition 29 of this Part, Note); wherefore we see that everyone by nature desires (appetere), that the rest of mankind should live according to his own individual disposition: when such a desire is equally present in all, everyone stands in everyone else's way, and in wishing to be loved or praised by all, all become mutually hateful.

Proposition 32

If we conceive that anyone takes delight in something, which only one person can possess, we shall endeavour to bring it about that the man in question shall not gain possession thereof.

Proof. From the mere fact of our conceiving that another person takes delight in a thing (Proposition 27 of this Part, Corollary) we shall ourselves love that thing and desire to take delight therein.  But we assumed that the pleasure in question would be prevented by another's delight in its object; we shall, therefore, endeavour to prevent his possession thereof (Proposition 28 of this Part).  Q.E.D.

Note. We thus see that man's nature is generally so constituted, that he takes pity on those who fare ill, and envies those who fare well with an amount of hatred proportioned to his own love for the goods in their possession.  Further, we see that from the same property of human nature, whence it follows that men are merciful, it follows also that they are envious and ambitious.  Lastly, if we make appeal to Experience, we shall find that she entirely confirms what we have said; more especially if we turn our attention to the first years of our life.  We find that children, whose body is continually, as it were, in equilibrium, laugh or cry simply because they see others laughing or crying; moreover, they desire forthwith to imitate whatever they see others doing, and to possess themselves of whatever they conceive as delighting others: inasmuch as the images of things are, as we have said, modifications of the human body, or modes wherein the human body is affected and disposed by external causes to act in this or that manner.

Proposition 33

When we love a thing similar to ourselves we endeavour, as far as we can, to bring about that it should love us in return.

Proof. That which we love we endeavour, as far as we can, to conceive in preference to anything else (Proposition 12 of this Part).  If the thing be similar to ourselves, we shall endeavour to affect it pleasurably in preference to anything else (Proposition 29 of this Part).  In other words, we shall endeavour, as far as we can, to bring it about, that the thing should be affected with pleasure accompanied by the idea of ourselves, that is (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note), that it should love us in return.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 34

The greater the emotion with which we conceive a loved object to be affected towards us, the greater will be our complacency.

Proof. We endeavour (Proposition 33 of this Part), as far as we can, to bring about, that what we love should love us in return: in other words, that what we love should be affected with pleasure accompanied by the idea of ourself as cause.  Therefore, in proportion as the loved object is more pleasurably affected because of us, our endeavour will be assisted.—that is (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note) the greater will be our pleasure.  But when we take pleasure in the fact, that we pleasurably affect something similar to ourselves, we regard ourselves with pleasure (Proposition 30 of this Part); therefore the greater the emotion with which we conceive a loved object to be affected, &c.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 35

If anyone conceives, that an object of his love joins itself to another with closer bonds of friendship than he himself has attained to, he will be affected with hatred towards the loved object and with envy towards his rival.

Proof. In proportion as a man thinks, that a loved object is well affected towards him, will be the strength of his self-approval (by Proposition 34 of this Part), that is (Proposition 30 of this Part, Note), of his pleasure; he will, therefore (Proposition 28 of this Part), endeavour, as far as he can, to imagine the loved object as most closely bound to him: this endeavour or desire will be increased, if he thinks that someone else has a similar desire (Proposition 31 of this Part).  But this endeavour or desire is assumed to be checked by the image of the loved object in conjunction with the image of him whom the loved object has joined to itself; therefore (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note) he will for that reason be affected with pain, accompanied by the idea of the loved object as a cause in conjunction with the image of his rival; that is, he will be (Proposition 13 of this Part) affected with hatred towards the loved object and also towards his rival (Proposition 15 of this Part, Corollary), which latter he will envy as enjoying the beloved object.  Q.E.D.

Note. This hatred towards an object of love joined with envy is called Jealousy, which accordingly is nothing else but a wavering of the disposition arising from combined love and hatred, accompanied by the idea of some rival who is envied. Further, this hatred towards the object of love will be greater, in proportion to the pleasure which the jealous man had been wont to derive from the reciprocated love of the said object; and also in proportion to the feelings he had previously entertained towards his rival.  If he had hated him, he will forthwith hate the object of his love, because he conceives it is pleasurably affected by one whom he himself hates: and also because he is compelled to associate the image of his loved one with the image of him whom he hates.  This condition generally comes into play in the case of love for a woman: for he who thinks, that a woman whom he loves prostitutes herself to another, will feel pain, not only because his own desire is restrained, but also because, being compelled to associate the image of her he loves with the parts of shame and the excreta of another, he therefore shrinks from her.

We must add, that a jealous man is not greeted by his beloved with the same joyful countenance as before, and this also gives him pain as a lover, as I will now show.

Proposition 36

He who remembers a thing, in which he has once taken delight, desires to possess it under the same circumstances as when he first took delight therein.

Proof. Everything, which a man has seen in conjunction with the object of his love, will be to him accidentally a cause of pleasure (Proposition 15 of this Part); he will, therefore, desire to possess it, in conjunction with that wherein he has taken delight; in other words, he will desire to possess the object of his love under the same circumstances as when he first took delight therein.  Q.E.D.

Corollary. A lover will, therefore, feel pain if one of the aforesaid attendant circumstances be missing.

Proof. For, in so far as he finds some circumstance to be missing, he conceives something which excludes its existence.  As he is assumed to be desirous for love's sake of that thing or circumstance (by Proposition 35 of this Part), he will, in so far as he conceives it to be missing, feel pain (Proposition 19 of this Part).  Q.E.D.

Note. This pain, in so far as it has reference to the absence of the object of love, is called Regret.

Proposition 37

Desire arising through pain or pleasure, hatred or love, is greater in proportion as the emotion is greater.

Proof. Pain diminishes or constrains a man's power of activity (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note), in other words (Proposition 7 of this Part), diminishes or constrains the effort, wherewith he endeavours to persist in his own being; therefore (Proposition 5 of this Part) it is contrary to the said endeavour: thus all the endeavours of a man affected by pain are directed to removing that pain.  But (by the definition of pain), in proportion as the pain is greater, so also is it necessarily opposed to a greater part of man's power of activity; therefore the greater the pain, the greater the power of activity employed to remove it; that is, the greater will be the desire or appetite in endeavouring to remove it.  Again, since pleasure (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note) increases or aids a man's power of activity, it may easily be shown in like manner, that a man affected by pleasure has no desire further than to preserve it, and his desire will be in proportion to the magnitude of the pleasure.

Lastly, since hatred and love are themselves emotions of pain and pleasure, it follows in like manner that the endeavour, appetite, or desire, which arises through hatred or love, will be greater in proportion to the hatred or love.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 38

If a man has begun to hate an object of his love, so that love is thoroughly destroyed, he will, causes being equal, regard it with more hatred than if he had never loved it, and his hatred will be in proportion to the strength of his former love.

Proof. If a man begins to hate that which he had loved, more of his appetites are put under restraint than if he had never loved it.  For love is a pleasure (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note) which a man endeavours as far as he can to render permanent (Proposition 28 of this Part); he does so by regarding the object of his love as present, and by affecting it as far as he can pleasurably; this endeavour is greater in proportion as the love is greater, and so also is the endeavour to bring about that the beloved should return his affection (Proposition 33 of this Part).  Now these endeavours are constrained by hatred towards the object of love (Proposition 13 of this Part, Corollary; Proposition 23 of this Part); wherefore the lover (Proposition 11 of this Part, Note) will for this cause also be affected with pain, the more so in proportion as his love has been greater; that is, in addition to the pain caused by hatred, there is a pain caused by the fact that he has loved the object; wherefore the lover will regard the beloved with greater pain, or in other words, will hate it more than if he had never loved it, and with the more intensity in proportion as his former love was greater.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 39

He who hates anyone will endeavour to do him an injury, unless he fears that a greater injury will thereby accrue to himself; on the other hand, he who loves anyone will, by the same law, seek to benefit him.

Proof. To hate a man is (Proposition 13 of this Part, Note) to conceive him as a cause of pain; therefore he who hates a man will endeavour to remove or destroy him.  But if anything more painful, or, in other words, a greater evil, should accrue to the hater thereby—and if the hater thinks he can avoid such evil by not carrying out the injury, which he planned against the object of his hate—he will desire to abstain from inflicting that injury (Proposition 28 of this Part), and the strength of his endeavour (Proposition 37 of this Part) will be greater than his former endeavour to do injury, and will therefore prevail over it, as we asserted.  The second part of this proof proceeds in the same manner.  Wherefore he who hates another, etc.  Q.E.D.

Note. By good I here mean every kind of pleasure, and all that conduces thereto, especially that which satisfies our longings, whatsoever they may be.  By evil, I mean every kind of pain, especially that which frustrates our longings.  For I have shown (Proposition 9 of this Part, Note) that we in no case desire a thing because we deem it good, but, contrariwise, we deem a thing good because we desire it: consequently we deem evil that which we shrink from; everyone, therefore, according to his particular emotions, judges or estimates what is good, what is bad, what is better, what is worse, lastly, what is best, and what is worst.  Thus a miser thinks that abundance of money is the best, and want of money the worst; an ambitious man desires nothing so much as glory, and fears nothing so much as shame.  To an envious man nothing is more delightful than another's misfortune, and nothing more painful than another's success.  So every man, according to his emotions, judges a thing to be good or bad, useful or useless.  The emotion, which induces a man to turn from that which he wishes, or to wish for that which he turns from, is called timidity, which may accordingly be defined as the fear whereby a man is induced to avoid an evil which he regards as future by encountering a lesser evil (Proposition 28 of this Part).  But if the evil which he fears be shame, timidity becomes bashfulness. Lastly, if the desire to avoid a future evil be checked by the fear of another evil, so that the man knows not which to choose, fear becomes consternation, especially if both the evils feared be very great.

Proposition 40

He, who conceives himself to be hated by another, and believes that he has given him no cause for hatred, will hate that other in return.

Proof. He who conceives another as affected with hatred, will thereupon be affected himself with hatred (Proposition 27 of this Part), that is, with pain, accompanied by the idea of an external cause.  But, by the hypothesis, he conceives no cause for this pain except him who is his enemy; therefore, from conceiving that he is hated by some one, he will be affected with pain, accompanied by the idea of his enemy; in other words, he will hate his enemy in return. Q.E.D.

Note. He who thinks that he has given just cause for hatred will (Proposition 30 of this Part, Note) be affected with shame; but this case (Proposition 25 of this Part) rarely happens.  This reciprocation of hatred may also arise from the hatred, which follows an endeavour to injure the object of our hate (Proposition 39 of this Part).  He therefore who conceives that he is hated by another will conceive his enemy as the cause of some evil or pain; thus he will be affected with pain or fear, accompanied by the idea of his enemy as cause; in other words, he will be affected with hatred towards his enemy, as I said above.

Corollary 1. He who conceives, that one whom he loves hates him, will be a prey to conflicting hatred and love.  For, in so far as he conceives that he is an object of hatred, he is determined to hate his enemy in return.  But, by the hypothesis, he nevertheless loves him: wherefore he will be a prey to conflicting hatred and love.

Corollary 2. If a man conceives that one, whom he has hitherto regarded without emotion, has done him any injury from motives of hatred, he will forthwith seek to repay the injury in kind.

Proof. He who conceives, that another hates him, will (by Proposition 39 of this Part) hate his enemy in return, and (Proposition 26 of this Part) will endeavour to recall everything which can affect him painfully; he will moreover endeavour to do him an injury (Proposition 39 of this Part). Now the first thing of this sort which he conceives is the injury done to himself; he will, therefore, forthwith endeavour to repay it in kind.  Q.E.D.

Note. The endeavour to injure one whom we hate is called Anger; the endeavour to repay in kind injury done to ourselves is called Revenge.
