Propositions 19 to 39

Proposition 19

Every man, by the laws of his nature, necessarily desires or shrinks from that which he deems to be good or bad.

Proof. The knowledge of good and evil is (Proposition 8 of this Part) the emotion of pleasure or pain, in so far as we are conscious thereof; therefore, every man necessarily desires what he thinks good, and shrinks from what he thinks bad.  Now this appetite is nothing else but man's nature or essence (compare Part 3, Proposition 9, Note; Definition 1 of the Emotions). Therefore, every man, solely by the laws of his nature, desires the one, and shrinks from the other, &c.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 20

The more every man endeavours, and is able to seek what is useful to him—in other words, to preserve his own being—the more is he endowed with virtue; on the contrary, in proportion as a man neglects to seek what is useful to him, that is, to preserve his own being, he is wanting in power.

Proof. Virtue is human power, which is defined solely by man's essence (Definition 8 of this Part), that is, which is defined solely by the endeavour made by man to persist in his own being. Wherefore, the more a man endeavours, and is able to preserve his own being, the more is he endowed with virtue, and, consequently (Part 3, Proposition 4; Part 3, Proposition 6), in so far as a man neglects to preserve his own being, he is wanting in power.  Q.E.D.

Note. No one, therefore, neglects seeking his own good, or preserving his own being, unless he be overcome by causes external and foreign to his nature.  No one, I say, from the necessity of his own nature, or otherwise than under compulsion from external causes, shrinks from food, or kills himself: which latter may be done in a variety of ways.  A man, for instance, kills himself under the compulsion of another man, who twists round his right hand, wherewith he happened to have taken up a sword, and forces him to turn the blade against his own heart; or, again, he may be compelled, like Seneca, by a tyrant's command, to open his own veins—that is, to escape a greater evil by incurring, a lesser; or, lastly, latent external causes may so disorder his imagination, and so affect his body, that it may assume a nature contrary to its former one, and whereof the idea cannot exist in the mind (Part 3, Proposition 10) But that a man, from the necessity of his own nature, should endeavour to become non-existent, is as impossible as that something should be made out of nothing, as everyone will see for himself, after a little reflection.

Proposition 21

No one can desire to be blessed, to act rightly, and to live rightly, without at the same time wishing to be, act, and to live—in other words, to actually exist.

Proof. The proof of this proposition, or rather the proposition itself, is self-evident, and is also plain from the definition of desire.  For the desire of living, acting, &c., blessedly or rightly, is (Definition 1 of the Emotions) the essence of man—that is (Part 3, Proposition 7), the endeavour made by everyone to preserve his own being.  Therefore, no one can desire, &c. Q.E.D.

Proposition 22

No virtue can be conceived as prior to this endeavour to preserve one's own being.

Proof. The effort for self-preservation is the essence of a thing (Part 3, Proposition 7); therefore, if any virtue could be conceived as prior thereto, the essence of a thing would have to be conceived as prior to itself, which is obviously absurd. Therefore no virtue, &c.  Q.E.D.

Corollary. The effort for self-preservation is the first and only foundation of virtue.  For prior to this principle nothing can be conceived, and without it no virtue can be conceived.

Proposition 23

Man, in so far as he is determined to a particular action because he has inadequate ideas, cannot be absolutely said to act in obedience to virtue; he can only be so described, in so far as he is determined for the action because he understands.

Proof. In so far as a man is determined to an action through having inadequate ideas, he is passive (Part 3, Proposition 1), that is (Part 3, Definition 1; Part 3, Definition 3), he does something, which cannot be perceived solely through his essence, that is (by Definition 8 of this Part), which does not follow from his virtue.  But, in so far as he is determined for an action because he understands, he is active; that is, he does something, which is perceived through his essence alone, or which adequately follows from his virtue. Q.E.D.

Proposition 24

To act absolutely in obedience to virtue is in us the same thing as to act, to live, or to preserve one's being (these three terms are identical in meaning) in accordance with the dictates of reason on the basis of seeking what is useful to one's self.

Proof. To act absolutely in obedience to virtue is nothing else but to act according to the laws of one's own nature.  But we only act, in so far as we understand (Part 3, Proposition 3): therefore to act in obedience to virtue is in us nothing else but to act, to live, or to preserve one's being in obedience to reason, and that on the basis of seeking what is useful for us (Proposition 22 of this Part, Corollary).  Q.E.D.

Proposition 25

No one wishes to preserve his being for the sake of anything else.

Proof. The endeavour, wherewith everything endeavours to persist in its being, is defined solely by the essence of the thing itself (Part 3, Proposition 7); from this alone, and not from the essence of anything else, it necessarily follows (Part 3, Proposition 6) that everyone endeavours to preserve his being.  Moreover, this proposition is plain from Proposition 22 of this Part, Corollary, for if a man should endeavour to preserve his being for the sake of anything else, the last-named thing would obviously be the basis of virtue, which, by the foregoing corollary, is absurd.  Therefore no one, &c.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 26

Whatsoever we endeavour in obedience to reason is nothing further than to understand; neither does the mind, in so far as it makes use of reason, judge anything to be useful to it, save such things as are conducive to understanding.

Proof. The effort for self-preservation is nothing else but the essence of the thing in question (Part 3, Proposition 7), which, in so far as it exists such as it is, is conceived to have force for continuing in existence (Part 3, Proposition 6) and doing such things as necessarily follow from its given nature (see Part 3, Proposition 9, Note).  But the essence of reason is nought else but our mind, in so far as it clearly and distinctly understands (see Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2); therefore (Part 2, Proposition 40) whatsoever we endeavour in obedience to reason is nothing else but to understand.  Again, since this effort of the mind wherewith the mind endeavours, in so far as it reasons, to preserve its own being is nothing else but understanding; this effort at understanding is (Proposition 22 of this Part, Corollary) the first and single basis of virtue, nor shall we endeavour to understand things for the sake of any ulterior object (Proposition 25 of this Part); on the other hand, the mind, in so far as it reasons, will not be able to conceive any good for itself, save such things as are conducive to understanding.

Proposition 27

We know nothing to be certainly good or evil, save such things as really conduce to understanding, or such as are able to hinder us from understanding.

Proof. The mind, in so far as it reasons, desires nothing beyond understanding, and judges nothing to be useful to itself, save such things as conduce to understanding (by Proposition 26 of this Part).  But the mind (Part 2, Proposition 41; Part 2, Proposition 43, Note) cannot possess certainty concerning anything, except in so far as it has adequate ideas, or (Part 2, Proposition 40, Note) in so far as it reasons.  Therefore we know nothing to be good or evil save such things as really conduce, &c.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 28

The mind's highest good is the knowledge of God, and the mind's highest virtue is to know God.

Proof. The mind is not capable of understanding anything higher than God, that is (Part 1, Definition 6), than a Being absolutely infinite, and without which (Part 1, Proposition 15) nothing can either be or be conceived; therefore (Proposition 26 of this Part; Proposition 27 of this Part), the mind's highest utility or (Definition 1 of this Part) good is the knowledge of God.  Again, the mind is active, only in so far as it understands, and only to the same extent can it be said absolutely to act virtuously.  The mind's absolute virtue is therefore to understand.  Now, as we have already shown, the highest that the mind can understand is God; therefore the highest virtue of the mind is to understand or to know God.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 29

No individual thing, which is entirely different from our own nature, can help or check our power of activity, and absolutely nothing can do us good or harm, unless it has something in common with our nature.

Proof. The power of every individual thing, and consequently the power of man, whereby he exists and operates, can only be determined by an individual thing (Part 1, Proposition 28), whose nature (Part 2, Proposition 6) must be understood through the same nature as that, through which human nature is conceived.  Therefore our power of activity, however it be conceived, can be determined and consequently helped or hindered by the power of any other individual thing, which has something in common with us, but not by the power of anything, of which the nature is entirely different from our own; and since we call good or evil that which is the cause of pleasure or pain (Proposition 8 of this Part), that is (Part 3, Proposition 11, Note), which increases or diminishes, helps or hinders, our power of activity; therefore, that which is entirely different from our nature can neither be to us good nor bad.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 30

A thing cannot be bad for us through the quality which it has in common with our nature, but it is bad for us in so far as it is contrary to our nature.

Proof. We call a thing bad when it is the cause of pain (Proposition 8 of this Part), that is (by the Definition, which see in Part 3, Proposition 11, Note), when it diminishes or checks our power of action.  Therefore, if anything were bad for us through that quality which it has in common with our nature, it would be able itself to diminish or check that which it has in common with our nature, which (Part 3, Proposition 4) is absurd.  Wherefore nothing can be bad for us through that quality which it has in common with us, but, on the other hand, in so far as it is bad for us, that is (as we have just shown), in so far as it can diminish or check our power of action, it is contrary to our nature. Q.E.D.

Proposition 31

In so far as a thing is in harmony with our nature, it is necessarily good.

Proof. In so far as a thing is in harmony with our nature, it cannot be bad for it.  It will therefore necessarily be either good or indifferent.  If it be assumed that it be neither good nor bad, nothing will follow from its nature (Definition 1 of this Part), which tends to the preservation of our nature, that is (by the hypothesis), which tends to the preservation of the thing itself; but this (Part 3, Proposition 6) is absurd; therefore, in so far as a thing is in harmony with our nature, it is necessarily good.  Q.E.D.

Corollary. Hence it follows, that, in proportion as a thing is in harmony with our nature, so is it more useful or better for us, and vice versâ, in proportion as a thing is more useful for us, so is it more in harmony with our nature.  For, in so far as it is not in harmony with our nature, it will necessarily be different therefrom or contrary thereto.  If different, it can neither be good nor bad (Proposition 29 of this Part); if contrary, it will be contrary to that which is in harmony with our nature, that is, contrary to what is good-in short, bad.  Nothing, therefore, can be good, except in so far as it is in harmony with our nature; and hence a thing is useful, in proportion as it is in harmony with our nature, and vice versâ.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 32

In so far as men are a prey to passion, they cannot, in that respect, be said to be naturally in harmony.

Proof. Things, which are said to be in harmony naturally, are understood to agree in power (Part 3, Proposition 7), not in want of power or negation, and consequently not in passion (Part 3, Proposition 3, Note); wherefore men, in so far as they are a prey to their passions, cannot be said to be naturally in harmony.  Q.E.D.

Note. This is also self-evident; for, if we say that white and black only agree in the fact that neither is red, we absolutely affirm that the do not agree in any respect.  So, if we say that a man and a stone only agree in the fact that both are finite—wanting in power, not existing by the necessity of their own nature, or, lastly, indefinitely surpassed by the power of external causes—we should certainly affirm that a man and a stone are in no respect alike; therefore, things which agree only in negation, or in qualities which neither possess, really agree in no respect.

Proposition 33

Men can differ in nature, in so far as they are assailed by those emotions, which are passions, or passive states; and to this extent one and the same man is variable and inconstant.

Proof. The nature or essence of the emotions cannot be explained solely through our essence or nature (Part 3, Definition 1; Part 3, Definition 2), but it must be defined by the power, that is (Part 3, Proposition 7), by the nature of external causes in comparison with our own; hence it follows, that there are as many kinds of each emotion as there are external objects whereby we are affected (Part 3, Proposition 56), and that men may be differently affected by one and the same object (Part 3, Proposition 51), and to this extent differ in nature; lastly, that one and the same man may be differently affected towards the same object, and may therefore be variable and inconstant.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 34

In so far as men are assailed by emotions which are passions, they can be contrary one to another.

Proof. A man, for instance Peter, can be the cause of Paul's feeling pain, because he (Peter) possesses something similar to that which Paul hates (Part 3, Proposition 16), or because Peter has sole possession of a thing which Paul also loves (Part 3, Proposition 32, Note), or for other causes (Part 3, Proposition 55, Note); it may therefore happen that Paul should hate Peter (Definition 7 of the Emotions), consequently it may easily happen also, that Peter should hate Paul in return, and that each should endeavour to do the other an injury, (Part 3, Proposition 39), that is (Proposition 30 of this Part), that they should be contrary one to another.  But the emotion of pain is always a passion or passive state (Part 3, Proposition 59); hence men, in so far as they are assailed by emotions which are passions, can be contrary one to another.  Q.E.D.

Note. I said that Paul may hate Peter, because he conceives that Peter possesses something which he (Paul) also loves; from this it seems, at first sight, to follow, that these two men, through both loving the same thing, and, consequently, through agreement of their respective natures, stand in one another's way; if this were so, Proposition 30 of this Part and Proposition 31 of this Part would be untrue.  But if we give the matter our unbiased attention, we shall see that the discrepancy vanishes.  For the two men are not in one another's way in virtue of the agreement of their natures, that is, through both loving the same thing, but in virtue of one differing from the other.  For, in so far as each loves the same thing, the love of each is fostered thereby (Part 3, Proposition 31), that is (Definition 6 of the Emotions) the pleasure of each is fostered thereby.  Wherefore it is far from being the case, that they are at variance through both loving the same thing, and through the agreement in their natures.  The cause for their opposition lies, as I have said, solely in the fact that they are assumed to differ.  For we assume that Peter has the idea of the loved object as already in his possession, while Paul has the idea of the loved object as lost.  Hence the one man will be affected with pleasure, the other will be affected with pain, and thus they will be at variance one with another.  We can easily show in like manner, that all other causes of hatred depend solely on differences, and not on the agreement between men's natures.

Proposition 35

In so far only as men live in obedience to reason, do they always necessarily agree in nature.

Proof. In so far as men are assailed by emotions that are passions, they can be different in nature (Proposition 33 of this Part), and at variance one with another.  But men are only said to be active, in so far as they act in obedience to reason (Part 3, Proposition 3); therefore, what so ever follows from human nature in so far as it is defined by reason must (Part 3, Definition 2) be understood solely through human nature as its proximate cause.  But, since every man by the laws of his nature desires that which he deems good, and endeavours to remove that which he deems bad (Proposition 19 of this Part); and further, since that which we, in accordance with reason, deem good or bad, necessarily is good or bad (Part 2, Proposition 41); it follows that men, in so far as they live in obedience to reason, necessarily do only such things as are necessarily good for human nature, and consequently for each individual man (Proposition 31 of this Part, Corollary); in other words, such things as are in harmony with each man's nature.  Therefore, men in so far as they live in obedience to reason, necessarily live always in harmony one with another.  Q.E.D.

Corollary 1. There is no individual thing in nature, which is more useful to man, than a man who lives in obedience to reason. For that thing is to man most useful, which is most in harmony with his nature (Proposition 31 of this Part, Corollary); that is, obviously, man. But man acts absolutely according to the laws of his nature, when he lives in obedience to reason (Part 3, Definition 2), and to this extent only is always necessarily in harmony with the nature of another man (by Proposition 35 of this Part); wherefore among individual things nothing is more useful to man, than a man who lives in obedience to reason.  Q.E.D.

Corollary 2. As every man seeks most that which is useful to him, so are men most useful one to another.  For the more a man seeks what is useful to him and endeavours to preserve himself, the more is he endowed with virtue (Proposition 20 of this Part), or, what is the same thing (Definition 8 of this Part), the more is he endowed with power to act according to the laws of his own nature, that is to live in obedience to reason.  But men are most in natural harmony, when they live in obedience to reason (by Proposition 35 of this Part); therefore (by Corollary 1 above) men will be most useful one to another, when each seeks most that which is useful to him. Q.E.D.

Note. What we have just shown is attested by experience so conspicuously, that it is in the mouth of nearly everyone: "Man is to man a God."  Yet it rarely happens that men live in obedience to reason, for things are so ordered among them, that they are generally envious and troublesome one to another. Nevertheless they are scarcely able to lead a solitary life, so that the definition of man as a social animal has met with general assent; in fact, men do derive from social life much more convenience than injury.  Let satirists then laugh their fill at human affairs, let theologians rail, and let misanthropes praise to their utmost the life of untutored rusticity, let them heap contempt on men and praises on beasts; when all is said, they will find that men can provide for their wants much more easily by mutual help, and that only by uniting their forces can they escape from the dangers that on every side beset them: not to say how much more excellent and worthy of our knowledge it is, to study the actions of men than the actions of beasts.  But I will treat of this more at length elsewhere.

Proposition 36

The highest good of those who follow virtue is common to all, and therefore all can equally rejoice therein.

Proof. To act virtuously is to act in obedience with reason (Proposition 24 of this Part), and whatsoever we endeavour to do in obedience to reason is to understand (Proposition 26 of this Part); therefore (Proposition 28 of this Part) the highest good for those who follow after virtue is to know God; that is (Part 2, Proposition 47, Note) a good which is common to all and can be possessed by all men equally, in so far as they are of the same nature.  Q.E.D.

Note. Someone may ask how it would be, if the highest good of those who follow after virtue were not common to all?  Would it not then follow, as above (Proposition 34 of this Part), that men living in obedience to reason, that is (Proposition 35 of this Part), men in so far as they agree in nature, would be at variance one with another?  To such an inquiry, I make answer, that it follows not accidentally but from the very nature of reason, that main's highest good is common to all, inasmuch as it is deduced from the very essence of man, in so far as defined by reason; and that a man could neither be, nor be conceived without the power of taking pleasure in this highest good.  For it belongs to the essence of the human mind (Part 2, Proposition 47), to have an adequate knowledge of the eternal and infinite essence of God.

Proposition 37

The good which every man, who follows after virtue, desires for himself he will also desire for other men, and so much the more, in proportion as he has a greater knowledge of God.

Proof. Men, in so far as they live in obedience to reason, are most useful to their fellow men (Proposition 35 of this Part, Corollary 1); therefore (Proposition 19 of this Part), we shall in obedience to reason necessarily endeavour to bring about that men should live in obedience to reason.  But the good which every man, in so far as he is guided by reason, or, in other words, follows after virtue, desires for himself, is to understand (Proposition 26 of this Part); wherefore the good, which each follower of virtue seeks for himself, he will desire also for others.  Again, desire, in so far as it is referred to the mind, is the very essence of the mind (Definition 1 of the Emotions); now the essence of the mind consists in knowledge (Part 2, Proposition 11), which involves the knowledge of God (Part 2, Proposition 47), and without it (Part 1, Proposition 15), can neither be, nor be conceived; therefore, in proportion as the mind's essence involves a greater knowledge of God, so also will be greater the desire of the follower of virtue, that other men should possess that which he seeks as good for himself.  Q.E.D.

Another Proof.—The good, which a man desires for himself and loves, he will love more constantly, if he sees that others love it also (Part 3, Proposition 31); he will therefore endeavour that others should love it also; and as the good in question is common to all, and therefore all can rejoice therein, he will endeavour, for the same reason, to bring about that all should rejoice therein, and this he will do the more (Part 3, Proposition 37), in proportion as his own enjoyment of the good is greater.

Note 1. He who, guided by emotion only, endeavours to cause others to love what he loves himself, and to make the rest of the world live according to his own fancy, acts solely by impulse, and is, therefore, hateful, especially, to those who take delight in something different, and accordingly study and, by similar impulse, endeavour, to make men live in accordance with what pleases themselves.  Again, as the highest good sought by men under the guidance of emotion is often such, that it can only be possessed by a single individual, it follows that those who love it are not consistent in their intentions, but, while they delight to sing its praises, fear to be believed.  But he, who endeavours to lead men by reason, does not act by impulse but courteously and kindly, and his intention is always consistent. Again, whatsoever we desire and do, whereof we are the cause in so far as we possess the idea of God, or know God, I set down to Religion.  The desire of well-doing, which is engendered by a life according to reason, I call piety.  Further, the desire, whereby a man living according to reason is bound to associate others with himself in friendship, I call honour; by honourable I mean that which is praised by men living according to reason, and by base I mean that which is repugnant to the gaining of friendship.  I have also shown in addition what are the foundations of a state; and the difference between true virtue and infirmity may be readily gathered from what I have said; namely, that true virtue is nothing else but living in accordance with reason; while infirmity is nothing else but man's allowing himself to be led by things which are external to himself, and to be by them determined to act in a manner demanded by the general disposition of things rather than by his own nature considered solely in itself.

Footnote: Honestas

Such are the matters which I engaged to prove in Proposition 18 of this Part, whereby it is plain that the law against the slaughtering of animals is founded rather on vain superstition and womanish pity than on sound reason.  The rational quest of what is useful to us further teaches us the necessity of associating ourselves with our fellow men, but not with beasts, or things, whose nature is different from our own; we have the same rights in respect to them as they have in respect to us. Nay, as everyone's right is defined by his virtue, or power, men have far greater rights over beasts than beasts have over men. Still I do not deny that beasts feel: what I deny is, that we may not consult our own advantage and use them as we please, treating them in the way which best suits us; for their nature is not like ours, and their emotions are naturally different from human emotions (Part 3, Proposition 57, Note).  It remains for me to explain what I mean by just and unjust, sin and merit.  On these points see the following note.

Note 2. In the Appendix to Part I. I undertook to explain praise and blame, merit and sin, justice and injustice.

Concerning praise and blame I have spoken in Part 3, Proposition 29, Note: the time has now come to treat of the remaining terms.  But I must first say a few words concerning man in the state of nature and in society.

Every man exists by sovereign natural right, and, consequently, by sovereign natural right performs those actions which follow from the necessity of his own nature; therefore by sovereign natural right every man judges what is good and what is bad, takes care of his own advantage according to his own disposition (Proposition 19 of this Part; Proposition 20 of this Part), avenges the wrongs done to him (Part 3, Proposition 40, Corollary 2), and endeavours to preserve that which he loves and to destroy that which he hates (Part 3, Proposition 28).  Now, if men lived under the guidance of reason, everyone would remain in possession of this his right, without any injury being done to his neighbour (Proposition 35 of this Part, Corollary 1).  But seeing that they are a prey to their emotions, which far surpass human power or virtue (Proposition 6 of this Part), they are often drawn in different directions, and being at variance one with another (Proposition 33 of this Part; Proposition 34 of this Part), stand in need of mutual help (Proposition 35 of this Part, Note).  Wherefore, in order that men may live together in harmony, and may aid one another, it is necessary that they should forego their natural right, and, for the sake of security, refrain from all actions which can injure their fellow-men.  The way in which this end can be obtained, so that men who are necessarily a prey to their emotions (Proposition 4 of this Part, Corollary), inconstant, and diverse, should be able to render each other mutually secure, and feel mutual trust, is evident from Proposition 7 of this Part and Part 3, Proposition 39.  It is there shown, that an emotion can only be restrained by an emotion stronger than, and contrary to itself, and that men avoid inflicting injury through fear of incurring a greater injury themselves.

On this law society can be established, so long as it keeps in its own hand the right, possessed by everyone, of avenging injury, and pronouncing on good and evil; and provided it also possesses the power to lay down a general rule of conduct, and to pass laws sanctioned, not by reason, which is powerless in restraining emotion, but by threats (Proposition 17 of this Part, Note).  Such a society established with laws and the power of preserving itself is called a State, while those who live under its protection are called citizens.  We may readily understand that there is in the state of nature nothing, which by universal consent is pronounced good or bad; for in the state of nature everyone thinks solely of his own advantage, and according to his disposition, with reference only to his individual advantage, decides what is good or bad, being bound by no law to anyone besides himself.

In the state of nature, therefore, sin is inconceivable; it can only exist in a state, where good and evil are pronounced on by common consent, and where everyone is bound to obey the State authority.  Sin, then, is nothing else but disobedience, which is therefore punished by the right of the State only.  Obedience, on the other hand, is set down as merit, inasmuch as a man is thought worthy of merit, if he takes delight in the advantages which a State provides.

Again, in the state of nature, no one is by common consent master of anything, nor is there anything in nature, which can be said to belong to one man rather than another: all things are common to all.  Hence, in the state of nature, we can conceive no wish to render to every man his own, or to deprive a man of that which belongs to him; in other words, there is nothing in the state of nature answering to justice and injustice.  Such ideas are only possible in a social state, when it is decreed by common consent what belongs to one man and what to another.

From all these considerations it is evident, that justice and injustice, sin and merit, are extrinsic ideas, and not attributes which display the nature of the mind.  But I have said enough.

Proposition 38

Whatsoever disposes the human body, so as to render it capable of being affected in an increased number of ways, or of affecting external bodies in an increased number of ways, is useful to man; and is so, in proportion as the body is thereby rendered more capable of being affected or affecting other bodies in an increased number of ways; contrariwise, whatsoever renders the body less capable in this respect is hurtful to man.

Proof. Whatsoever thus increases the capabilities of the body increases also the mind's capability of perception (Part 2, Proposition 14); therefore, whatsoever thus disposes the body and thus renders it capable, is necessarily good or useful (Proposition 26 of this Part; Proposition 27 of this Part); and is so in proportion to the extent to which it can render the body capable; contrariwise (Part 2, Proposition 14; Proposition 26 of this Part; Proposition 27 of this Part), it is hurtful, if it renders the body in this respect less capable. Q.E.D.

Proposition 39

Whatsoever brings about the preservation of the proportion of motion and rest, which the parts of the human body mutually possess, is good; contrariwise, whatsoever causes a change in such proportion is bad.

Proof. The human body needs many other bodies for its preservation (Part 2, Postulate 4).  But that which constitutes the specific reality (forma) of a human body is, that its parts communicate their several motions one to another in a certain fixed proportion (the Definition before Lemma 4, which follows Part 2, Proposition 13). Therefore, whatsoever brings about the preservation of the proportion between motion and rest, which the parts of the human body mutually possess, preserves the specific reality of the human body, and consequently renders the human body capable of being affected in many ways and of affecting external bodies in many ways; consequently it is good (by Proposition 38 of this Part).  Again, whatsoever brings about a change in the aforesaid proportion causes the human body to assume another specific character, in other words (see the Preface to this Part, towards the end, though the point is indeed self-evident), to be destroyed, and consequently totally incapable of being affected in an increased numbers of ways; therefore it is bad.  Q.E.D.

Note. The extent to which such causes can injure or be of service to the mind will be explained in the Fifth Part.  But I would here remark that I consider that a body undergoes death, when the proportion of motion and rest which obtained mutually among its several parts is changed.  For I do not venture to deny that a human body, while keeping the circulation of the blood and other properties, wherein the life of a body is thought to consist, may none the less be changed into another nature totally different from its own.  There is no reason, which compels me to maintain that a body does not die, unless it becomes a corpse; nay, experience would seem to point to the opposite conclusion. It sometimes happens, that a man undergoes such changes, that I should hardly call him the same.  As I have heard tell of a certain Spanish poet, who had been seized with sickness, and though he recovered therefrom yet remained so oblivious of his past life, that he would not believe the plays and tragedies he had written to be his own: indeed, he might have been taken for a grown-up child, if he had also forgotten his native tongue.  If this instance seems incredible, what shall we say of infants? A man of ripe age deems their nature so unlike his own, that he can only be persuaded that he too has been an infant by the analogy of other men.  However, I prefer to leave such questions undiscussed, lest I should give ground to the superstitious for raising new issues.
