Proposition 21

The mind can only imagine anything, or remember what is past, while the body endures.

Proof. The mind does not express the actual existence of its body, nor does it imagine the modifications of the body as actual, except while the body endures (Part 2, Proposition 8, Corollary); and, consequently (Part 2, Proposition 26), it does not imagine any body as actually existing, except while its own body endures. Thus it cannot imagine anything (Part 2, Proposition 17, Note), or remember things past, except while the body endures (see Part 2, Proposition 18, Note).  Q.E.D.

Proposition 22

Nevertheless in God there is necessarily an idea, which expresses the essence of this or that human body under the form of eternity.

Proof. God is the cause, not only of the existence of this or that human body, but also of its essence (Part 1, Proposition 25).  This essence, therefore, must necessarily be conceived through the very essence of God (Part 1, Axiom 4), and be thus conceived by a certain eternal necessity (Part 1, Proposition 16); and this conception must necessarily exist in God (Part 2, Proposition 3).  Q.E.D.

Proposition 23

The human mind cannot be absolutely destroyed with the body, but there remains of it something which is eternal.

Proof. There is necessarily in God a concept or idea, which expresses the essence of the human body (Proposition 22 of this Part), which, therefore, is necessarily something appertaining to the essence of the human mind (Part 2, Proposition 13).  But we have not assigned to the human mind any duration, definable by time, except in so far as it expresses the actual existence of the body, which is explained through duration, and may be defined by time—that is (Part 2, Proposition 8, Corollary), we do not assign to it duration, except while the body endures.  Yet, as there is something, notwithstanding, which is conceived by a certain eternal necessity through the very essence of God (Proposition 22 of this Part); this something, which appertains to the essence of the mind, will necessarily be eternal.  Q.E.D.

Note. This idea, which expresses the essence of the body under the form of eternity, is, as we have said, a certain mode of thinking, which belongs to the essence of the mind, and is necessarily eternal.  Yet it is not possible that we should remember that we existed before our body, for our body can bear no trace of such existence, neither can eternity be defined in terms of time, or have any relation to time.  But, notwithstanding, we feel and know that we are eternal.  For the mind feels those things that it conceives by understanding, no less than those things that it remembers.  For the eyes of the mind, whereby it sees and observes things, are none other than proofs.  Thus, although we do not remember that we existed before the body, yet we feel that our mind, in so far as it involves the essence of the body, under the form of eternity, is eternal, and that thus its existence cannot be defined in terms of time, or explained through duration.  Thus our mind can only be said to endure, and its existence can only be defined by a fixed time, in so far as it involves the actual existence of the body.  Thus far only has it the power of determining the existence of things by time, and conceiving them under the category of duration.

Proposition 24

The more we understand particular things, the more do we understand God.

Proof. This is evident from Part 1, Proposition 25, Corollary

Proposition 25

The highest endeavour of the mind, and the highest virtue is to understand things by the third kind of knowledge.

Proof. The third kind of knowledge proceeds from an adequate idea of certain attributes of God to an adequate knowledge of the essence of things (see Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2); and, in proportion as we understand things more in this way, we better understand God (by Proposition 24 of this Part); therefore (Part 4, Proposition 28) the highest virtue of the mind, that is (Part 4, Definition 8) the power, or nature, or (Part 3, Proposition 7) highest endeavour of the mind, is to understand things by the third kind of knowledge.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 26

In proportion as the mind is more capable of understanding things by the third kind of knowledge, it desires more to understand things by that kind.

Proof. This is evident.  For, in so far as we conceive the mind to be capable of conceiving things by this kind of knowledge, we, to that extent, conceive it as determined thus to conceive things; and consequently (Definition 1 of the Emotions), the mind desires so to do, in proportion as it is more capable thereof.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 27

From this third kind of knowledge arises the highest possible mental acquiescence.

Proof. The highest virtue of the mind is to know God (Part 4, Proposition 28), or to understand things by the third kind of knowledge (Proposition 25 of this Part), and this virtue is greater in proportion as the mind knows things more by the said kind of knowledge (Proposition 24 of this Part): consequently, he who knows things by this kind of knowledge passes to the summit of human perfection, and is therefore (Definition 2 of the Emotions) affected by the highest pleasure, such pleasure being accompanied by the idea of himself and his own virtue; thus (Definition 25 of the Emotions), from this kind of knowledge arises the highest possible acquiescence.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 28

The endeavour or desire to know things by the third kind of knowledge cannot arise from the first, but from the second kind of knowledge.

Proof. This proposition is self-evident.  For whatsoever we understand clearly and distinctly, we understand either through itself, or through that which is conceived through itself; that is, ideas which are clear and distinct in us, or which are referred to the third kind of knowledge (Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2) cannot follow from ideas that are fragmentary and confused, and are referred to knowledge of the first kind, but must follow from adequate ideas, or ideas of the second and third kind of knowledge; therefore (Definition 1 of the Emotions), the desire of knowing things by the third kind of knowledge cannot arise from the first, but from the second kind.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 29

Whatsoever the mind understands under the form of eternity, it does not understand by virtue of conceiving the present actual existence of the body, but by virtue of conceiving the essence of the body under the form of eternity.

Proof. In so far as the mind conceives the present existence of its body, it to that extent conceives duration which can be determined by time, and to that extent only has it the power of conceiving things in relation to time (Proposition 21 of this Part; Part 2, Proposition 26).  But eternity cannot be explained in terms of duration (Part 1, Definition 8, Explanation).  Therefore to this extent the mind has not the power of conceiving things under the form of eternity, but it possesses such power, because it is of the nature of reason to conceive things under the form of eternity (Part 2, Proposition 44, Corollary 2), and also because it is of the nature of the mind to conceive the essence of the body under the form of eternity (Proposition 23 of this Part), for besides these two there is nothing which belongs to the essence of mind (Part 2, Proposition 13).  Therefore this power of conceiving things under the form of eternity only belongs to the mind in virtue of the mind's conceiving the essence of the body under the form of eternity.  Q.E.D.

Note. Things are conceived by us as actual in two ways; either as existing in relation to a given time and place, or as contained in God and following from the necessity of the divine nature. Whatsoever we conceive in this second way as true or real, we conceive under the form of eternity, and their ideas involve the eternal and infinite essence of God, as we showed in Part 2, Proposition 45, Note, which see.

Proposition 30

Our mind, in so far as it knows itself and the body under the form of eternity, has to that extent necessarily a knowledge of God, and knows that it is in God, and is conceived through God.

Proof. Eternity is the very essence of God, in so far as this involves necessary existence (Part 1, Definition 8).  Therefore to conceive things under the form of eternity, is to conceive things in so far as they are conceived through the essence of God as real entities, or in so far as they involve existence through the essence of God; wherefore our mind, in so far as it conceives itself and the body under the form of eternity, has to that extent necessarily a knowledge of God, and knows, &c.  Q.E.D.

Proposition 31

The third kind of knowledge depends on the mind, as its formal cause, in so far as the mind itself is eternal.

Proof. The mind does not conceive anything under the form of eternity, except in so far as it conceives its own body under the form of eternity (Proposition 29 of this Part); that is, except in so far as it is eternal (Proposition 21 of this Part; Proposition 23 of this Part); therefore (by Proposition 30 of this Part), in so far as it is eternal, it possesses the knowledge of God, which knowledge is necessarily adequate (Part 2, Proposition 46); hence the mind, in so far as it is eternal, is capable of knowing everything which can follow from this given knowledge of God (Part 2, Proposition 40), in other words, of knowing things by the third kind of knowledge (see Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2), whereof accordingly the mind (Part 3, Definition 1), in so far as it is eternal, is the adequate or formal cause of such knowledge.  Q.E.D.

Note. In proportion, therefore, as a man is more potent in this kind of knowledge, he will be more completely conscious of himself and of God; in other words, he will be more perfect and blessed, as will appear more clearly in the sequel.  But we must here observe that, although we are already certain that the mind is eternal, in so far as it conceives things under the form of eternity, yet, in order that what we wish to show may be more readily explained and better understood, we will consider the mind itself, as though it had just begun to exist and to understand things under the form of eternity, as indeed we have done hitherto; this we may do without any danger of error, so long as we are careful not to draw any conclusion, unless our premisses are plain.

Proposition 32

Whatsoever we understand by the third kind of knowledge, we take delight in, and our delight is accompanied by the idea of God as cause.

Proof. From this kind of knowledge arises the highest possible mental acquiescence, that is (Definition 25 of the Emotions), pleasure, and this acquiescence is accompanied by the idea of the mind itself (Proposition 27 of this Part), and consequently (Proposition 30 of this Part) the idea also of God as cause.  Q.E.D.

Corollary. From the third kind of knowledge necessarily arises the intellectual love of God.  From this kind of knowledge arises pleasure accompanied by the idea of God as cause, that is (Definition 6 of the Emotions), the love of God; not in so far as we imagine him as present (Proposition 29 of this Part), but in so far as we understand him to be eternal; this is what I call the intellectual love of God.

Proposition 33

The intellectual love of God, which arises from the third kind of knowledge, is eternal.

Proof. The third kind of knowledge is eternal (Proposition 31 of this Part; Part 1, Axiom 3); therefore (by Part 1, Axiom 3) the love which arises therefrom is also necessarily eternal.  Q.E.D.

Note. Although this love towards God has (by Proposition 33 of this Part) no beginning, it yet possesses all the perfections of love, just as though it had arisen as we supposed in Proposition 32 of this Part, Corollary.  Nor is there here any difference, except that the mind possesses as eternal those same perfections which we feigned to accrue to it, and they are accompanied by the idea of God as eternal cause.  If pleasure consists in the transition to a greater perfection, assuredly blessedness must consist in the mind being endowed with perfection itself.

Proposition 34

The mind is, only while the body endures, subject to those emotions which are attributable to passions.

Proof. Imagination is the idea wherewith the mind contemplates a thing as present (Part 2, Proposition 17, Note); yet this idea indicates rather the present disposition of the human body than the nature of the external thing (Part 2, Proposition 16, Corollary 2). Therefore emotion (see the general Definition of the Emotions) is imagination, in so far as it indicates the present disposition of the body; therefore (Proposition 21 of this Part) the mind is, only while the body endures, subject to emotions which are attributable to passions.  Q.E.D.

Corollary. Hence it follows that no love save intellectual love is eternal.

Note. If we look to men's general opinion, we shall see that they are indeed conscious of the eternity of their mind, but that they confuse eternity with duration, and ascribe it to the imagination or the memory which they believe to remain after death.

Proposition 35

God loves himself with an infinite intellectual love.

Proof. God is absolutely infinite (Part 1, Definition 6), that is (Part 2, Definition 6), the nature of God rejoices in infinite perfection; and such rejoicing is (Part 2, Proposition 3) accompanied by the idea of himself, that is (Part 1, Proposition 11; Part 1, Definition 1), the idea of his own cause: now this is what we have (in Proposition 32 of this Part, Corollary) described as intellectual love.

Proposition 36

The intellectual love of the mind towards God is that very love of God whereby God loves himself, not in so far as he is infinite, but in so far as he can be explained through the essence of the human mind regarded under the form of eternity; in other words, the intellectual love of the mind towards God is part of the infinite love wherewith God loves himself.

Proof. This love of the mind must be referred to the activities of the mind (Proposition 32 of this Part, Corollary; Part 3, Proposition 3); it is itself, indeed, an activity whereby the mind regards itself accompanied by the idea of God as cause (Proposition 32 of this Part, Corollary); that is (Part 1, Proposition 25, Corollary; Part 2, Proposition 11, Corollary), an activity whereby God, in so far as he can be explained through the human mind, regards himself accompanied by the idea of himself; therefore (by Proposition 35 of this Part), this love of the mind is part of the infinite love wherewith God loves himself.  Q.E.D.

Corollary. Hence it follows that God, in so far as he loves himself, loves man, and, consequently, that the love of God towards men, and the intellectual love of the mind towards God are identical.

Note. From what has been said we clearly understand, wherein our salvation, or blessedness, or freedom, consists: namely, in the constant and eternal love towards God, or in God's love towards men.  This love or blessedness is, in the Bible, called Glory, and not undeservedly.  For whether this love be referred to God or to the mind, it may rightly be called acquiescence of spirit, which (Definition 25 of the Emotions; Definition 30 of the Emotions) is not really distinguished from glory.  In so far as it is referred to God, it is (Proposition 35 of this Part) pleasure, if we may still use that term, accompanied by the idea of itself, and, in so far as it is referred to the mind, it is the same (Proposition 27 of this Part).

Again, since the essence of our mind consists solely in knowledge, whereof the beginning and the foundation is God (Part 1, Proposition 15; Part 2, Proposition 47, Note), it becomes clear to us, in what manner and way our mind, as to its essence and existence, follows from the divine nature and constantly depends on God.  I have thought it worth while here to call attention to this, in order to show by this example how the knowledge of particular things, which I have called intuitive or of the third kind (Part 2, Proposition 40, Note 2), is potent, and more powerful than the universal knowledge, which I have styled knowledge of the second kind.  For, although in Part I. I showed in general terms, that all things (and consequently, also, the human mind) depend as to their essence and existence on God, yet that demonstration, though legitimate and placed beyond the chances of doubt, does not affect our mind so much, as when the same conclusion is derived from the actual essence of some particular thing, which we say depends on God.

Proposition 37

There is nothing in nature, which is contrary to this intellectual love, or which can take it away.

Proof. This intellectual love follows necessarily from the nature of the mind, in so far as the latter is regarded through the nature of God as an eternal truth (Proposition 33 of this Part; Proposition 29 of this Part). If, therefore, there should be anything which would be contrary to this love, that thing would be contrary to that which is true; consequently, that, which should be able to take away this love, would cause that which is true to be false; an obvious absurdity.  Therefore there is nothing in nature which, &c. Q.E.D.

Note. The Axiom of Part IV. has reference to particular things, in so far as they are regarded in relation to a given time and place: of this, I think, no one can doubt.

Proposition 38

In proportion as the mind understands more things by the second and third kind of knowledge, it is less subject to those emotions which are evil, and stands in less fear of death.

Proof. The mind's essence consists in knowledge (Part 2, Proposition 11); therefore, in proportion as the mind understands more things by the second and third kinds of knowledge, the greater will be the part of it that endures (Proposition 29 of this Part; Proposition 23 of this Part), and, consequently (by Proposition 37 of this Part), the greater will be the part that is not touched by the emotions, which are contrary to our nature, or in other words, evil (Part 4, Proposition 30).  Thus, in proportion as the mind understands more things by the second and third kinds of knowledge, the greater will be the part of it, that remains unimpaired, and, consequently, less subject to emotions, &c. Q.E.D.

Note. Hence we understand that point which I touched on in Part 4, Proposition 39, Note, and which I promised to explain in this Part; namely, that death becomes less hurtful, in proportion as the mind's clear and distinct knowledge is greater, and, consequently, in proportion as the mind loves God more.  Again, since from the third kind of knowledge arises the highest possible acquiescence (Proposition 27 of this Part), it follows that the human mind can attain to being of such a nature, that the part thereof which we have shown to perish with the body (Proposition 21 of this Part) should be of little importance when compared with the part which endures.  But I will soon treat of the subject at greater length.

Proposition 39

He, who possesses a body capable of the greatest number of activities, possesses a mind whereof the greatest part is eternal.

Proof. He, who possesses a body capable of the greatest number of activities, is least agitated by those emotions which are evil (Part 4, Proposition 38)—that is (Part 4, Proposition 30), by those emotions which are contrary to our nature; therefore (Proposition 10 of this Part), he possesses the power of arranging and associating the modifications of the body according to the intellectual order, and, consequently, of bringing it about, that all the modifications of the body should be referred to the idea of God; whence it will come to pass that (Proposition 15 of this Part) he will be affected with love towards God, which (Proposition 16 of this Part) must occupy or constitute the chief part of the mind; therefore (Proposition 33 of this Part), such a man will possess a mind whereof the chief part is eternal.  Q.E.D.

Note. Since human bodies are capable of the greatest number of activities, there is no doubt but that they may be of such a nature, that they may be referred to minds possessing a great knowledge of themselves and of God, and whereof the greatest or chief part is eternal, and, therefore, that they should scarcely fear death.  But, in order that this may be understood more clearly, we must here call to mind, that we live in a state of perpetual variation, and, according as we are changed for the better or the worse, we are called happy or unhappy.

For he, who, from being an infant or a child, becomes a corpse, is called unhappy; whereas it is set down to happiness, if we have been able to live through the whole period of life with a sound mind in a sound body.  And, in reality, he, who, as in the case of an infant or a child, has a body capable of very few activities, and depending, for the most part, on external causes, has a mind which, considered in itself alone, is scarcely conscious of itself, or of God, or of things; whereas, he, who has a body capable of very many activities, has a mind which, considered in itself alone, is highly conscious of itself, of God, and of things.  In this life, therefore, we primarily endeavour to bring it about, that the body of a child, in so far as its nature allows and conduces thereto, may be changed into something else capable of very many activities, and referable to a mind which is highly conscious of itself, of God, and of things; and we desire so to change it, that what is referred to its imagination and memory may become insignificant, in comparison with its intellect, as I have already said in the note to the last Proposition.

Proposition 40

In proportion as each thing possesses more of perfection, so is it more active, and less passive; and, vice versâ, in proportion as it is more active, so is it more perfect.

Proof. In proportion as each thing is more perfect, it possesses more of reality (Part 2, Definition 6), and, consequently (Part 3, Proposition 3, Note), it is to that extent more active and less passive.  This demonstration may be reversed, and thus prove that, in proportion as a thing is more active, so is it more perfect.  Q.E.D.

Corollary. Hence it follows that the part of the mind which endures, be it great or small, is more perfect than the rest. For the eternal part of the mind (Proposition 23 of this Part; Proposition 29 of this Part) is the understanding, through which alone we are said to act (Part 3, Proposition 3); the part which we have shown to perish is the imagination (Proposition 21 of this Part), through which only we are said to be passive (Part 3, Proposition 3, and the general Definition of the Emotions); therefore, the former, be it great or small, is more perfect than the latter.  Q.E.D.

Note. Such are the doctrines which I had purposed to set forth concerning the mind, in so far as it is regarded without relation to the body; whence, as also from Part 1, Proposition 21 and other places, it is plain that our mind, in so far as it understands, is an eternal mode of thinking, which is determined by another eternal mode of thinking, and this other by a third, and so on to infinity; so that all taken together at once constitute the eternal and infinite intellect of God.

Proposition 41

Even if we did not know that our mind is eternal, we should still consider as of primary importance piety and religion, and generally all things which, in Part IV., we showed to be attributable to courage and high-mindedness.

Proof. The first and only foundation of virtue, or the rule of right living is (Part 4, Proposition 22, Corollary; Part 4, Proposition 24) seeking one's own true interest.  Now, while we determined what reason prescribes as useful, we took no account of the mind's eternity, which has only become known to us in this Fifth Part.  Although we were ignorant at that time that the mind is eternal, we nevertheless stated that the qualities attributable to courage and high-mindedness are of primary importance.  Therefore, even if we were still ignorant of this doctrine, we should yet put the aforesaid precepts of reason in the first place.  Q.E.D.

Note. The general belief of the multitude seems to be different.  Most people seem to believe that they are free, in so far as they may obey their lusts, and that they cede their rights, in so far as they are bound to live according to the commandments of the divine law.  They therefore believe that piety, religion, and, generally, all things attributable to firmness of mind, are burdens, which, after death, they hope to lay aside, and to receive the reward for their bondage, that is, for their piety and religion; it is not only by this hope, but also, and chiefly, by the fear of being horribly punished after death, that they are induced to live according to the divine commandments, so far as their feeble and infirm spirit will carry them.

If men had not this hope and this fear, but believed that the mind perishes with the body, and that no hope of prolonged life remains for the wretches who are broken down with the burden of piety, they would return to their own inclinations, controlling everything in accordance with their lusts, and desiring to obey fortune rather than themselves.  Such a course appears to me not less absurd than if a man, because he does not believe that he can by wholesome food sustain his body for ever, should wish to cram himself with poisons and deadly fare; or if, because he sees that the mind is not eternal or immortal, he should prefer to be out of his mind altogether, and to live without the use of reason; these ideas are so absurd as to be scarcely worth refuting.

Proposition 42

Blessedness is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself; neither do we rejoice therein, because we control our lusts, but, contrariwise, because we rejoice therein, we are able to control our lusts.

Proof. Blessedness consists in love towards God (Proposition 36 of this Part, Note), which love springs from the third kind of knowledge (Proposition 32 of this Part, Corollary); therefore this love (Part 3, Proposition 3; Part 3, Proposition 59) must be referred to the mind, in so far as the latter is active; therefore (Part 4, Definition 8) it is virtue itself.  This was our first point.  Again, in proportion as the mind rejoices more in this divine love or blessedness, so does it the more understand (Proposition 32 of this Part); that is (Proposition 3 of this Part, Corollary), so much the more power has it over the emotions, and (Proposition 38 of this Part) so much the less is it subject to those emotions which are evil; therefore, in proportion as the mind rejoices in this divine love or blessedness, so has it the power of controlling lusts.  And, since human power in controlling the emotions consists solely in the understanding, it follows that no one rejoices in blessedness, because he has controlled his lusts, but, contrariwise, his power of controlling his lusts arises from this blessedness itself.  Q.E.D.

Note. I have thus completed all I wished to set forth touching the mind's power over the emotions and the mind's freedom.  Whence it appears, how potent is the wise man, and how much he surpasses the ignorant man, who is driven only by his lusts.  For the ignorant man is not only distracted in various ways by external causes without ever gaining the true acquiescence of his spirit, but moreover lives, as it were unwitting of himself, and of God, and of things, and as soon as he ceases to suffer, ceases also to be.

Whereas the wise man, in so far as he is regarded as such, is scarcely at all disturbed in spirit, but, being conscious of himself, and of God, and of things, by a certain eternal necessity, never ceases to be, but always possesses true acquiescence of his spirit.

If the way which I have pointed out as leading to this result seems exceedingly hard, it may nevertheless be discovered.  Needs must it be hard, since it is so seldom found.  How would it be possible, if salvation were ready to our hand, and could without great labour be found, that it should be by almost all men neglected? But all things excellent are as difficult as they are rare.
