Chapter 1: Preliminary—Methods of Observation and Apparatus

There will be but few of my readers who have not, in some heavy shower of rain, beguiled the tedium of enforced waiting by watching, perhaps half-unconsciously, the thousand little crystal fountains that start up from the surface of pool or river; noting now and then a surrounding coronet of lesser jets, or here and there a bubble that floats for a moment and then vanishes.

It is to this apparently insignificant transaction, which always has been and always will be so familiar, and to others of a like nature, that I desire to call the attention of those who are interested in natural phenomena; hoping to share with them some of the delight that I have myself felt, in contemplating the exquisite forms that the camera has revealed, and in watching the progress of a multitude of events, compressed indeed within the limits of a few hundredths of a second, but none the less orderly and inevitable, and of which the sequence is in part easy to anticipate and understand, while in part it taxes the highest mathematical powers to elucidate.

In these modern days of kinematographs and snapshot cameras it might seem an easy matter to follow, by the aid of photography, even a splashing drop. But in reality the task is not so simple, for the changes of form that take place in a splash are far too rapid to come within reach of any ordinary kinematograph, and even the quickest photographic shutter is also much too slow, so that it is necessary to have recourse to the far shorter exposure of a suitable electric spark. The originals of the photographs which illustrate this book were taken by means of a spark, whose duration was certainly less than three-millionths of a second, an interval of time which bears to a whole second about the same proportion as a day to a thousand years.

In order to obtain the photographs, advantage was taken of the fact that whatever be the sequence of events in any particular splash, this sequence will be exactly repeated every time that a falling drop strikes the surface under exactly the same conditions, and the problem to be solved was, therefore, as follows:—To cause a drop of definite size to fall from a definite height in absolute darkness so as to strike the surface of the liquid into which it falls at a spot towards which is directed a photographic camera with uncovered lens, and armed with an exceptionally sensitive plate, and to illuminate the drop at the instant that it just touches the surface by a flash of such excessively short duration that no appreciable change of form can take place while the drop is illuminated.

This gives us a photograph of the earliest stage. The plate must then be removed and a fresh one substituted; a second drop, of exactly the same size, must be let fall from exactly the same place, and photographed in just the same way, but the flash must now be so timed as to take place at a slightly later stage of the splash, say, one-thousandth of a second later. The photographic plate must be then again removed and a third substituted, on which a still later stage is to be depicted, and in this way the phenomenon can be followed step by step.

By adopting this process, and not attempting to follow the same individual splash throughout, we avoid two great difficulties: (1) the necessity of shifting our photographic plate or film through a distance equal to the breadth of the whole picture every five hundredth or thousandth of a second (if we wish to obtain pictures of stages so near together as this); and (2) the difficulty of obtaining brilliant flashes of light of sufficiently short duration at these very short intervals.

For these we substitute two other difficulties: (1) that of delivering the drops exactly as required; and (2) that of timing the flash on each occasion within one or two thousandths of a second, so as to pick out the exact stage we wish to photograph.

I will now describe how these two problems have been solved.

It is easy enough to arrange for the production of small drops of almost exactly equal size. They may be allowed to fall one by one at a steady rate from the end of a fine glass tube connected to a vessel in which the liquid is maintained at a constant level, as in Fig. 1, or they may be squeezed out slowly as required by means of a syringe held in a clip as in Fig. 2. Any required number of these small drops can be caught, and allowed to run together if a larger drop is to be experimented with.

[Figure 1]

[Figure 2]

If the liquid used is mercury, the drops may be caught in any little glass cup such as a deeply concave watch-glass; but other liquids, such as water or milk, would wet the glass and stick to it.

If, however, the inside surface of the watch-glass be first carefully smoked in the flame of a candle, then even water or milk will roll over it without sticking, and the drop thus made up will retain a spheroidal form, and can be conveyed to the place of observation in the dark room, where it is transferred to the "dropping cup."

This consists of a similar, deep, smoked watch-glass (W)—see Plate I—supported on the end of a small horizontal lever, a light cylindrical rod of about the dimensions of an ordinary uncut lead pencil, pivoted about a horizontal axle near the end to which the watch-glass is attached. The other end is armed with a small light piece of iron (I) and is held in position by means of an electro-magnet (M), against the action of a spring. On cutting off the current from the electro-magnet the spring, acting as a catapult, tosses up the longer arm of the lever and thus removes the watch-glass from below the drop (D), which is left unsupported in mid-air, so that it falls from a definite fixed distance into a bowl of water placed below it, towards the surface of which the camera (C) is directed. This solves problem number one. Of course, if we wish to observe the splash of a solid sphere, there is no need to smoke the surface of the watch-glass. Indeed, the sphere may be more conveniently supported on a small ring.

Now for the production and timing of the flash. Two large Leyden jars (JJ) are provided, and charged by an electrical machine on their inner coats, one positively and one negatively. Stout wires lead from the outer coats to the dark room, and terminate in a spark-gap (S) between magnesium terminals close over the surface of the water in the bowl just mentioned. If the inner coats are now connected together, the positive and negative charges unite with a dazzling flash and a simultaneous discharge and flash takes place between the two outer coats across the spark-gap in the dark room.

This latter is the illuminating spark; we have now to time it correctly.

For this purpose it is arranged that the discharge shall be effected by means of a falling metal sphere (T) which I shall call the timing sphere, which passes between two terminals S and S connected one to the inside of one jar and one to the inside of the other. These terminals are just too far apart for a spark to leap across, till the timing sphere passes between them and thus shortens the gap; then the discharge takes place, with its accompanying flash in the dark room.

The release of the timing sphere is effected by an arrangement of lever and spring controlled by an electro-magnet exactly similar to that which releases the drop in the dark room, and the two electro-magnets *are on the same electric circuit*, so that the drop and timing sphere *are released simultaneously*. But while the drop always falls the same distance, the height through which the timing sphere has to fall before producing discharge can be adjusted at will, and to great nicety, by moving its releasing-lever up or down a vertical support with a scale attached.

If, for example, a particular stage of the splash is photographed when the timing sphere falls just four feet to the gap, then by raising its releasing-lever about two-fifths of an inch, the laws of falling bodies tell us that we shall postpone the flash by just one-thousandth of a second, and the next photograph will accordingly reveal a stage just so much later.

[Figure plate-one: E is the electrical machine. J J are the Leyden jars whose inner coats are connected to the sparking knobs S S. L is the lever for releasing the timing sphere T. C is the catapult. I is the light strip of iron held down by the electro-magnet M.]

It ought still to be mentioned that to make the utmost use of the illuminating power of the spark, it is necessary to place close behind it a little concave mirror (R), by means of which a compact beam of rays, which would otherwise have been wasted, is directed to the required spot. By this addition we imitate, in miniature, the search-light of a man-of-war.

As with all experimental devices, the precision attainable with this arrangement is limited by several circumstances. In the first place, the demagnetization of the iron cores of the electro-magnets, when the current is cut off, is not truly instantaneous, and the time required depends on the strength of the magnetizing current and on the temperature of the iron, which in turn will depend on the length of time for which the current has been running. This variation would be of no importance if the two magnets were exactly alike and the springs of exactly equal strength, conditions which can be nearly but not perfectly fulfilled.

[Figure ac: PLATE II Photographs taken to test the accuracy of the "timing."]

A more important source of uncertainty arises from the fact that the time at which the spark takes place depends partly on the magnitude of the + and - charges which have been allowed to accumulate on the discharging knobs connected to the two Leyden jars, for when these charges are larger, then the spark will be longer and will take place earlier and before the timing sphere has reached the mid-position. The charging has therefore to be carefully watched by means of the indications of a suitable electrometer, and the timing sphere must on each occasion be released when the charges have just reached the right value. But even this does not entirely suffice, for the passage of the spark depends also partly on the state of the surface of the knobs, which cannot be kept at any high degree of polish.

Still, when care is taken to keep the conditions as nearly as possible constant, neither of these sources of error is serious, and the reader can judge for himself of the accuracy of the timing from the photographs given on Plate II, in which a solid sphere was let fall in the dark room past a metre scale. The timing sphere was arranged, in the first four photographs, to illuminate it at the same stage in its fall, after a descent of thirty centimetres; if the timing had been perfect the sphere would appear on each occasion at the same mark on the scale.

It will be observed that in the first, second, and fourth photographs the falling sphere is almost accurately bisected by the long line of the three-inch mark on the right-hand edge of the scale. The greatest difference of position being just about one millimetre (as read off the left-hand scale), which would correspond to an error of about 1/2700 of a second. But the third photograph is earlier, showing the sphere 4·5 millimetres higher up, a distance which implies an error of just 1/600 of a second.

A fifth photograph was then taken, with the timing arranged so as to illuminate the sphere one centimetre higher up, and it will be seen that if we compare this with No. 3, the error is again only one millimetre. Thus Nos. 3 and 5 agree very closely, but disagree with Nos. 1, 2, and 4 by about 1/600 of a second.

The photographs themselves supply the reason. For there happens to be visible on each an (out-of-focus) image of the spark, and this image is very much the same in 1, 2 and 4, but much larger and brighter in 3 and 5, showing that the knobs were then more highly charged, which would account for the spark occurring a little too early.

But when we are watching the splash made by the fall of a liquid drop, instead of a solid sphere, there is a new and more serious source of difficulty. For the drop as it lies on the smoked glass cup is not perfectly spherical, but is flattened by its own weight, as shown in Fig. 3, and on the sudden removal of the supporting cup it oscillates between an oval form, elongated vertically, and a flattened form (see Fig. 4). These oscillations are unavoidable, and their extent will depend partly on the amount of adhesion between the smoked surface and the drop, and as this adhesion is never entirely absent and is variable, depending partly on the length of time that the drop has been lying in the cup, it follows that the drop will always receive a slight tug downwards at starting, which will be greater on some occasions than on others. On this account not only will the time taken to reach the water vary slightly, but the drop will strike it sometimes when elongated and sometimes when flattened, and the resulting splash will be affected by this circumstance.

[Figure 3]

[Figure 4]

The four photographs on the next page were taken in succession in order to afford the reader an opportunity of judging for himself the sort of accuracy attainable when a liquid drop was concerned.

The fall was 30 centim., and the greatest discrepancy is 4·8 millimetres, corresponding to 1/560 of a second. Thus even here the error does not amount to two-thousandths of a second.

[Figure ad: 1]

[Figure ae: 2]

[Figure af: 3]

[Figure ag: 4]

Photographs taken to test the timing of a falling drop.

With higher falls the timing sphere is moving more quickly past the discharging knobs, and the error due to a longer or shorter spark is correspondingly less, so that it appears safe to say that the accuracy of the timing was such that, when all precautions were taken, any desired stage could be picked out within two-thousandths of a second.

It is not however pretended that the precautions necessary for the most accurate timing were always taken, especially in the earlier Series of Photographs, for the main object of the experiments was to find out what happened, and only incidentally to ascertain exactly how long it took to happen, and there is no doubt that on some occasions, through the smoke-film being allowed to wear away, adhesions to the dropping cup occurred, with a corresponding disturbance of the timing, before the defect was noticed and remedied.

[Figure 5: Photograph of the edge of a rapidly whirling disc.]

It remains to mention, for the sake of those interested in photography, that notwithstanding the sensitiveness of the plates and the brilliance of the illuminating spark, its duration was so short that the negatives were always "under-exposed." [C] I have mentioned that the effective duration of the spark was less than three-millionths of a second. The evidence for this is the accompanying photograph (Fig. 5), taken of a cardboard disc when rotating at a rate of fifty-three turns per second; the disc was 22 cm. in diameter, and had been roughly graduated round the edge with pen and ink. The photograph of the part that was in focus shows no perceptible blurring of the edge of the marks, and with a lens, a blurring of one-tenth of a millimetre would be easily detectable. Since the edge was moving at a rate of 36·5 metres per second (about 78 miles per hour), the time taken to traverse one-tenth of a millimetre would be rather less than three-millionths of a second. Hence we may conclude that the illumination did not last so long as this.

The weakness of the negatives was met by a prolonged development of about forty minutes in a saturated solution of eikonogen. This forbade the use of any artificial light, and all the photographic processes had to be conducted in absolute darkness. To avoid the tedium of long waiting in the dark room, a light-tight tray was constructed, in which several developing dishes could be placed, and the whole brought out into the daylight and suitably rocked. In this way ten or twelve photographs could be developed simultaneously.

It may be worth while to mention here that the bright spark given by breaking the *primary* circuit of an induction coil at the surface of mercury was found to be of much too long duration to be useful for the purposes of splash-photography.

Footnote [C] The plates which I have mostly used have been Thomas's A 1 ordinary.
