Chapter 11: A New Phenomenon That Appears with an Increase in the Velocity of Entry of a Rough Sphere

A slight delay in the passage of this book through the press has enabled me to obtain some of the missing information referred to in the opening paragraph of the last chapter.

If any reader who may have been persuaded to try for himself the simple experiment mentioned at the beginning of Chapter VII, will extend his observations by increasing the height of fall of the roughened marble to 4 or 5 feet (say to 140 centim.), he will find that while, as before, much air is still carried down, there is nevertheless, now, no rebounding jet projected high into the air, such as is invariably seen with the lower fall of 2 feet (60 centim.), and he will notice a curious "seething" appearance at the surface.[K] Thinking that this appearance which the naked eye detects must be due to an entanglement of the rising jet with the bubble, which entanglement was likely to produce confused motions that could not be profitably studied, I had not till now been sufficiently curious to examine what really happened. But certain recent observations of the persistence with which the seething motion again and again recurred when a stone was dropped or thrown into a river, led me to suspect that something required investigation. I was, however, quite unprepared to find the remarkable change of procedure that is revealed by the following series of photographs (Series XVII), in the taking of which I owe much to the kind and skilful assistance of Dr. Bryan. The earlier figures show the very rapid rise of the crater and its closing as a bubble much before the entrapped column of air divides. Before the division takes place, the liquid now flowing in from all sides closes over the upper end of the long air-tube, separates it from the air outside, and *forms a downward jet which shoots down the middle of the air-tube in pursuit of the sphere*. The first formation of this jet is not easy to observe, because the view is obscured by much splashing and turbulent vortical motion resulting apparently from the collision of the streams that converge from all sides on the axis of the air-tube at its upper end. Thus in Fig. 5 the jet is not yet well established, or at least not easily discerned; but in Fig. 6 the turbulence has cleared away from the upper part, and from this stage onwards the jet is well seen in all the figures, and it persists long after the segmentation of the air column has taken place. The reader must not suppose that this jet is a mere *falling* of the water under the action of gravity, for the rapidity with which it advances is far greater than could be accounted for in this way; indeed, as the "times" show, the effect of gravity during the establishment of the jet is insignificant.

SERIES XVII

Rough sphere falling 140 cm. into water. Scale 2/3.

[Figure gx: 1 0·006 sec. — A broad crater with thin upright walls rises above the surface, and below it a deep, rounded air-cavity follows the sphere down.]

[Figure gy: 2 0·008 sec. — The crater walls stand taller and straight-sided, their rim spreading outward in a brim of spray, while the air-cavity below grows longer.]

[Figure gz: 3 0·015 sec. — The crater has closed over at the top into a bubble, its walls drawn together into a twisted spout of spray, above a long air-tube tapering downward.]

[Figure ha: 4 0·021 sec. — The closed bubble is lower and broader, with a ragged plume of spray rising from where the walls met; below the surface the air-tube widens as it descends.]

[Figure hb: 5 0·038 sec. — The dome has collapsed into a turbulent, splashing heap with drops flying off; below, the top of the air-tube is a broad chamber full of confused motion.]

The segmentation of the air column appears to be independent of the jet; but some photographs, such as Fig. 7, show the jet striking the side and breaking into the surrounding liquid with a great accompaniment of "air-dust."

SERIES XVII—(*continued*)

[Figure hc: 6 0·043 sec. — Upper and lower halves joined from two photographs. A small heap stands above the surface; below it a pear-shaped air-chamber narrows into the long air-tube, with the white jet shooting down its middle.]

[Figure hd: 7 0·052 sec. — Made up from two photographs. The pear-shaped chamber tapers to a point, and below it the jet has struck the side and broken out in a ragged cloud of air-dust above the lower air-tube.]

N.B.—Each of these figures is made up from two photographs; one of the upper and one of the lower portion taken from different splashes, but with the same "timing."

The reader will observe that after division of the air-tube has taken place, say from Fig. 9 onwards, the water entering the jet at the top and coming out again at the bottom must circulate as in a vortex ring, part of the core of which is filled with the air surrounding the jet.

It is also to be observed that after the establishment of the jet, there is a steady increase in the size of the heap above the surface; but it is not easy in any given photograph to say how much of this protuberance is air and how much is water. An examination of Figs. 7, 8, and 9 shows that the place of origin of the jet is gradually lifted above the level of the free surface.

That the jet we now see should be directed downwards rather than upwards may, I think, be explained in a general way as follows:—The great initial momentum of the sphere causes it to continue in rapid motion after the bubble has closed, thus the sphere acts as a sort of piston, which by increasing the length of the air-tube diminishes the pressure in it and so sucks in the bubble, which is driven down by the greater atmospheric pressure above. The converging horizontal inflow near the mouth of the air-tube cannot, of course, produce the downward-directed jet without an equal and opposite generation of momentum upwards; but this is now expended, not in producing a similar upward jet, but in balancing the excess of atmospheric pressure. The reaction, in fact, to the projection of the jet downwards, is the force which holds up and slowly raises the roof of the long air-shaft.

SERIES XVII—(*continued*)

[Figure he: 8 0·057 sec. — A conical heap stands above the surface; below it the pear-shaped chamber, with the jet visible down its core, tapers away into the narrowing air-tube.]

[Figure hf: 9 0·063 sec. — The air column has divided: the rounded chamber below the heap is closed at the bottom, and a trail of air-dust drifts down from beneath it.]

[Figure hg: 10 0·073 sec. — The heap above the surface is larger and flings off drops; the air-chamber below has become rounder, with small bubbles strung out underneath.]

[Figure hh: 11 0·089 sec. — A large rough heap now stands above the surface, while the air-chamber below has flattened into a wide rounded pocket with scattered bubbles beneath.]

When, as in the last figure of Series VI, p. 85, we saw the upward-directed jet, then also there must have been an equal and opposite generation of downward momentum distributed in some way through the liquid below the basin, of which, however, there could be no visible sign. Hence we see that the present downward jet is, in a sense, not a new phenomenon, but one which, having existed unnoticed before, is now rendered visible to us by reason of its being produced in air instead of in water.

By means of a hole bored through the ceiling of the dark room, the fall was then increased to 281 centim. (just over 9 feet). The very beautiful earlier stages of the splash at this height are shown in Series XVIII. Fig. 4 shows very well the internal splashing at the top of the air-column which accompanies the initiation of the jet. Some later photographs taken at this height (not yet quite presentable) show the jet passing right down the narrow neck of air-tube and probably striking the top of the sphere, the descent of which must thus be liable to a curious irregularity.

A further increase of the height of fall to 686 centim. (22-1/2 feet) was found to produce but little change in the phenomena.

SERIES XVIII

Early stages of the splash of a rough sphere (diam. 1·5 centim.) falling 281 centim. (about 9 feet) into water.

[Figure hi: 1 T = 0 — A low, wide-brimmed crater has risen above the surface, with a short, rounded cavity below it.]

[Figure hj: 2 0·003 sec. — The crater walls rise tall and curve inward, their rim torn into spray, while the air-cavity below is long and tapering.]

[Figure hk: 3 0·005 sec. — The crater walls lean together towards closing and the air-cavity below reaches deeper, with faint streaks down its sides.]

[Figure hl: 4 — The crater has closed into a narrow neck with a splash spouting above it, and at the top of the air-column below there is much internal splashing and a cloud of bubbles.]

Footnote [K] I can recommend any reader who is not afraid of being late for breakfast to keep a bag of marbles in his bath-room.

PRINTED BY WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON, LTD PLYMOUTH

The following changes have been made to the original text.
