William Caxton's Preface

After I had completed and finished various histories, some of devotion and some of the deeds of great conquerors and princes in this world, and also certain books of examples and teaching, many noble gentlemen of this realm of England came to me and asked me, many times over, why I had not had made and printed the noble history of the Holy Grail, and of the most renowned Christian king, first and chief of the three best and worthiest Christians, King Arthur, who ought to be remembered among us Englishmen before all other Christian kings. For it is well known through all the world that there are nine worthies, the best that ever lived: that is to say, three pagans, three Jews, and three Christian men. As for the pagans, they lived before the Incarnation of Christ, and they were these: the first Hector of Troy, whose history has come down to us both in ballad and in prose; the second Alexander the Great; and the third Julius Caesar, Emperor of Rome, whose histories are well known and easy to come by. And as for the three Jews, who also lived before the incarnation of our Lord, the first was Joshua, the leader who brought the children of Israel into the Promised Land; the second David, king of Jerusalem; and the third Judas Maccabeus; and the Bible tells all their noble histories and deeds. And since that same Incarnation there have been three noble Christian men, installed and admitted through all the world into the number of the nine best and worthiest. The first of these was the noble Arthur, whose noble deeds I intend to set down in this present book that follows. The second was Charlemagne, or Charles the Great, whose history can be had in many places, both in French and in English. And the third and last was Godfrey of Bouillon, about whose deeds and life I made a book for the excellent prince and king of noble memory, King Edward the Fourth.

These noble gentlemen urgently asked me to print the history of that noble king and conqueror King Arthur, and of his knights, with the history of the Holy Grail, and of the death and ending of Arthur himself. They argued that I ought rather to print his deeds and noble feats than those of Godfrey of Bouillon or any of the other eight, considering that he was a man born within this realm, and king and emperor of it, and that there are in French many and various noble volumes of his deeds, and of his knights' too. I answered them that various men hold the opinion that there was no such Arthur, and that all the books made about him are invented stories and fables, because some chronicles make no mention of him at all, and do not remember him or his knights. To this they answered, and one of them in particular said, that anyone who should say or think that there was never such a king called Arthur might well be charged with great folly and blindness. For he said that there was plenty of evidence to the contrary. First, you may see his tomb in the monastery of Glastonbury. And also in the Polychronicon, in the fifth book, the sixth chapter, and in the seventh book, the twenty-third chapter, you may read where his body was buried, and afterwards found, and moved into that monastery. You will see also in the history of Boccaccio, in his book De Casu Principum, "On the Fall of Princes", part of his noble deeds, and also of his fall. Also Geoffrey of Monmouth tells his life in his British book. And in various places of England there are many memorials of him still, and of his knights, and they will remain forever. First, in the abbey of Westminster, at St. Edward's shrine, there is still the print of his seal in red wax enclosed in beryl, on which is written "Patricius Arthurus Britannie, Gallie, Germanie, Dacie, Imperator", that is, "The noble Arthur, Emperor of Britain, Gaul, Germany and Denmark". Item: in the castle of Dover you may see Gawain's skull and Cradok's mantle; at Winchester, the Round Table; in other places Lancelot's sword and many other things. Then, all these things considered, no man can reasonably deny that there was a king of this land named Arthur. For in all places, Christian and heathen, he is reputed and counted one of the nine worthies, and the first of the three Christian men. And besides, he is more spoken of across the sea, and more books are made of his noble deeds there, than there are in England, in German, Italian, Spanish and Greek as well as in French. And there still remain as witnesses to him in Wales, in the town of Camelot, the great stones and the marvellous works of iron lying under the ground, and royal vaults, which various people now living have seen. So it is a marvel that he is not more renowned in his own country, except that it agrees with the Word of God, which says that no man is accepted as a prophet in his own country.

So, with all these things put to me, I could not well deny that there was such a noble king named Arthur, reputed one of the nine worthies, and first and chief of the Christian men. And many noble volumes have been made of him and of his noble knights in French, which I have seen and read across the sea, and which we do not have in our mother tongue. In Welsh there are many, and in French too, and some in English, but nowhere near all of them. Therefore, out of those that have lately been drawn out briefly into English, I have, according to the simple skill that God has sent me, and under the favour and correction of all noble lords and gentlemen, undertaken to print a book of the noble histories of this King Arthur and of certain of his knights, from a copy delivered to me, which copy Sir Thomas Malory took out of certain books in French and turned into English. And I, following my copy, have had it set in print, so that noble men may see and learn the noble deeds of chivalry, the noble and virtuous deeds that some knights did in those days, by which they came to honour, and how those who were wicked were punished and often put to shame and rebuke. And I humbly beg all noble lords and ladies, and all other people of whatever rank or degree they are, who see and read this book and work, to keep the good and honest deeds in their memory, and to follow them. In it they will find many joyful and pleasant histories, and noble and renowned deeds of humanity, nobility and chivalry. For here may be seen noble chivalry, courtesy, humanity, friendliness, hardiness, love, friendship, cowardice, murder, hate, virtue and sin. Follow the good and leave the evil, and it will bring you to good fame and renown. And to pass the time, this book will be pleasant to read in; but as for putting faith and belief in all that it contains being true, you are at your liberty. But all of it is written for our instruction, and so that we take care not to fall into vice or sin, but practise and follow virtue, by which we may come and attain to good fame and renown in this life, and after this short and passing life come to everlasting bliss in heaven: which may He grant us who reigns in heaven, the blessed Trinity. Amen.

Then, to proceed with this book, which I dedicate to all noble princes, lords and ladies, gentlemen and gentlewomen, who wish to read or hear read the noble and joyful history of the great conqueror and excellent king, King Arthur, once king of this noble realm, then called Britain: I, William Caxton, a simple person, present this book that follows, which I have undertaken to print. It treats of the noble deeds, feats of arms and of chivalry, prowess, hardiness, humanity, love, courtesy and true nobility, with many wonderful histories and adventures. And so that the contents of this volume can be understood briefly, I have divided it into twenty-one Books, and every book into chapters, as will follow hereafter, by God's grace. The First Book will tell how Uther Pendragon fathered the noble conqueror King Arthur, and contains twenty-eight chapters. The Second Book tells of Balin the noble knight, and contains nineteen chapters. The Third Book tells of the marriage of King Arthur to Queen Guinevere, with other matters, and contains fifteen chapters. The Fourth Book tells how Merlin was besotted, and of war made on King Arthur, and contains twenty-nine chapters. The Fifth Book tells of the conquest of Lucius the emperor, and contains twelve chapters. The Sixth Book tells of Sir Lancelot and Sir Lionel, and of marvellous adventures, and contains eighteen chapters. The Seventh Book tells of a noble knight called Sir Gareth, whom Sir Kay named Beaumains, and contains thirty-six chapters. The Eighth Book tells of the birth of Sir Tristram the noble knight, and of his deeds, and contains forty-one chapters. The Ninth Book tells of a knight whom Sir Kay named La Cote Male Taile, and also of Sir Tristram, and contains forty-four chapters. The Tenth Book tells of Sir Tristram and other marvellous adventures, and contains eighty-eight chapters. The Eleventh Book tells of Sir Lancelot and Sir Galahad, and contains fourteen chapters. The Twelfth Book tells of Sir Lancelot and his madness, and contains fourteen chapters. The Thirteenth Book tells how Galahad first came to King Arthur's court, and how the quest of the Holy Grail was begun, and contains twenty chapters. The Fourteenth Book tells of the quest of the Holy Grail, and contains ten chapters. The Fifteenth Book tells of Sir Lancelot, and contains six chapters. The Sixteenth Book tells of Sir Bors and Sir Lionel his brother, and contains seventeen chapters. The Seventeenth Book tells of the Holy Grail, and contains twenty-three chapters. The Eighteenth Book tells of Sir Lancelot and the queen, and contains twenty-five chapters. The Nineteenth Book tells of Queen Guinevere and Lancelot, and contains thirteen chapters. The Twentieth Book tells of the piteous death of Arthur, and contains twenty-two chapters. The Twenty-first Book tells of his last departing, and how Sir Lancelot came to avenge his death, and contains thirteen chapters. The sum is twenty-one books, which contain in all five hundred and seven chapters, as will be shown more plainly hereafter.
