Chapter 1: How Uther Pendragon sent for the Duke of Cornwall and his wife Igraine, and how they suddenly left

It happened in the days of Uther Pendragon, when he was king of all England and reigned there, that there was a mighty duke in Cornwall who made war on him for a long time. And the duke was called the Duke of Tintagil. And so, through go-betweens, King Uther sent for this duke, ordering him to bring his wife with him, for she was said to be a beautiful lady, and an exceedingly wise one, and her name was Igraine.

So when the duke and his wife had come to the king, the great lords worked between them and the two men were reconciled. The king liked this lady and loved her well, and he gave them a welcome beyond measure, and wanted to sleep with her. But she was an exceedingly good woman, and would not consent to the king. And then she told the duke her husband, and said, "I think we were sent for so that I should be dishonoured. So, husband, I advise you that we leave here at once, so that we can ride all night to our own castle."

And just as she said, so they left, so that neither the king nor any of his council knew they had gone. As soon as King Uther learned of their leaving so suddenly, he was furiously angry. Then he called his privy council to him and told them of the sudden departure of the duke and his wife.

Then they advised the king to send for the duke and his wife with a stern command: "And if he will not come at your summons, then you may do as you see fit; then you will have good cause to make mighty war on him." So that was done, and the messengers brought back their answers; and in short it was this, that neither he nor his wife would come to him.

Then the king was furiously angry. And then the king sent him plain word in return, and told him to make ready, and stock and arm his castles, for within forty days he would fetch him out of the strongest castle he had.

When the duke had this warning, he went at once and stocked and armed two strong castles of his, of which one was called Tintagil and the other Terrabil. So he put his wife Dame Igraine in the castle of Tintagil, and himself in the castle of Terrabil, which had many exits and back gates. Then Uther came in all haste with a great army and laid siege to the castle of Terrabil. And there he pitched many tents, and there was great fighting on both sides, and many people were killed. Then, out of sheer anger and great love for the fair Igraine, King Uther fell sick. So Sir Ulfius, a noble knight, came to King Uther and asked the king why he was sick.

"I'll tell you," said the king. "I am sick with anger and with love for the fair Igraine, so that I cannot be well."

"Well, my lord," said Sir Ulfius, "I will go and look for Merlin, and he will find you a remedy that will content your heart."

So Ulfius set off, and by chance he met Merlin dressed as a beggar, and Merlin asked Ulfius who he was looking for. And he said he had little reason to tell him.

"Well," said Merlin, "I know who you are looking for, for you are looking for Merlin. So look no further, for I am he. And if King Uther will reward me well, and swear to me to grant my wish, that will bring him more honour and profit than me; for I will see that he has all he desires."

"All this I will undertake," said Ulfius, "that there will be nothing within reason that you shall not have as you wish."

"Well," said Merlin, "he will have his purpose and his desire. And so," said Merlin, "ride on your way, for I will not be far behind."
