Chapter 2: How Uther Pendragon made war on the Duke of Cornwall, and how through Merlin he lay with the duchess and fathered Arthur

Then Ulfius was glad, and rode on at better than a walking pace until he came to King Uther Pendragon, and told him he had met with Merlin.

"Where is he?" said the king.

"Sir," said Ulfius, "he will not be long."

With that Ulfius saw Merlin standing in the doorway of the tent. And then Merlin was obliged to come to the king. When King Uther saw him, he said he was welcome.

"Sir," said Merlin, "I know every bit of your heart. If you will swear to me, as you are a true anointed king, to grant my wish, you shall have your desire."

Then the king swore upon the Four Gospels.

"Sir," said Merlin, "this is my wish: the first night that you lie with Igraine you will father a child on her, and when it is born it must be handed over to me, for me to bring up wherever I choose. For it will be to your honour, and to the child's good, as much as the child is worth."

"Gladly," said the king. "Let it be as you wish."

"Now make yourself ready," said Merlin. "This very night you will lie with Igraine in the castle of Tintagil. And you will look like the duke her husband, Ulfius will look like Sir Brastias, a knight of the duke's, and I will look like a knight called Sir Jordanus, another knight of the duke's. But take care you do not make much conversation with her or her people, but say you are unwell, and so get yourself to bed, and do not get up in the morning until I come to you, for the castle of Tintagil is only ten miles from here."

So this was done as they had planned. But the Duke of Tintagil saw the king ride away from the siege of Terrabil, and so that night he sallied out of the castle by a back gate to attack the king's army. And so, by his own sally, the duke himself was killed before ever the king came to the castle of Tintagil.

So after the death of the duke, King Uther lay with Igraine, more than three hours after his death, and fathered Arthur on her that night. And at daybreak Merlin came to the king and told him to make ready, and so he kissed the lady Igraine and left in all haste. But when the lady heard the news of the duke her husband, and that by every account he was dead before ever King Uther came to her, then she wondered who it could be that had lain with her in the likeness of her lord. So she mourned in private and held her peace.

Then all the barons with one voice begged the king to make peace between the lady Igraine and himself. The king gave them leave, for he would gladly have been reconciled with her. So the king put all his trust in Ulfius to negotiate between them, and through his negotiating the king and she at last met together.

"Now we will do well," said Ulfius. "Our king is a vigorous knight and has no wife, and my lady Igraine is an exceedingly beautiful lady. It would be a great joy to us all if it pleased the king to make her his queen."

To that they all agreed, and put it to the king. And at once, like the vigorous knight he was, he agreed to it gladly, and so in all haste they were married one morning with great merriment and joy.

And King Lot of Lothian and of Orkney then married Morgause, who was Gawain's mother, and King Nentres of the land of Garlot married Elaine. All this was done at King Uther's request. And the third sister, Morgan le Fay, was sent to school in a nunnery, and there she learned so much that she became a great scholar of necromancy, the black art. And afterwards she was married to King Uriens of the land of Gore, who was the father of Sir Uwain le Blanchemains.
