Chapter 3: Of the birth of King Arthur and of his upbringing

Then Queen Igraine grew bigger and bigger day by day. And so it happened, within half a year, as King Uther lay beside his queen, that he asked her, by the faith she owed him, whose child she carried. Then she was badly flustered about how to answer.

"Don't be dismayed," said the king, "but tell me the truth, and I will love you the better for it, on my life."

"Sir," she said, "I will tell you the truth. The same night that my lord died, at the hour of his death, as his knights bear witness, there came into my castle of Tintagil a man like my lord in speech and in face, and two knights with him in the likeness of his two knights Brastias and Jordanus. And so I went to bed with him, as I ought to do with my lord, and that same night, as I shall answer to God, this child was conceived in me."

"That is the truth," said the king, "as you say. For it was I myself who came in that likeness. And so do not be dismayed, for I am the father of the child."

And there he told her the whole story, how it was done on Merlin's advice. Then the queen was overjoyed when she knew who was the father of her child.

Soon Merlin came to the king, and said, "Sir, you must make provision for the bringing up of your child."

"As you wish," said the king. "Let it be so."

"Well," said Merlin, "I know a lord of yours in this land who is an exceedingly true man and a faithful one, and he shall have the bringing up of your child. His name is Sir Ector, and he is a lord with fine estates in many parts of England and Wales. Have this lord, Sir Ector, sent for to come and speak with you, and ask him yourself, as he loves you, to put his own child out to be nursed by another woman, so that his wife can nurse yours. And when the child is born, let it be handed over to me at that secret back gate over there, unchristened."

So it was done just as Merlin planned. And when Sir Ector came he gave his solemn promise to the king to bring up the child as the king wished; and there the king granted Sir Ector great rewards. Then, when the lady had given birth, the king commanded two knights and two ladies to take the child, wrapped in a cloth of gold, "and hand him over to whatever poor man you meet at the back gate of the castle." So the child was handed over to Merlin, and so he carried it away to Sir Ector, and had a holy man christen him, and named him Arthur. And so Sir Ector's wife nursed him at her own breast.
