Chapter 5: How Arthur was chosen king, and of the wonders and marvels of a sword drawn out of a stone by Arthur

Then the realm stood in great danger for a long while, for every lord who had many men at his command made himself strong, and many expected to be king. Then Merlin went to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and advised him to send for all the lords of the realm, and all the gentlemen of arms, to come to London by Christmas, on pain of excommunication. And this was the reason: that Jesus, who was born on that night, would of His great mercy show some miracle, as He had come to be king of mankind, to show by some miracle who should be the rightful king of this realm. So the Archbishop, on Merlin's advice, sent for all the lords and gentlemen of arms to come to London by Christmas Eve. And many of them cleansed their lives, so that their prayers might be the more acceptable to God. So in the greatest church of London (whether it was St. Paul's or not, the French book does not say) all the ranks of the realm were in the church to pray, long before daybreak. And when matins and the first mass were over, there was seen in the churchyard, facing the high altar, a great square stone, like a block of marble, and in the middle of it was something like an anvil of steel, a foot high, and in it a fine sword was stuck naked by the point, and around the sword there were letters written in gold that said this: "Whoever pulls this sword out of this stone and anvil is the true-born king of all England." Then the people marvelled, and told the Archbishop.

"I command," said the Archbishop, "that you keep yourselves within your church and go on praying to God, and that no man touch the sword until high mass is all done."

So when all the masses were done, all the lords went to look at the stone and the sword. And when they saw the inscription, some tried, those who wanted to be king. But none of them could stir the sword or move it.

"He is not here," said the Archbishop, "who will win this sword, but have no doubt God will make him known. But this is my advice," said the Archbishop, "that we provide ten knights, men of good name, to guard this sword."

So it was arranged, and then a proclamation was made that every man who wished should try to win the sword. And for New Year's Day the barons had jousts and a tournament proclaimed, so that all knights who wanted to joust or to fight in the tournament could take part; and all this was arranged to keep the lords and the common people together, for the Archbishop trusted that God would make known the one who should win the sword.

So on New Year's Day, when the service was over, the barons rode to the field, some to joust and some to fight in the tournament. And so it happened that Sir Ector, who had large estates around London, rode to the jousts, and with him rode Sir Kay his son, and young Arthur, who was his foster brother; and Sir Kay had been made a knight the All Hallows' Day before. So as they rode towards the jousts, Sir Kay found he had lost his sword, for he had left it at his father's lodging, and so he asked young Arthur to ride back for his sword.

"Gladly," said Arthur, and rode fast after the sword. And when he got home, the lady and everyone else were out to see the jousting. Then Arthur was angry, and said to himself, "I will ride to the churchyard and take the sword that is stuck in the stone, for my brother Sir Kay shall not be without a sword this day."

So when he came to the churchyard, Sir Arthur dismounted and tied his horse to the stile, and so he went to the tent, and found no knights there, for they were at the jousting. And so he took hold of the sword by the handle, and lightly and fiercely pulled it out of the stone, and took his horse and rode on his way until he came to his brother Sir Kay, and gave him the sword. And as soon as Sir Kay saw the sword, he knew very well it was the sword from the stone, and so he rode to his father Sir Ector, and said, "Sir, look, here is the sword from the stone, and so I must be king of this land."

When Sir Ector saw the sword, he turned back and came to the church, and there all three of them dismounted and went into the church. And at once he made Sir Kay swear on a holy book how he came by that sword.

"Sir," said Sir Kay, "by my brother Arthur, for he brought it to me."

"How did you get this sword?" said Sir Ector to Arthur.

"Sir, I will tell you. When I came home for my brother's sword, I found nobody at home to give me his sword. And so I thought my brother Sir Kay should not be without a sword, and so I came here in a hurry and pulled it out of the stone without any trouble."

"Did you find any knights around this sword?" said Sir Ector.

"No," said Arthur.

"Now," said Sir Ector to Arthur, "I understand that you must be king of this land."

"Why me," said Arthur, "and for what reason?"

"Sir," said Ector, "because God wills it so. For no man could ever have drawn out this sword except the one who shall be the rightful king of this land. Now let me see whether you can put the sword back where it was, and pull it out again."

"That's no great feat," said Arthur, and so he put it back in the stone. Then Sir Ector tried to pull out the sword, and failed.
