Chapter 6: How King Arthur pulled out the sword several times

"Now you try," said Sir Ector to Sir Kay.

And at once he pulled at the sword with all his might, but it would not budge.

"Now you shall try," said Sir Ector to Arthur.

"Gladly," said Arthur, and pulled it out easily.

And with that Sir Ector knelt down on the ground, and Sir Kay too.

"Alas," said Arthur, "my own dear father and brother, why are you kneeling to me?"

"No, no, my lord Arthur, it is not so. I was never your father, nor of your blood, but I know well that you are of higher blood than I thought you were."

And then Sir Ector told him everything: how he had been entrusted with him to bring him up, and by whose command, and how Merlin had handed him over.

Then Arthur grieved greatly when he understood that Sir Ector was not his father.

"Sir," said Ector to Arthur, "will you be my good and gracious lord when you are king?"

"I would be much to blame otherwise," said Arthur, "for you are the man in the world I owe most to, you and my good lady and mother, your wife, who has fostered me and cared for me as well as her own. And if it is ever God's will that I am king, as you say, you shall ask of me whatever I can do, and I will not fail you. God forbid I should fail you."

"Sir," said Sir Ector, "I will ask no more of you than that you make my son, your foster brother, Sir Kay, seneschal, the steward over all your lands."

"That shall be done," said Arthur, "and more, on my life: no man shall ever have that office but him, while he and I live."

With that they went to the Archbishop, and told him how the sword had been won, and by whom. And on Twelfth Day all the barons came there to try to take the sword, whoever wanted to try. But there, in front of them all, none could take it out but Arthur. At this many lords were angry, and said it was a great shame to them all and to the realm to be ruled over by a boy not born of high blood. And so they quarrelled that time, so that it was put off until Candlemas, when all the barons were to meet there again. But all the while the ten knights were appointed to guard the sword day and night, and so they set a tent over the stone and the sword, and five were always on watch. So at Candlemas many more great lords came there to win the sword, but none could succeed. And just as Arthur had done at Christmas, he did at Candlemas, and pulled out the sword easily, at which the barons were bitterly aggrieved, and put it off again until the high feast of Easter. And as Arthur had done before, so he did at Easter. Yet there were some of the great lords who resented that Arthur should be king, and put it off again until the feast of Pentecost.

Then the Archbishop of Canterbury, by Merlin's foresight, had the best knights they could find brought together, those knights whom Uther Pendragon had loved best and trusted most in his day. And knights such as these were set about Arthur: Sir Baudwin of Britain, Sir Kay, Sir Ulfius, Sir Brastias. All these, with many others, were always about Arthur, day and night, until the feast of Pentecost.
