Chapter 8: How King Arthur held a great feast in Wales at Pentecost, and what kings and lords came to his feast

Then the king moved into Wales, and had a great feast proclaimed, to be held at Pentecost after his coronation, in the city of Caerleon. To the feast came King Lot of Lothian and of Orkney, with five hundred knights. Also there came to the feast King Uriens of Gore, with four hundred knights. Also there came to that feast King Nentres of Garlot, with seven hundred knights. Also there came to the feast the King of Scotland, with six hundred knights, and he was only a young man. Also there came to the feast a king who was called the King with the Hundred Knights, and he and his men were exceedingly well equipped in every way. Also there came the King of Carados with five hundred knights. And King Arthur was glad of their coming, for he thought that all the kings and knights had come out of great love, and to do him honour at his feast. So the king rejoiced greatly, and sent the kings and knights rich presents. But the kings would accept none of them, and sent the messengers back shamefully rebuked, and said they had no wish to receive gifts from a beardless boy of low birth, and sent him word that they would have none of his gifts, but that they had come to give him gifts with hard swords between the neck and the shoulders. And that was why they had come, as they told the messengers plainly, for it was a great shame to them all to see such a boy have rule over so noble a realm as this land was. With this answer the messengers left, and told King Arthur this answer. So, on the advice of his barons, he withdrew into a strong tower with five hundred good men. And all the kings named above laid siege to him there, after a fashion; but King Arthur was well supplied with food. And within fifteen days Merlin came among them into the city of Caerleon. Then all the kings were exceedingly glad of Merlin, and asked him, "For what reason has that boy Arthur been made your king?"

"Sirs," said Merlin, "I will tell you the reason. It is because he is King Uther Pendragon's son, born in wedlock, conceived on Igraine, the wife of the Duke of Tintagil."

"Then he is a bastard," they all said.

"No," said Merlin. "Arthur was conceived more than three hours after the death of the duke, and thirteen days after that King Uther married Igraine; and so I prove to you that he is no bastard. And whoever says no to it, he shall be king and overcome all his enemies; and before he dies he shall be king of all England for a long time, and have under his rule Wales, Ireland and Scotland, and more realms than I will name now."

Some of the kings marvelled at Merlin's words, and judged that it would be as he said; and some of them laughed him to scorn, as King Lot did; and others called him a wizard. But then they came to an agreement with Merlin that King Arthur should come out and speak with the kings, and come safely and go safely: such a guarantee was given. So Merlin went to King Arthur and told him what he had done, and told him not to be afraid, but to come out boldly and speak with them, and not spare them, but answer them as their king and chieftain, "for you will overcome them all, whether they like it or not."
