Chapter 9: Of the first war that King Arthur fought, and how he won the day

Then King Arthur came out of his tower, and under his gown he wore a short coat of double mail, and with him went the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Sir Baudwin of Britain, and Sir Kay, and Sir Brastias: these were the men of greatest honour that were with him. And when they met there was no meekness, but bold words on both sides; but King Arthur always answered them, and said he would make them bow if he lived. So they parted in anger, and King Arthur told them to look to themselves, and they told the king to look to himself. So the king went back to the tower again and armed himself and all his knights.

"What will you do?" said Merlin to the kings. "You had better stop, for you will not win here, even if you were ten times as many."

"Are we well advised to be afraid of a dream-reader?" said King Lot.

With that Merlin vanished, and came to King Arthur, and told him to attack them fiercely. And in the meantime three hundred good men, of the best that were with the kings, went straight over to King Arthur, and that comforted him greatly.

"Sir," said Merlin to Arthur, "do not fight with the sword that you won by miracle until you see things going against you; then draw it out and do your best."

So straight away King Arthur attacked them in their camp. And Sir Baudwin, Sir Kay and Sir Brastias killed men on the right hand and on the left so that it was a marvel to see; and all the while King Arthur on horseback laid about him with a sword, and did marvellous deeds of arms, so that many of the kings took great joy in his deeds and his boldness.

Then King Lot broke out at the rear, and the King with the Hundred Knights, and King Carados, and attacked Arthur fiercely from behind. With that Sir Arthur turned with his knights, and struck behind and before, and Sir Arthur was always in the thick of the fighting, until his horse was killed under him. And with that King Lot struck King Arthur down. Then his four knights caught him up and set him on horseback. Then he drew his sword Excalibur, and it was so bright in his enemies' eyes that it gave light like thirty torches. And with that he drove them back, and killed many people. And then the common people of Caerleon rose up with clubs and staves and killed many knights; but all the kings kept together with those of their knights who were left alive, and so fled and went away. And Merlin came to Arthur, and advised him to follow them no further.
