Chapter 10: How Merlin advised King Arthur to send for King Ban and King Bors, and of the counsel they took for the war

So after the feast and the fighting, King Arthur went to London, and so, on Merlin's advice, the king called his barons to council, for Merlin had told the king that the six kings who had made war on him would in all haste take their revenge on him and on his lands. So the king asked all of them for advice. They could give no advice, but said they were strong enough.

"You speak well," said Arthur. "I thank you for your good spirit. But will all of you who love me speak with Merlin? You know well that he has done much for me, and he knows many things, and when he is before you, I would like you to ask him earnestly for his best advice."

All the barons said they would ask him and beg him. So Merlin was sent for, and courteously asked by all the barons to give them his best advice.

"I will tell you," said Merlin. "I warn you all, your enemies are far too strong for you, and they are as good men of arms as any alive. And by this time they have won over four more kings, and a mighty duke. And unless our king has more knights with him than he can raise within the bounds of his own realm, if he fights them in battle he will be overcome and killed."

"What would be best to do in this case?" said all the barons.

"I will tell you my advice," said Merlin. "There are two brothers beyond the sea, and they are both kings, and marvellously good fighting men; and one is called King Ban of Benwick, and the other is called King Bors of Gaul, that is, France. And a mighty man makes war on these two kings, King Claudas, and fights with them over a castle, and there is great war between them. But this Claudas is so rich in goods, with which he gets himself good knights, that for the most part he gets the better of these two kings. So this is my advice: that our king and sovereign lord send to the kings Ban and Bors by two trusty knights, with well-written letters, saying that if they will come and see King Arthur and his court, and so help him in his wars, he will swear to them to help them in their wars against King Claudas. Now, what do you say to this advice?" said Merlin.

"This is good advice," said the king and all the barons.

Right then, in all haste, two knights were appointed to carry the message to the two kings. So letters were written in courteous terms, according to King Arthur's wishes. Ulfius and Brastias were made the messengers, and so they rode off well horsed and well armed, as the custom was at that time, and so crossed the sea and rode toward the city of Benwick. And near there were eight knights who spotted them, and at a narrow pass they met Ulfius and Brastias, and would have taken them prisoner. So they asked them to let them pass, for they were messengers to King Ban and King Bors, sent from King Arthur.

"Then," said the eight knights, "you shall die or be prisoners, for we are knights of King Claudas."

And with that two of them lowered their spears, and Ulfius and Brastias lowered their spears, and they charged together with great force. And Claudas' knights broke their spears, and theirs held, and carried the two knights out of their saddles to the earth, and so they left them lying, and rode on their way. And the other six knights rode ahead to a pass to meet them again, and so Ulfius and Brastias struck down two more, and so went on their way. And at the fourth pass two met two, and both were laid on the earth; so there was not one of the eight knights who was not badly hurt or bruised. And when they came to Benwick, it happened that both kings were there, Ban and Bors.

And when the kings were told that messengers had come, two knights of honour were sent to them, one called Lionses, lord of the country of Payarne, and Sir Phariance, an honourable knight. At once they asked where they came from, and they said from King Arthur, king of England; so they took them in their arms and they rejoiced greatly in each other. But as soon as the two kings knew they were Arthur's messengers, there was no delay, but at once they spoke with the knights, and welcomed them in the most faithful way, and said they were more welcome to them than from any king living; and with that they kissed the letters and delivered them. And when Ban and Bors understood the letters, then the messengers were even more welcome than they were before. And after the urgency of the letters they gave them this answer: that they would fulfil the wish of King Arthur's letter, and that Ulfius and Brastias should stay there as long as they liked, and have as warm a welcome as could be given them in those border lands. Then Ulfius and Brastias told the kings of their adventure with the eight knights at the passes.

"Ha! Ah!" said Ban and Bors. "They were my good friends. I wish I had known of them; they would not have got away so lightly."

So Ulfius and Brastias had a warm welcome and great gifts, as much as they could carry away; and they had their answer by word of mouth and in writing, that those two kings would come to Arthur in all the haste they could. So the two knights rode on ahead, and crossed the sea, and came to their lord, and told him how they had fared, at which King Arthur was exceedingly glad.

"When do you suppose the two kings will be here?"

"Sir," they said, "before All Hallows."

Then the king had a great feast prepared, and had a great jousting proclaimed. And by All Hallows the two kings had come over the sea with three hundred knights, well equipped both for peace and for war. And King Arthur met them ten miles out of London, and there was as great joy as could be imagined or made. And on All Hallows, at the great feast, the three kings sat in the hall, and Sir Kay the seneschal served in the hall, and Sir Lucan the butler, who was Duke Corneus' son, and Sir Griflet, who was the son of Cardol: these three knights had charge of all the service that served the kings. And as soon as they had washed and risen from the table, all the knights who wished to joust made themselves ready; and by the time they were ready on horseback there were seven hundred knights. And Arthur, Ban and Bors, with the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Sir Ector, Kay's father, were in a place hung with cloth of gold like a hall, with ladies and gentlewomen, to watch who did best, and to give judgment on it.
