Chapter 11: Of a great tournament held by King Arthur and the two kings Ban and Bors, and how they went over the sea

And King Arthur and the two kings had the seven hundred knights divided into two sides. And three hundred knights of the realm of Benwick and of Gaul were turned to the other side. Then they set their shields in place, and many good knights began to level their spears. So Griflet was the first to meet a knight, one Ladinas, and they met so eagerly that everyone wondered at it; and they fought so that their shields fell to pieces, and horse and man fell to the earth; and both the French knight and the English knight lay there so long that everyone thought they were dead. When Lucan the butler saw Griflet lying like that, he got him on his horse again at once, and the two of them did marvellous deeds of arms against many young knights. Also Sir Kay came out of an ambush with five knights with him, and the six of them struck down six others. And Sir Kay did marvellous deeds of arms that day, so that nobody did as well as he did that day. Then came Ladinas and Gracian, two knights of France, and did exceedingly well, so that everyone praised them.

Then came Sir Placidas, a good knight, and met Sir Kay, and struck him down, horse and man, at which Sir Griflet was angry, and met Sir Placidas so hard that horse and man fell to the earth. But when the five knights knew that Sir Kay had had a fall, they were angry out of their wits, and with that each of the five of them bore down a knight. When King Arthur and the two kings saw both sides beginning to grow angry, they leapt on small riding horses, and had it proclaimed that everyone should go back to their lodgings. And so they went home and took off their armour, and so to evensong and supper. And afterwards the three kings went into a garden, and gave the prize to Sir Kay, and to Lucan the butler, and to Sir Griflet. And then they went into council, and with them went Gwenbaus, the brother of King Ban and King Bors, a wise scholar, and Ulfius and Brastias went there, and Merlin. And after they had been in council, they went to bed. And in the morning they heard mass, and went to dinner, and so to their council, and argued a great deal over what was best to do. At last they agreed that Merlin should go with a token from King Ban, and that was a ring, to his men and King Bors'; and that Gracian and Placidas should go back and keep their castles and their countries, for fear of King Claudas, as King Ban of Benwick and King Bors of Gaul had ordered them. And so they crossed the sea and came to Benwick. And when the people saw King Ban's ring, and Gracian and Placidas, they were glad, and asked how the kings were, and rejoiced greatly at their good health and their alliance. And as their sovereign lords wished, the fighting men made themselves ready with all possible haste, so that there were fifteen thousand of them on horse and on foot, and they had a great plenty of food with them, by Merlin's provision. But Gracian and Placidas were left to stock and arm the castles, for fear of King Claudas. Then Merlin crossed the sea, well supplied with food both by water and by land. And when he came to the sea he sent the foot soldiers home again, and took no more with him than ten thousand men on horseback, most of them men-at-arms, and so took ship and crossed the sea into England, and landed at Dover. And through Merlin's cunning, he led the army northward, by the most secret way that could be thought of, to the forest of Bedegraine, and there in a valley he camped them in secret.

Then Merlin rode to Arthur and the two kings, and told them how he had fared; at which they marvelled greatly, that any man on earth could manage so fast, and go and come. So Merlin told them that ten thousand were in the forest of Bedegraine, well armed at all points. Then there was no more to say, but the whole army went to horse, as Arthur had arranged beforehand. So with twenty thousand he travelled by night and by day. But Merlin had made such an order beforehand, that no fighting man should ride or walk in any country on this side of the river Trent unless he had a token from King Arthur, and because of this the king's enemies did not dare ride about to spy as they had done before.
