Chapter 12: How eleven kings gathered a great army against King Arthur

And so within a little while the three kings came to the castle of Bedegraine, and found there an exceedingly fine company, and well equipped, at which they rejoiced greatly, and they lacked no food. This was the reason for the northern army: it had been raised because of the insult and the rebuff the six kings had suffered at Caerleon. And those six kings, through their dealings, had won over five other kings; and so they began to gather their people.

And now they swore that, come good or ill, none of them would leave the others until they had destroyed Arthur. And then they took an oath. The first to begin the oath was the Duke of Cambenet, who swore he would bring with him five thousand men-at-arms, who were ready on horseback. Then King Brandegoris of Stranggore swore that he would bring five thousand men-at-arms on horseback. Then King Clariance of Northumberland swore he would bring three thousand men-at-arms. Then the King of the Hundred Knights, who was an exceedingly good man and a young one, swore that he would bring four thousand men-at-arms on horseback. Then King Lot swore, an exceedingly good knight, and Sir Gawain's father, that he would bring five thousand men-at-arms on horseback. Also King Uriens swore, who was Sir Uwain's father, of the land of Gore, and he would bring six thousand men-at-arms on horseback. Also King Idres of Cornwall swore that he would bring five thousand men-at-arms on horseback. Also King Cradelment swore to bring five thousand men on horseback. Also King Agwisance of Ireland swore to bring five thousand men-at-arms on horseback. Also King Nentres swore to bring five thousand men-at-arms on horseback. Also King Carados swore to bring five thousand men-at-arms on horseback. So their whole army was fifty thousand fully armed men-at-arms on horseback, and ten thousand good men on foot. Then they were soon ready, and mounted on horseback and sent out their scouts ahead of them, for these eleven kings on their way laid siege to the castle of Bedegraine. And so they set out and drew toward Arthur, and left few to stay at the siege, for the castle of Bedegraine was held for King Arthur, and the men who were in it were Arthur's.
