Chapter 14: How the eleven kings and their army fought against Arthur and his army, and of many great feats of the war

Then King Arthur and King Ban and King Bors, with their good and trusty knights, attacked them so fiercely that they brought their tents down on their heads. But the eleven kings, by manly prowess of arms, won their way to an open field; but ten thousand good men were killed there that morning. And so they had a strong pass in front of them, and still they were fifty thousand hardy men. Then it drew toward day.

"Now you shall do as I advise," said Merlin to the three kings. "I would have King Ban and King Bors, with their company of ten thousand men, put in a wood near here, in ambush, and kept secret, and they should be placed there before daylight comes, and they should not stir until you and your knights have fought with the enemy for a long time. And when it is daylight, draw up your army right in front of them and the pass, so that they can see your whole army, for then they will be the bolder, when they see you have only about twenty thousand men, and it will make them the gladder to let you and your army come over the pass."

All three kings and all the barons said that Merlin spoke exceedingly well, and it was done at once as Merlin had planned. So in the morning, when each army saw the other, the army of the north was greatly encouraged. Then three thousand men-at-arms were handed over to Ulfius and Brastias, and they attacked the enemy fiercely in the pass, and killed men on the right hand and on the left so that it was a wonder to tell.

When the eleven kings saw that so small a company did such deeds of arms, they were ashamed, and attacked them again fiercely; and there Sir Ulfius' horse was killed under him, but he did marvellously well on foot. But Duke Eustace of Cambenet and King Clariance of Northumberland kept pressing Ulfius hard. When Brastias saw how his comrade was faring, he struck the duke with a spear, so that horse and man fell down. King Clariance saw that, and turned on Brastias, and each struck the other so that horse and man went to the earth, and so they lay stunned for a long time, and their horses' knees were broken through to the hard bone. Then came Sir Kay the seneschal with six companions, and did exceedingly well. With that came the eleven kings, and there Griflet was put to the earth, horse and man, and Lucan the butler, horse and man, by King Brandegoris, and King Idres, and King Agwisance. Then the fighting grew exceedingly hard on both sides. When Sir Kay saw Griflet on foot, he rode at King Nentres and struck him down, and led his horse to Sir Griflet, and got him mounted again. Also Sir Kay with the same spear struck down King Lot, and hurt him very badly. The King with the Hundred Knights saw that, and rode at Sir Kay and struck him down, and took his horse, and gave it to King Lot, who thanked him. When Sir Griflet saw Sir Kay and Lucan the butler on foot, he took a sharp spear, great and square, and rode at Pinel, a good man of arms, and struck down horse and man, and then he took his horse and gave it to Sir Kay. Then when King Lot saw King Nentres on foot, he rode at Melot de la Roche, and struck him down, horse and man, and gave King Nentres the horse, and got him mounted again. Also the King of the Hundred Knights saw King Idres on foot; then he rode at Gwiniart de Bloi, and struck him down, horse and man, and gave King Idres the horse, and got him mounted again; and King Lot struck down Clariance de la Forest Savage, and gave the horse to Duke Eustace. And so when they had got the kings mounted again, they drew together, all eleven kings, and said they would be revenged for the damage they had taken that day. Meanwhile Sir Ector came in with an eager face, and found Ulfius and Brastias on foot, in great danger of death, badly trampled under the horses' feet.

Then Arthur, like a lion, rode at King Cradelment of North Wales, and struck him through the left side, so that horse and king fell down; and then he took the horse by the rein, and led it to Ulfius, and said, "Have this horse, my old friend, for you have great need of a horse."

"Many thanks," said Ulfius.

Then Sir Arthur did such marvels in arms that everyone wondered at it. When the King with the Hundred Knights saw King Cradelment on foot, he rode at Sir Ector, Sir Kay's father, who was well horsed, and struck down horse and man, and gave the horse to the king, and got him mounted again. And when King Arthur saw the king riding Sir Ector's horse, he was angry, and with his sword he struck the king on the helm, so that a quarter of the helm and shield fell away, and the sword carved on down to the horse's neck, and so the king and the horse fell down to the ground. Then Sir Kay came at Sir Morganore, seneschal to the King of the Hundred Knights, and struck him down, horse and man, and led the horse to his father, Sir Ector. Then Sir Ector rode at a knight called Lardans, and struck down horse and man, and led the horse to Sir Brastias, who had great need of a horse, and had been badly trampled. Then Brastias saw Lucan the butler, who lay like a dead man under the horses' feet, and all the while Sir Griflet was doing marvels to rescue him, and there were always fourteen knights on Sir Lucan. Then Brastias struck one of them on the helm, so that the blow went down to the teeth, and he rode at another and struck him, so that his arm flew into the field. Then he went to the third and struck him on the shoulder, so that shoulder and arm flew into the field. And when Griflet saw help had come, he struck a knight on the temples, so that head and helm went to the earth, and Griflet took that knight's horse, and led it to Sir Lucan, and told him to mount the horse and avenge his hurts. For Brastias had killed a knight earlier and mounted Griflet on his horse.
