Chapter 15: More of the same battle

Then Lucan saw King Agwisance, who had just killed Moris de la Roche, and Lucan rode at him with a short spear that was a heavy one, and gave him such a fall that the horse went down to the earth. Also Lucan found there, on foot, Bloias de la Flandres and Sir Gwinas, two hardy knights, and in the fury that Lucan was in, he killed two young knights and got these two mounted again. Then the battle grew exceedingly hard on both sides; but Arthur was glad that his knights were mounted again, and then they fought together so that the noise and the din rang along the water and the wood. And so King Ban and King Bors made themselves ready, and set their shields and armour in order, and they were so full of spirit that many knights shook and quivered with eagerness. All this while Lucan, and Gwinas, and Briant, and Bellias of Flanders held a hard fight against six kings, that is, King Lot, King Nentres, King Brandegoris, King Idres, King Uriens and King Agwisance. So with the help of Sir Kay and Sir Griflet they pressed these six kings so hard that they scarcely had any power to defend themselves. But when Sir Arthur saw that the battle would not be ended by any means, he went wild as a lion, and steered his horse here and there, on the right hand and on the left, so that he did not stop until he had killed twenty knights. Also he wounded King Lot badly on the shoulder, and made him leave the field, for Sir Kay and Griflet did great deeds of arms there with King Arthur. Then Ulfius, and Brastias, and Sir Ector fought against Duke Eustace, and King Cradelment, and King Clariance of Northumberland, and King Carados, and against the King with the Hundred Knights. So these knights fought with these kings so that they made them give ground.

Then King Lot grieved greatly for his losses and for his companions, and said to the ten kings, "Unless you do as I advise, we shall be killed and destroyed. Let me have the King with the Hundred Knights, and King Agwisance, and King Idres, and the Duke of Cambenet, and we five kings will have fifteen thousand men-at-arms with us, and we will go to one side while you six kings keep up the fight with twelve thousand. When we see that you have fought with them for a long time, then we will come on fiercely. Otherwise we shall never match them," said King Lot, "except by this means."

So they parted as they planned here, and six kings made their side strong against Arthur, and fought hard for a long time.

In the meantime the ambush of King Ban and King Bors broke out, and Lionses and Phariance had the vanguard, and these two knights met King Idres and his company, and there began a great fight, with breaking of spears and striking of swords, and killing of men and horses, and King Idres was close to defeat.

Agwisance the king saw that, and put Lionses and Phariance in danger of death; for the Duke of Cambenet came on along with him with a great company. So these two knights were in such danger of their lives that they were forced to turn back, but all the while they defended themselves and their company marvellously. When King Bors saw those knights driven back, it grieved him badly; then he came on so fast that his company seemed as dark as indigo. When King Lot saw King Bors, he knew him well, and then he said, "O Jesus, defend us from death and horrible wounds! For I see well that we are in great danger of death. For I see over there a king, one of the most honourable men and one of the best knights in the world, who has come to join his company."

"Who is he?" said the King with the Hundred Knights.

"It is King Bors of Gaul," said King Lot. "I wonder how they came into this country without any of us knowing it."

"It was by Merlin's advice," said the knight.

"As for him," said King Carados, "I will take on King Bors, if you will rescue me when there is need."

"Go on," they all said. "We will do all we can."

Then King Carados and his army rode on at an easy pace, until they came within bowshot of King Bors; then each army let their horses run as fast as they could. And Bleoberis, who was King Bors' godson, carried his chief standard; he was an exceedingly good knight.

"Now we shall see," said King Bors, "how these northern Britons can bear arms."

And King Bors met a knight, and struck him right through with a spear, so that he fell dead on the earth; and afterwards he drew his sword and did marvellous deeds of arms, so that everyone on both sides wondered greatly at it. And his knights did not fail, but did their part, and King Carados was struck to the earth. With that came the King with the Hundred Knights and rescued King Carados mightily by force of arms, for he was an exceedingly good knight for a king, and only a young man.
