Chapter 16: Still more of the same battle

By then King Ban came into the field, as fierce as a lion, with bands of green, and gold upon them.

"Ha! Ah!" said King Lot. "We must be defeated, for over there I see the most valiant knight in the world, and the man of greatest renown, for there are no two brothers living such as King Ban and King Bors. So we must either withdraw or die; and unless we withdraw manfully and wisely, there is nothing but death."

When King Ban came into the battle, he came in so fiercely that the strokes echoed back from the wood and the water; and at that King Lot wept for pity and grief, to see so many good knights meet their end. But through the great force of King Ban, the two northern armies that had separated were driven crashing together in great fear; and the three kings and their knights kept on killing, so that it was pitiful to see that multitude of people fleeing. But King Lot, and the King of the Hundred Knights, and King Morganore gathered the people together in exceedingly knightly fashion, and did great feats of arms, and held the battle all that day, hard as it was.

When the King of the Hundred Knights saw the great damage that King Ban did, he drove at him with his horse, and struck him high upon the helm, a great stroke, and stunned him badly. Then King Ban was angry with him, and went after him fiercely. The other saw that, and threw up his shield, and spurred his horse forward; but King Ban's stroke fell and cut a piece out of the shield, and the sword slid down the hauberk, his mail shirt, behind his back, and cut through the horse's steel armour and through the horse itself, clean in two, so that the sword struck the earth. Then the King of the Hundred Knights got clear of the horse nimbly, and with his sword he ran King Ban's horse through and through. With that King Ban sprang nimbly clear of the dead horse, and then King Ban struck at the other so eagerly, and hit him on the helm, so that he fell to the earth. Also in that fury he felled King Morganore, and there was great slaughter of good knights and of many people. By then King Arthur came into the thick of the fighting, and found King Ban standing among dead men and dead horses, fighting on foot like a raging lion, so that nobody came near him, as far as he could reach with his sword, without catching a grievous blow; and King Arthur felt great pity for him. And Arthur was so bloody that no man could know him by his shield, for it was all blood and brains on his sword. And as Arthur looked beside him he saw a knight who was exceedingly well horsed, and with that Sir Arthur rode at him, and struck him on the helm, so that his sword went down to his teeth, and the knight sank down to the earth dead. And at once Arthur took the horse by the rein, and led it to King Ban, and said, "Fair brother, have this horse, for you have great need of it, and I am deeply sorry for your great losses."

"It shall soon be avenged," said King Ban, "for I trust in God that my hand has not lost its habit so far that some of them will not sorely regret this."

"I can well believe it," said Arthur, "for I see your deeds are full of action. Even so, I could not get to you at that time."

But when King Ban was mounted on horseback, then a new battle began, which was fierce and hard, with exceedingly great slaughter. And so through great force King Arthur, King Ban and King Bors made their knights draw back a little. But all the while the eleven kings with their knights never turned back; and so they withdrew to a little wood, and so over a little river, and there they rested, for at night they could have no rest on the field. And then the eleven kings and knights drew into a close mass, all together, like men afraid and past all comfort. But no man could break through them, they held so hard together both behind and before, so that King Arthur marvelled at their deeds of arms, and was exceedingly angry.

"Ah, Sir Arthur," said King Ban and King Bors, "don't blame them, for they are doing as good men ought to do. For by my faith," said King Ban, "they are the best fighting men, and the knights of greatest prowess, that I ever saw or heard tell of, and those eleven kings are men of great honour; and if they belonged to you, there would be no king under heaven who had eleven such knights, and of such honour."

"I cannot love them," said Arthur. "They would destroy me."

"We know that well," said King Ban and King Bors, "for they are your mortal enemies, and that has been proved already; and this day they have done their part, and it is a great pity they are so wilful."

Then all the eleven kings drew together, and then King Lot said, "Lords, you must act otherwise than you are doing, or else the great loss is still to come. You can see what people we have lost, and what good men we are losing, because we keep waiting for these foot soldiers; and every time we save one of the foot soldiers we lose ten horsemen for him. So this is my advice: let us send our foot soldiers away from us, for it is near night, and the noble Arthur will not stop for the foot soldiers, and they can save themselves, for the wood is close at hand. And when we horsemen are together, see that each one of you kings gives such orders that no man breaks ranks, on pain of death. And whoever sees any man turn to run, let him be killed at once, for it is better that we kill a coward than that all of us be killed through a coward. What do you say?" said King Lot. "Answer me, all you kings."

"It is well said," said King Nentres; so said the King of the Hundred Knights; the same said King Carados, and King Uriens; so did King Idres and King Brandegoris; and so did King Cradelment, and the Duke of Cambenet; the same said King Clariance and King Agwisance. And they swore they would never fail one another, neither for life nor for death. And whoever fled, and did not do as they did, should be killed. Then they repaired their armour, and set their shields straight, and took new spears and rested them on their thighs, and stood as still as if they had been a clump of trees.
