Chapter 17: Still more of the same battle, and how Merlin ended it

When Sir Arthur and King Ban and King Bors saw them and all their knights, they praised them highly for their noble knightly bearing, as the hardiest fighters they had ever heard of or seen. With that some forty noble knights made themselves ready, and told the three kings that they would break the enemy's line. These were their names: Lionses, Phariance, Ulfius, Brastias, Ector, Kay, Lucan the butler, Griflet le Fise de Dieu, Mariet de la Roche, Guinas de Bloi, Briant de la Forest Savage, Bellaus, Morians of the Castle of Maidens, Flannedrius of the Castle of Ladies, Annecians, who was King Bors' godson, a noble knight, Ladinas de la Rouse, Emerause, Caulas, Graciens le Castlein, one Blois de la Case, and Sir Colgrevaunce de Gorre. All these knights rode on ahead with their spears resting on their thighs, and spurred their horses as hard as the horses could run. And the eleven kings with part of their knights charged with their horses as fast as they could with their spears, and there on both sides they did marvellous deeds of arms. So Arthur, Ban and Bors came into the thick of the fighting, and cut men down right and left, so that their horses went in blood up to the fetlocks. But all the while the eleven kings and their army kept their faces turned to Arthur. And at this Ban and Bors marvelled greatly, considering the great slaughter there was; but at last the enemy were driven back over a little river.

With that Merlin came on a great black horse, and said to Arthur, "Will you never be done? Haven't you done enough? Of sixty thousand men you have left only fifteen thousand alive this day, and it is time to call a halt! For God is angry with you, that you will never be done. For those eleven kings over there will not be overthrown this time, and if you keep on at them any longer, your fortune will turn and theirs will grow. And so withdraw to your lodging, and rest as soon as you can, and reward your good knights with gold and with silver, for they have well deserved it. No riches can be too costly for them, for out of so few men as you have, there were never men who did more feats of prowess than they have done today, for you have been matched this day with the best fighters in the world."

"That is the truth," said King Ban and King Bors.

"Also," said Merlin, "withdraw wherever you wish, for I dare promise that for these three years they will not harm you; and by then you will hear new tidings."

And then Merlin said to Arthur, "These eleven kings have more on their hands than they know, for the Saracens have landed in their countries, more than forty thousand of them, who burn and kill, and have laid siege to the castle of Wandesborow, and are doing great destruction. So do not be afraid for these three years. Also, sir, have all the goods that were taken in this battle searched out, and when you have them in your hands, have them given freely to these two kings, Ban and Bors, so that they may reward their knights with them; and that will make strangers more willing to serve you in time of need. And you are able to reward your own knights out of your own goods whenever you please."

"It is well said," said Arthur, "and as you have planned, so it shall be done."

When it was handed over to Ban and Bors, they gave the goods to their knights as freely as it had been given to them. Then Merlin took his leave of Arthur and of the two kings, to go and see his master Bleise, who lived in Northumberland. And so he left and came to his master, who was exceedingly glad of his coming; and there he told how Arthur and the two kings had fared at the great battle, and how it had ended, and told the names of every king and knight of honour who was there. And so Bleise wrote down the battle word for word, as Merlin told it to him, how it began, and by whom, and likewise how it ended, and who had the worst of it. All the battles that were fought in Arthur's days, Merlin had his master Bleise write down; and he also had written down all the battles that every worthy knight of Arthur's court fought.

After this Merlin left his master and came to King Arthur, who was in the castle of Bedegraine, which was one of the castles that stand in the forest of Sherwood. And Merlin was so disguised that King Arthur did not know him, for he was all wrapped in black sheepskins, with a great pair of boots, and a bow and arrows, in a russet gown, and he had wild geese in his hand; and it was the morning after Candlemas Day. But King Arthur did not know him.

"Sir," said Merlin to the king, "will you give me a gift?"

"And why should I give you a gift, peasant?" said King Arthur.

"Sir," said Merlin, "you would do better to give me a gift that is not in your hand than to lose great riches, for here, in the same place where the great battle was, there is great treasure hidden in the earth."

"Who told you so, peasant?" said Arthur.

"Merlin told me so," said he.

Then Ulfius and Brastias knew him well enough, and smiled.

"Sir," said these two knights, "it is Merlin who is speaking to you."

Then King Arthur was greatly taken aback, and marvelled at Merlin, and so did King Ban and King Bors, and so they had great fun at his expense.

Meanwhile there came a damsel who was an earl's daughter: his name was Sanam, and her name was Lionors, an exceedingly beautiful damsel; and so she came there to do homage, as other lords did after the great battle. And King Arthur set his love greatly on her, and so did she on him, and the king lay with her, and fathered a child on her: his name was Borre, who was afterwards a good knight, and of the Round Table. Then word came that King Rience of North Wales was making great war on King Leodegrance of Cameliard, at which Arthur was angry, for he loved him well, and hated King Rience, for he was always against him. So, by arrangement of the three kings, those who were sent home to Benwick were all to leave, for fear of King Claudas: Phariance, and Antemes, and Gracian, and Lionses of Payarne, with the leaders of those who were to keep the kings' lands.
