Chapter 18: How King Arthur, King Ban, and King Bors rescued King Leodegrance, and other events

And then King Arthur, and King Ban, and King Bors set out with their company, some twenty thousand, and within six days came into the country of Cameliard, and there rescued King Leodegrance, and killed many of King Rience's people there, to the number of ten thousand men, and put him to flight. And then these three kings had a great welcome from King Leodegrance, who thanked them for their great goodness in avenging him on his enemies. And there Arthur had his first sight of Guinevere, the daughter of the King of Cameliard, and ever after he loved her. Afterwards they were married, as the book tells. So, to make an end briefly, the kings took their leave to go to their own countries, for King Claudas was doing great destruction on their lands.

Then Arthur said, "I will go with you."

"No," said the kings, "you shall not at this time, for you still have much to do in these lands. So we will go, and with the great riches we have won in these lands by your gifts, we will hire good knights and stand against King Claudas' malice. For by the grace of God, if we have need we will send to you for your help; and if you have need, send for us, and we will not delay, on our lives."

"There will be no need," said Merlin, "for these two kings to come back by way of war. But I know well that King Arthur will not be long away from you, for within a year or two you will have great need, and then he will avenge you on your enemies, as you have done on his. For these eleven kings shall all die in one day, by the great might and prowess of arms of two valiant knights (as is told later); their names are Balin le Savage and Balan his brother, and they are as marvellously good knights as any living."

Now we turn to the eleven kings, who went back to a city called Sorhaute, which was in King Uriens' land, and there they refreshed themselves as well as they could, and had doctors look to their wounds, and grieved greatly for the death of their people. With that a messenger came and told how people had come into their lands who were lawless men as well as Saracens, some forty thousand, and had burned and killed all the people they could reach, without mercy, and had laid siege to the castle of Wandesborow.

"Alas," said the eleven kings, "here is sorrow upon sorrow. If we had not made war on Arthur as we have done, he would soon avenge us. As for King Leodegrance, he loves Arthur better than us; and as for King Rience, he has enough to do with Leodegrance, for he has laid siege to him."

So they agreed together to guard all the borders of Cornwall, of Wales and of the North. So first they put King Idres in the city of Nauntes in Brittany, with four thousand men-at-arms, to watch both the water and the land. Also they put King Nentres of Garlot in the city of Windesan, with four thousand knights, to watch both on water and on land. Also they had more than eight thousand other fighting men, to fortify all the fortresses on the borders of Cornwall. Also they put more knights all along the borders of Wales and Scotland, with many good men-at-arms; and so they held together for the space of three years, and all the while made alliances with mighty kings and dukes and lords. And King Rience of North Wales joined them, and with him Nero, who was a mighty man of men. And all this while they stocked and armed themselves with good men-at-arms, and food, and every kind of equipment that belongs to war, to avenge themselves for the battle of Bedegraine, as is told in the book of adventures that follows.
