Chapter 19: How King Arthur rode to Caerleon, and of his dream, and how he saw the Questing Beast

Then, after King Ban and King Bors had gone, King Arthur rode into Caerleon. And there came to him King Lot's wife, of Orkney, as if bearing a message, but in fact she had been sent there to spy on King Arthur's court. And she came richly dressed, with her four sons, Gawain, Gaheris, Agravain and Gareth, and with many other knights and ladies. For she was an exceedingly beautiful lady, and so the king fell deeply in love with her, and wanted to sleep with her. So they agreed, and he fathered Mordred on her, and she was his sister, on his mother's side, Igraine's. So she stayed there a month, and at last she left. Then the king dreamed a marvellous dream, which badly frightened him. But all this time King Arthur did not know that King Lot's wife was his sister. This was Arthur's dream: he dreamed that griffins and serpents had come into this land, and he dreamed that they burned and killed all the people in the land, and then he dreamed that he fought with them, and they did him exceedingly great harm, and wounded him very badly, but at last he killed them. When the king woke, he was exceedingly heavy-hearted over his dream, and so, to put it out of his thoughts, he made ready with many knights to ride hunting. As soon as he was in the forest the king saw a great hart in front of him.

"This hart I will chase," said King Arthur.

And so he spurred his horse, and rode after it a long way, and by sheer force he was often on the point of striking the hart. But the king had chased the hart so long that his horse lost its wind and fell down dead. Then a yeoman fetched the king another horse.

So when the king saw the hart had gone to cover, and his horse was dead, he sat down by a spring, and there he fell deep into thought. And as he sat like this, he thought he heard a noise of hounds, as many as thirty. And with that the king saw coming towards him the strangest beast that he had ever seen or heard of. So the beast went to the spring and drank, and the noise in the beast's belly was like the baying of thirty couple of hounds on the scent; but all the while the beast drank there was no noise in its belly. And with that the beast went off with a great noise, at which the king marvelled greatly. And so he was deep in thought, and with that he fell asleep. Just then a knight came on foot to Arthur and said, "Knight, sitting there sleepy and lost in thought, tell me if you saw a strange beast pass this way."

"I saw one like that," said King Arthur, "and by now it is two miles off. What do you want with the beast?" said Arthur.

"Sir, I have followed that beast a long time, and killed my horse doing it. So I wish to God I had another, to follow my quest."

Just then someone came with the king's horse, and when the knight saw the horse, he begged the king to give it to him: "For I have followed this quest this past twelvemonth, and either I shall take the beast, or I will shed the best blood of my body."

Pellinore, a king at that time, followed the Questing Beast, and after his death Sir Palomides followed it.
