Chapter 20: How King Pellinore took Arthur's horse and followed the Questing Beast, and how Merlin met Arthur

"Sir knight," said the king, "give up that quest, and let me have it, and I will follow it for another twelvemonth."

"You fool," said the knight to Arthur, "you want it for nothing. It shall never be achieved except by me, or by my next of kin."

With that he leapt to the king's horse and mounted into the saddle, and said, "Many thanks. This horse is mine now."

"Well," said the king, "you may take my horse by force, but I would like to find out whether you are better on horseback than I am."

"Well," said the knight, "look for me here whenever you like, and here near this spring you will find me." And so he went on his way.

Then the king sat deep in thought, and told his men to fetch his horse as fast as ever they could. Just then Merlin came by him, looking like a child of fourteen, and greeted the king, and asked him why he was so thoughtful.

"I may well be thoughtful," said the king, "for I have seen the most marvellous sight that I ever saw."

"I know that well," said Merlin, "as well as you do yourself, and all your thoughts besides. But you are a fool to brood, for it will not help you. I also know who you are, and who your father was, and who you were born to. King Uther Pendragon was your father, and fathered you on Igraine."

"That is false," said King Arthur. "How could you know it? You are not old enough to have known my father."

"Yes," said Merlin, "I know it better than you or any man alive."

"I will not believe you," said Arthur, and he was angry with the child.

So Merlin went away, and came back in the likeness of an old man of eighty, at which the king was very glad, for he seemed to be very wise.

Then said the old man, "Why are you so sad?"

"I may well be heavy-hearted," said Arthur, "for many reasons. Besides, there was a child here, and he told me many things that I think he had no business knowing, for he was not old enough to have known my father."

"Yes," said the old man, "the child told you the truth, and he would have told you more if you had let him. But you have lately done a thing for which God is displeased with you, for you have lain with your sister, and on her you have fathered a child who will destroy you and all the knights of your realm."

"Who are you," said Arthur, "to tell me this news?"

"I am Merlin, and it was I who was in the child's likeness."

"Ah," said King Arthur, "you are a marvellous man. But I marvel greatly at your words, that I must die in battle."

"Do not marvel," said Merlin, "for it is God's will that your body be punished for your foul deeds. But I may well be sorry," said Merlin, "for I shall die a shameful death, to be put into the earth alive, and you shall die an honourable death."

And as they were talking of this, someone came with the king's horse, and so the king mounted his horse, and Merlin another, and so they rode to Caerleon. And at once the king asked Ector and Ulfius how he had been fathered, and they told him that Uther Pendragon was his father and Queen Igraine his mother.

Then he said to Merlin, "I want my mother sent for, so that I may speak with her; and if she says so herself, then I will believe it."

In all haste the queen was sent for, and she came, and brought with her Morgan le Fay, her daughter, who was as beautiful a lady as any could be. And the king welcomed Igraine in the best way he could.
