Chapter 21: How Ulfius accused Queen Igraine, Arthur's mother, of treason; and how a knight came and asked for vengeance for his master's death

Just then Ulfius came, and said openly, so that the king and everyone feasting there that day could hear, "You are the falsest lady in the world, and the greatest traitor to the king's person."

"Be careful what you say," said Arthur. "That is a heavy charge."

"I know very well what I am saying," said Ulfius, "and here is my glove, to prove it on the body of any man who says otherwise: that this Queen Igraine is the cause of your great harm, and of your great war. For if she had spoken out in the lifetime of King Uther Pendragon about your birth, and how you were fathered, you would never have had the deadly wars you have had. For most of the barons of your realm never knew whose son you were, nor who fathered you. And she who bore you in her body should have made it known openly, to clear her own honour and yours, and likewise to the whole realm. And so I prove her false to God and to you and to all your realm, and whoever says otherwise, I will prove it on his body."

Then Igraine spoke and said, "I am a woman and I cannot fight, but rather than be dishonoured, some good man would take up my quarrel. What is more," she said, "Merlin knows well, and so do you, Sir Ulfius, how King Uther came to me in the castle of Tintagil in the likeness of my lord, who had been dead three hours before, and so fathered a child on me that night. And thirteen days after, King Uther married me, and by his command, when the child was born, it was handed over to Merlin and brought up by him. And so I never saw the child again, nor do I know what his name is, for I have never known him yet."

And there Ulfius said to the queen, "Merlin is more to blame than you."

"I know well," said the queen, "that I bore a child by my lord King Uther, but I do not know what has become of him."

Then Merlin took the king by the hand, saying, "This is your mother."

And with that Sir Ector bore witness how he had brought him up by Uther's command. And with that King Arthur took his mother, Queen Igraine, in his arms and kissed her, and they wept over each other. And then the king had a feast made that lasted eight days.

Then one day there came into the court a squire on horseback, leading before him a knight wounded to the death, and told him how there was a knight in the forest who had put up a tent by a spring, "and he has killed my master, a good knight; his name was Miles. And so I beg you that my master may be buried, and that some knight may avenge my master's death."

Then there was great talk in the court of that knight's death, and every man gave his opinion. Then Griflet came, who was only a squire, and he was young, the same age as King Arthur; and he begged the king, for all the service he had done him, to give him the order of knighthood.
