Chapter 22: How Griflet was made a knight, and jousted with a knight

"You are very young and tender in years," said Arthur, "to take so high an order on yourself."

"Sir," said Griflet, "I beg you, make me a knight."

"Sir," said Merlin, "it would be a great pity to lose Griflet, for he will be an exceedingly good man when he comes of age, and will stay with you all his life. And if he risks his body against that knight at the spring, he is in great danger of never coming back, for that is one of the best knights in the world, and the strongest man at arms."

"Well," said Arthur.

So at Griflet's wish the king made him a knight.

"Now," said Arthur to Sir Griflet, "since I have made you a knight, you must grant me a gift."

"Whatever you wish," said Griflet.

"You shall promise me on your life that when you have jousted with the knight at the spring, whether you end up on foot or on horseback, you will come straight back to me without any further fighting."

"I promise you," said Griflet, "as you wish."

Then Griflet took his horse in great haste, and set his shield and took a spear in his hand, and so he rode at a great gallop until he came to the spring. And beside it he saw a rich tent, and beside that, under a cloth, stood a fine horse, well saddled and bridled, and on a tree hung a shield of several colours and a great spear. Then Griflet struck the shield with the butt of his spear, so that the shield fell down to the ground. With that the knight came out of the tent, and said, "Fair knight, why did you strike down my shield?"

"Because I will joust with you," said Griflet.

"It is better you don't," said the knight, "for you are only young, and newly made a knight, and your strength is nothing to mine."

"Be that as it may," said Griflet, "I will joust with you."

"I am loath to," said the knight, "but since I must, I will make ready for it. Where are you from?" said the knight.

"Sir, I am from Arthur's court."

So the two knights charged together, and Griflet's spear shattered to pieces; and with that the knight struck Griflet through the shield and the left side, and broke his spear, so that the stump stuck in his body, and horse and knight fell down.
