Chapter 23: How twelve knights came from Rome and demanded tribute from Arthur for this land, and how Arthur fought with a knight

When the knight saw him lying on the ground like that, he dismounted, and was exceedingly heavy-hearted, for he thought he had killed him. And then he unlaced his helmet and gave him air, and so, with the spear-stump still in him, he set him on his horse, and so commended him to God, and said he had a mighty heart, and if he lived he would prove an exceedingly good knight. And so Sir Griflet rode to the court, where there was great grieving over him. But through good doctors he was healed and saved.

Just then twelve knights came into the court, and they were old men, and they came from the Emperor of Rome. And they demanded tribute from Arthur for this realm, or else the emperor would destroy him and his land.

"Well," said King Arthur, "you are messengers, and so you may say what you like, or else you would die for it. But this is my answer: I owe the emperor no tribute, and I will pay him none. But on a fair field I will give him his tribute, and it shall be with a sharp spear, or else with a sharp sword, and that shall not be long in coming, by my father's soul, Uther Pendragon."

And with that the messengers left, exceedingly angry, and King Arthur just as angry, for they had come at a bad time; for the king was exceedingly angry over the wounding of Sir Griflet. And so he commanded a trusted man of his chamber that before daybreak his best horse and armour, with everything that belonged to his person, should be outside the city before the next morning. So before the next morning he met his man and his horse, and so he mounted and set his shield and took his spear, and told his chamberlain to wait there until he came back. And so Arthur rode at an easy pace until it was day, and then he saw three peasants chasing Merlin, and they would have killed him. Then the king rode up to them, and ordered them, "Run, you churls!" Then they were afraid when they saw a knight, and ran.

"O Merlin," said Arthur, "you would have been killed here, for all your arts, if it had not been for me."

"No," said Merlin, "not so, for I could save myself if I wanted to. And you are nearer your death than I am, for you are riding to your death, unless God is your friend."

So as they went along talking like this, they came to the spring, and the rich tent beside it. Then King Arthur saw a knight sitting in a chair, in armour.

"Sir knight," said Arthur, "for what reason do you wait here, so that no knight may ride this way unless he jousts with you?" said the king. "My advice to you is to give up that custom," said Arthur.

"This custom," said the knight, "I have kept and I will keep, in spite of anyone who says no; and whoever is aggrieved by my custom, let him change it, whoever wants to."

"I will change it," said Arthur.

"And I will defend it against you," said the knight.

At once he took his horse and set his shield and took a spear, and they met so hard, each on the other's shield, that both their spears shattered to pieces. With that Arthur at once pulled out his sword.

"No, not so," said the knight. "It is better," said the knight, "for the two of us to run at each other again with sharp spears."

"Gladly," said Arthur, "if I had any more spears."

"I have plenty," said the knight.

So a squire came and brought two good spears, and Arthur chose one and the knight the other. So they spurred their horses and came together with all their might, so that each broke his spear off in his hand. Then Arthur put his hand to his sword.

"No," said the knight, "you shall do better. You are as good a jouster as any I ever met, and for the love of the high order of knighthood, let us joust just once more."

"I agree," said Arthur.

At once two great spears were brought, and each knight took a spear, and with that they charged together, so that Arthur's spear shattered to pieces. But the other knight hit him so hard in the middle of the shield that horse and man fell to the earth. And with that Arthur was fierce, and pulled out his sword, and said, "I will try you on foot, sir knight, for I have lost the honour on horseback."

"I will stay on horseback," said the knight.

Then Arthur was angry, and set his shield towards him with his sword drawn. When the knight saw that, he dismounted, for he thought there was no honour in having a knight at such a disadvantage, himself on horseback and the other on foot. And so he dismounted and set his shield towards Arthur. And there began a hard battle with many great strokes, and they hewed so with their swords that the pieces of their armour flew across the fields, and they both bled so much that the whole place where they fought was soaked with blood. And so they fought a long time, and rested, and then they went back to the battle, and so crashed together like two rams that both fell to the earth. So at last they struck together so that both their swords met squarely. But the knight's sword struck King Arthur's sword into two pieces, and at that he was heavy-hearted.

Then said the knight to Arthur, "You are in my power, to save or to kill as I please. And unless you yield yourself beaten and a recreant, a knight who begs for his life, you shall die."

"As for death," said King Arthur, "it is welcome whenever it comes. But as for yielding to you as a recreant, I would rather die than be so shamed."

And with that the king leapt at Pellinore, and took him by the middle and threw him down, and tore off his helmet. When the knight felt that, he was afraid, for he was an exceedingly big man and a strong one. And at once he brought Arthur under him, and tore off his helmet, and would have struck off his head.
