Chapter 25: How Arthur, through Merlin, got his sword Excalibur from the Lady of the Lake

Then the king and Merlin left, and went to a hermit who was a good man and a great healer. So the hermit searched all his wounds and gave him good salves. So the king was there three days, and by then his wounds had mended well enough that he could ride and walk, and so they left. And as they rode, Arthur said, "I have no sword."

"No matter," said Merlin. "Near here is a sword that shall be yours, if I can manage it."

So they rode until they came to a lake, which was a fair, broad water, and in the middle of the lake Arthur saw an arm clothed in white samite, a rich silk, that held a fair sword in that hand.

"Look!" said Merlin. "There is the sword I spoke of."

With that they saw a damsel going upon the lake.

"What damsel is that?" said Arthur.

"That is the Lady of the Lake," said Merlin. "And within that lake is a rock, and in it is as fair a place as any on earth, and richly furnished. And this damsel will come to you soon, and then speak courteously to her, so that she will give you that sword."

At once the damsel came to Arthur, and greeted him, and he greeted her in return.

"Damsel," said Arthur, "what sword is that, which the arm over there holds above the water? I wish it were mine, for I have no sword."

"Sir Arthur, king," said the damsel, "that sword is mine, and if you will give me a gift when I ask it of you, you shall have it."

"On my faith," said Arthur, "I will give you whatever gift you ask."

"Well!" said the damsel. "Get into that barge over there, and row yourself to the sword, and take it and the scabbard with you, and I will ask for my gift when I see my time."

So Sir Arthur and Merlin dismounted and tied their horses to two trees, and so they went into the boat. And when they came to the sword that the hand held, Sir Arthur took it up by the handle, and took it with him, and the arm and the hand went under the water. And so they came to land and rode on, and then Sir Arthur saw a rich tent.

"What is that tent over there?"

"It is the tent of the knight you fought with last," said Merlin, "Sir Pellinore. But he is out; he is not there. He has had a fight with a knight of yours called Egglame, and they have fought together, but in the end Egglame fled, or else he would have been dead, and Pellinore has chased him all the way to Caerleon. And we shall meet him soon on the highway."

"That is well said," said Arthur. "Now I have a sword, now I will do battle with him, and be avenged on him."

"Sir, you shall not," said Merlin, "for the knight is weary of fighting and chasing, so that there would be no honour for you in fighting him. Also, he will not easily be matched by any one knight alive. And so it is my advice: let him pass, for he will do you good service before long, and his sons after his days. Also, you will see the day, before long, when you will be very glad to give him your sister in marriage."

"When I see him, I will do as you advise," said Arthur.

Then Sir Arthur looked at the sword, and liked it exceedingly well.

"Which do you like better," said Merlin, "the sword or the scabbard?"

"I like the sword better," said Arthur.

"Then you are the less wise," said Merlin, "for the scabbard is worth ten of the sword. For while you have the scabbard on you, you will never lose any blood, however badly you are wounded. So always keep the scabbard safe with you."

So they rode to Caerleon, and on the way they met Sir Pellinore. But Merlin had worked such a craft that Pellinore did not see Arthur, and he passed by without a word.

"I wonder," said Arthur, "that the knight would not speak."

"Sir," said Merlin, "he did not see you, for if he had seen you, you would not have got away so easily."

So they came to Caerleon, and his knights were exceedingly glad of it. And when they heard of his adventures, they marvelled that he would risk his person like that, alone. But all men of honour said it was a fine thing to serve under such a chieftain, who would put his person at risk in adventures as other poor knights did.
