Chapter 1: Of a damsel who came with a sword belted at her side, looking for a man good enough to draw it out of the scabbard

After the death of Uther Pendragon, Arthur his son reigned, and he had great wars in his day to bring all England into his hand. For there were many kings within the realm of England, and in Wales, Scotland and Cornwall. So it happened one time, when King Arthur was at London, that a knight came and told the king the news that King Rience of North Wales had raised a great number of men, and they had entered the land, and were burning and killing the king's loyal subjects.

"If this is true," said Arthur, "it would be a great shame to my rank unless he were mightily resisted."

"It is the truth," said the knight, "for I saw the army myself."

"Well," said the king, "have a proclamation made, that all the lords, knights and gentlemen of arms should gather at a castle called Camelot in those days, and there the king will hold a general council and a great joust."

So when the king had come there with all his barons, and they were lodged as seemed best to them, a damsel had come there who was sent with a message from the great lady Lile of Avalon. And when she came before King Arthur, she told him whom she came from, and how she had been sent to him with a message, for these reasons. Then she let her richly furred cloak fall, and then she was seen to be wearing a noble sword belted at her side. The king marvelled at it, and said, "Damsel, why are you wearing that sword? It does not become you."

"Now I will tell you," said the damsel. "This sword that I am wearing gives me great sorrow and trouble, for I cannot be freed of this sword except by a knight, and he must be an exceedingly good man of his hands and of his deeds, and without baseness or treachery, and without treason. And if I can find such a knight who has all these virtues, he can draw this sword out of the sheath. For I have been at King Rience's court, where I was told there were exceedingly good knights, and he and all his knights have tried it and none can succeed."

"This is a great marvel," said Arthur, "if it is true. I will try to draw out the sword myself, not presuming that I am the best knight, but so that I will start drawing at your sword as an example to all the barons, so that they will try, every one after another, when I have tried it."

Then Arthur took the sword by the sheath and by the belt and pulled at it hard, but the sword would not come out.

"Sir," said the damsel, "you need not pull half so hard, for the man who is to pull it out will do it with little strength."

"You speak well," said Arthur. "Now try, all my barons; but take care that you are not stained with shame, treachery or guile."

"Then it will be no use," said the damsel, "for he must be a clean knight without baseness, and of gentle blood on his father's side and his mother's side."

Most of the barons of the Round Table who were there at that time all tried in turn, but none could succeed. And so the damsel grieved beyond measure, and said, "Alas! I thought the best knights without treachery or treason were in this court."

"On my faith," said Arthur, "there are good knights here, I believe, as good as any in the world, but it is not their fortune to help you, and that displeases me."
