Chapter 2: How Balin, dressed like a poor knight, pulled out the sword, which afterwards was the cause of his death

Then it so happened at that time that there was a poor knight at King Arthur's court who had been his prisoner for half a year and more for killing a knight who was a cousin of King Arthur's. This knight's name was Balin, and through the good offices of the barons he had been released from prison, for he was known as a good man of his body, and he was born in Northumberland. And so he went quietly into the court, and saw this adventure, and it lifted his heart, and he wanted to try it as the other knights did. But because he was poor and poorly dressed, he did not push himself far forward into the crowd. Yet in his heart he was fully confident that he would do as well as any knight there, if fortune favoured him.

And as the damsel took her leave of Arthur and of all the barons, and was leaving, this knight Balin called to her, and said, "Damsel, I beg you, of your courtesy, allow me to try as these lords have. Though I am so poorly dressed, in my heart I feel as confident as some of these others, and in my heart I feel I shall succeed very well."

The damsel looked at the poor knight, and saw that he was a likely man; but because of his poor clothes she thought he could not be a man of honour, free of baseness or treachery. And then she said to the knight, "Sir, there is no need to put me to more pain or trouble, for it does not seem likely that you will succeed where others have failed."

"Ah, fair damsel," said Balin, "worthiness, and good qualities, and good deeds, are not only in a man's clothes; manhood and honour are hidden within a man's person, and many an honourable knight is not known to all people. And therefore honour and boldness are not in clothes."

"By God," said the damsel, "you speak the truth. Therefore you shall try to do what you can."

Then Balin took the sword by the belt and sheath, and drew it out easily; and when he looked at the sword it pleased him greatly. Then the king and all the barons marvelled greatly that Balin had achieved that adventure, and many knights felt great spite against Balin.

"Certainly," said the damsel, "this is an exceedingly good knight, and the best I ever found, and the most honourable, without treason, treachery or baseness, and he will do many marvels. Now, noble and courteous knight, give me the sword back."

"No," said Balin, "for I will keep this sword, unless it is taken from me by force."

"Well," said the damsel, "you are not wise to keep the sword from me, for with that sword you will kill the best friend you have, and the man you love most in the world, and the sword will be your destruction."

"I will take whatever adventure God sends me," said Balin, "but you shall not have the sword at this time, on my life."

"You will regret it before long," said the damsel, "for I would have the sword more for your good than for mine, for I am exceedingly sad for your sake. For you will not believe that the sword will be your destruction, and that is a great pity."

With that the damsel left, grieving greatly.

Immediately afterwards Balin sent for his horse and armour, and meant to leave the court, and took his leave of King Arthur.

"No," said the king, "I hope you will not leave this fellowship so lightly. I suppose you are displeased that I have treated you unkindly. Blame me the less for it, for I was misinformed about you; I did not think you were such a knight as you are, of honour and prowess. And if you will stay at this court among my fellowship, I will advance you so that you shall be pleased."

"God thank your highness," said Balin. "No man could praise your generosity and highness half as much as they are worth. But at this time I must leave, begging you always for your good grace."

"Truly," said the king, "I am very sorry and angry at your leaving. I beg you, fair knight, not to stay away long, and you shall be most welcome to me and to my barons, and I will make amends for every wrong I have done you."

"God thank your great lordship," said Balin, and with that he made ready to leave.

Then most of the knights of the Round Table said that Balin had not achieved this adventure by strength alone, but by witchcraft.
