Chapter 3: How the Lady of the Lake demanded the head of the knight who had won the sword, or else the damsel's head

Meanwhile, while this knight was making ready to leave, there came into the court a lady who was called the Lady of the Lake. And she came on horseback, richly dressed, and greeted King Arthur, and there she asked him for the gift he had promised her when she gave him the sword.

"That is true," said Arthur. "I promised you a gift, but I have forgotten the name of the sword you gave me."

"The name of it," said the lady, "is Excalibur, which is as much as to say Cut-steel."

"You speak well," said the king. "Ask what you will and you shall have it, if it lies in my power to give it."

"Well," said the lady, "I ask for the head of the knight who has won the sword, or else the head of the damsel who brought it. I would not care if I had both their heads, for he killed my brother, a good knight and a true one, and that gentlewoman was the cause of my father's death."

"Truly," said King Arthur, "I cannot grant either of their heads with my honour. So ask for anything else you will, and I will fulfil your desire."

"I will ask for nothing else," said the lady.

When Balin was ready to leave, he saw the Lady of the Lake, who by her doing had killed Balin's mother, and he had been looking for her for three years. And when he was told that she had asked King Arthur for his head, he went straight to her and said, "Ill met! You want my head, and so you shall lose yours." And with his sword he swiftly struck off her head in front of King Arthur.

"Alas, for shame!" said Arthur. "Why have you done this? You have shamed me and all my court, for this was a lady I was indebted to, and she came here under my safe-conduct. I will never forgive you that offence."

"Sir," said Balin, "I am sorry for your displeasure, but this same lady was the falsest lady living, and by enchantment and sorcery she has been the destroyer of many good knights, and she was the cause of my mother being burned, through her falsehood and treachery."

"Whatever cause you had," said Arthur, "you should have spared her in my presence. So make no mistake, you will regret it, for I never had such an insult in my court. Therefore leave my court as fast as you can."

Then Balin took up the lady's head, and carried it with him to his lodging, and there he met his squire, who was sorry that he had displeased King Arthur; and so they rode out of the town.

"Now," said Balin, "we must part. Take this head and carry it to my friends, and tell them how I have fared, and tell my friends in Northumberland that my greatest enemy is dead. Also tell them how I am out of prison, and what adventure happened to me in winning this sword."

"Alas!" said the squire. "You are greatly to blame for displeasing King Arthur."

"As for that," said Balin, "I will hurry, as fast as I can, to meet King Rience and destroy him, or else die in the attempt. And if I have the luck to defeat him, then King Arthur will be my good and gracious lord."

"Where shall I meet you?" said the squire.

"At King Arthur's court," said Balin.

So he and his squire parted at that time. Then King Arthur and all the court grieved greatly, and were ashamed at the death of the Lady of the Lake. Then the king buried her richly.
