Chapter 5: How Balin was pursued by Sir Lanceor, a knight of Ireland, and how he jousted with him and slew him

"And so," said Merlin, "this Lady Lile of Avalon gave her this sword that she brought with her, and said that no man would pull it out of the sheath unless he was one of the best knights of this realm, and he would be hardy and full of prowess, and with that sword he would kill her brother. This was the reason the damsel came to this court. I know it as well as you do. Would to God she had never come to this court! But she never came into honourable company to do good, but always great harm. And the knight who has achieved the sword will be destroyed by that sword, and that will be a great loss, for there is no knight alive of more prowess than he is. And he will do you, my lord Arthur, great honour and kindness; and it is a great pity that he will not last but a little while, for I know of no man living to match his strength and boldness."

So the knight of Ireland armed himself at all points, and set his shield on his shoulder, and mounted his horse, and took his spear in his hand, and rode after him at a great pace, as fast as his horse could go. And within a little while, on a mountain, he caught sight of Balin, and with a loud voice he cried, "Stop, knight! For you will stop whether you like it or not, and the shield in front of you will not help you."

When Balin heard the shout, he turned his horse fiercely, and said, "Fair knight, what do you want with me? Do you want to joust with me?"

"Yes," said the Irish knight, "that is why I have come after you."

"Perhaps," said Balin, "it would have been better for you to have stayed at home. For many a man expects to put his enemy to shame, and often it falls on himself. From what court have you been sent?" said Balin.

"I have come from the court of King Arthur," said the knight of Ireland, "and I have come here to avenge the insult you did today to King Arthur and to his court."

"Well," said Balin, "I see well I must fight you, and I am sorry for it, to grieve King Arthur or any of his court. And your quarrel with me is a very weak one," said Balin, "for the lady who is dead did me great harm, and otherwise I would have been as unwilling as any knight living to kill a lady."

"Make ready," said the knight Lanceor, "and square up to me, for only one of us will stay alive on this field."

Then they took their spears, and came together as fast as their horses could drive, and the Irish knight struck Balin on the shield, so that his spear all went to splinters. And Balin hit him through the shield, and the hauberk gave way, and so the spear pierced through his body and the horse's rump. And at once Balin turned his horse fiercely, and drew out his sword, and did not know that he had killed him; and then he saw him lying like a dead corpse.
