Chapter 6: How a damsel who loved Lanceor killed herself for love, and how Balin met his brother Balan

Then he looked around him, and saw a damsel who came riding as fast as the horse could go, on a fine palfrey. And when she saw that Lanceor was dead, she grieved beyond measure, and said, "O Balin, you have killed two bodies and one heart, and two hearts in one body, and you have lost two souls."

And with that she took the sword from her love who lay dead, and fell to the ground in a faint. And when she got up she grieved beyond measure, and her sorrow grieved Balin exceedingly. And he went to her to take the sword out of her hand, but she held it so tight that he could not take it out of her hand without hurting her. And suddenly she set the pommel to the ground, and ran herself through the body.

When Balin saw what she had done, he was exceedingly heavy at heart, and ashamed that so fair a damsel had destroyed herself for love of the man he had killed.

"Alas," said Balin, "I bitterly regret the death of this knight, for the love of this damsel, for there was much true love between them both."

And for sorrow he could not look at him any longer, but turned his horse and looked towards a great forest, and there, by his coat of arms, he recognised his brother Balan. And when they met they took off their helmets and kissed each other, and wept for joy and pity.

Then Balan said, "I little expected to meet you by this sudden chance. I am very glad of your release from your grievous imprisonment, for a man in the castle of Four Stones told me that you had been released, and that man had seen you at the court of King Arthur. And so I came here into this country, for here I expected to find you."

At once the knight Balin told his brother of his adventure of the sword, and of the death of the Lady of the Lake, and how King Arthur was displeased with him. "And so he sent this knight after me, who lies here dead, and the death of this damsel grieves me deeply."

"So it does me," said Balan, "but you must take whatever adventure God sends you."

"Truly," said Balin, "I am very heavy-hearted that my lord Arthur is displeased with me, for he is the most honourable knight who reigns on earth now, and I will win his love or else risk my life. For King Rience is laying siege to the Castle Terrabil, and we will go there in all haste, to prove our honour and prowess on him."

"Gladly," said Balan, "let us do that, and we will help each other as brothers should."
