Chapter 7: How a dwarf reproached Balin for the death of Lanceor, and how King Mark of Cornwall found the dead lovers and made a tomb over them

"Now let us go from here," said Balin, "and well met are we."

Meanwhile, as they talked, a dwarf came from the city of Camelot on horseback, as fast as he could, and found the dead bodies. At this he grieved greatly, and pulled out his hair for sorrow, and said, "Which of you knights has done this deed?"

"Why do you ask?" said Balan.

"Because I want to know," said the dwarf.

"It was I," said Balin, "who killed this knight in my own defence, for he came here to chase me, and either I had to kill him or he me. And this damsel killed herself for love of him, and I regret it, and for her sake I will love all women the better."

"Alas," said the dwarf, "you have done yourself great harm, for this knight who lies here dead was one of the most valiant men alive. And be sure of this, Balin: this knight's kin will hunt you through the world until they have killed you."

"As for that," said Balin, "I am not greatly afraid; but I am very heavy-hearted that I have displeased my lord King Arthur by the death of this knight."

So as they talked together, a king of Cornwall came riding up, who was called King Mark. And when he saw these two bodies lying dead, and learned from the two knights mentioned above how they had died, then the king grieved greatly for the true love that had been between them, and said, "I will not leave until I have made a tomb here on this earth."

And there he pitched his tents and searched through all the country to find a tomb, and in a church they found one that was fair and rich. And then the king had them both laid in the earth, and put the tomb over them, and wrote the names of them both on the tomb: how here lies Lanceor, the son of the king of Ireland, who at his own request was killed by the hands of Balin; and how his lady and lover, Colombe, killed herself with her love's sword for grief and sorrow.
