Chapter 8: How Merlin prophesied that the two best knights in the world would fight there, and that they would be Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram

Meanwhile, as this was being done, Merlin came in to King Mark, and seeing all that he was doing, said, "Here in this same place there will be the greatest battle between two knights that ever was or ever will be, and they will be the truest lovers, and yet neither of them will kill the other."

And there Merlin wrote on the tomb, in letters of gold, the names of the two who would fight in that place, and their names were Lancelot du Lake and Tristram.

"You are a strange man," said King Mark to Merlin, "to speak of such marvels. You are a rough fellow, and an unlikely one to tell of such deeds. What is your name?" said King Mark.

"At this time," said Merlin, "I will not tell it. But at the time when Sir Tristram is caught with his sovereign lady, then you shall hear and know my name, and at that time you shall hear news that will not please you."

Then Merlin said to Balin, "You have done yourself great harm, because you did not save this lady who killed herself, when you might have saved her if you had wanted to."

"On my life," said Balin, "I could not save her, for she killed herself suddenly."

"I am sorry for it," said Merlin. "Because of the death of that lady you will strike the most dolorous stroke that ever man struck, except the stroke of our Lord. For you will wound the truest knight and the man of most honour who is alive now, and through that stroke three kingdoms will be in great poverty, misery and wretchedness for twelve years, and the knight will not be healed of that wound for many years."

Then Merlin took his leave of Balin.

And Balin said, "If I knew that what you say were true, that I should do such a terrible deed as that, I would kill myself to make you a liar."

With that Merlin suddenly vanished. And then Balan and his brother took their leave of King Mark.

"First," said the king, "tell me your name."

"Sir," said Balan, "you can see he carries two swords; so you may call him the Knight with the Two Swords."

And so King Mark went off to Camelot to King Arthur, and Balin took the road towards King Rience. And as the brothers rode together they met Merlin in disguise, but they did not recognise him.

"Where are you riding?" said Merlin.

"We have little reason to tell you that," said the two knights.

"But what is your name?" said Balin.

"At this time," said Merlin, "I will not tell it to you."

"It looks bad," said the knights. "A man who will not tell his name is no honest man."

"As for that," said Merlin, "be that as it may, I can tell you why you are riding this way: to meet King Rience. But it will do you no good unless you have my advice."

"Ah!" said Balin. "You are Merlin. We will be guided by your advice."

"Come on," said Merlin. "You will win great honour; and see that you act like knights, for you will have great need to."

"As for that," said Balin, "do not be afraid. We will do what we can."
