Chapter 9: How Balin and his brother, on Merlin's advice, captured King Rience and brought him to King Arthur

Then Merlin lodged them in a wood among the leaves beside the highway, and took the bridles off their horses and put them out to grass, and they lay down to rest until it was near midnight. Then Merlin told them to get up and make ready, for the king was near them. He had stolen away from his army with some sixty horsemen of his best knights, and twenty of them rode on ahead to warn the Lady de Vance that the king was coming; for that night King Rience was to have slept with her.

"Which is the king?" said Balin.

"Wait," said Merlin. "Here, in a narrow way, you will meet him." And with that he showed Balin and his brother where he was riding.

At once Balin and his brother met the king, and struck him down, and wounded him fiercely, and laid him on the ground. And there they killed men on the right hand and the left, and killed more than forty of his men, and the rest fled. Then they went back to King Rience and would have killed him if he had not surrendered himself to their mercy.

Then he spoke like this: "Knights full of prowess, do not kill me, for you may gain by my life, and by my death you will gain nothing."

Then these two knights said, "You speak truly and well." And so they laid him on a horse-litter.

With that Merlin vanished, and came to King Arthur ahead of them, and told him how his greatest enemy had been captured and defeated.

"By whom?" said King Arthur.

"By two knights," said Merlin, "who would like to please your lordship, and tomorrow you shall know what knights they are."

Soon afterwards the Knight with the Two Swords and Balan his brother came, and brought King Rience of North Wales with them, and there they handed him over to the porters, and gave him into their charge. And so the two of them went back again at the dawning of the day.

King Arthur then came to King Rience, and said, "Sir king, you are welcome. By what chance have you come here?"

"Sir," said King Rience, "I came here by a hard chance."

"Who captured you?" said King Arthur.

"Sir," said the king, "the Knight with the Two Swords and his brother, who are two marvellous knights of prowess."

"I do not know them," said Arthur, "but I am much indebted to them."

"Ah," said Merlin, "I will tell you. It is Balin, who achieved the sword, and his brother Balan, a good knight; there is no better knight living for prowess and worthiness. And it will be the greatest sorrow over him that I ever knew over any knight, for he will not last long."

"Alas," said King Arthur, "that is a great pity; for I am much indebted to him, and I have repaid him badly for his kindness."

"No," said Merlin, "he will do much more for you, and you will know that soon. But, sir, are you prepared?" said Merlin. "For tomorrow, before noon, Nero, King Rience's brother, will attack you with a great army. So make ready, for I will leave you."
