Chapter 10: How King Arthur fought a battle against Nero and King Lot of Orkney, and how King Lot was deceived by Merlin, and how twelve kings were slain

Then King Arthur made his army ready in ten divisions, and Nero was ready in the field before the Castle Terrabil with a great army, and he had ten divisions, with many more men than Arthur had. Then Nero had the vanguard with most of his men, and Merlin came to King Lot of the Isle of Orkney, and kept him there with a tale of prophecy until Nero and his men were destroyed. And there Sir Kay the seneschal did exceedingly well, so that for all the days of his life the honour of it never left him. And Sir Hervis de Revel did marvellous deeds with King Arthur, and King Arthur killed twenty knights that day and maimed forty. At that time the Knight with the Two Swords and his brother Balan came in, and the two of them did so marvellously that the king and all the knights marvelled at them. And all who saw them said they were sent from heaven as angels, or as devils from hell; and King Arthur himself said they were the best knights he ever saw, for they struck such blows that all men wondered at them.

Meanwhile someone came to King Lot, and told him that while he lingered there Nero had been destroyed and killed with all his men.

"Alas," said King Lot, "I am ashamed, for through my fault many an honourable man has been killed. For if we had been together, there would have been no army under heaven able to match us. This vagabond with his prophecy has made a fool of me."

Merlin did all that, for he knew well that if King Lot had been there in person at the first battle, King Arthur would have been killed, and all his people destroyed. And Merlin knew well that one of the two kings would be dead that day, and Merlin was unwilling that either of them should be killed; but of the two, he would rather King Lot were killed than King Arthur.

"Now what is best to do?" said King Lot of Orkney. "Is it better for me to make terms with King Arthur or to fight, since the greater part of our people are killed and destroyed?"

"Sir," said a knight, "attack Arthur, for they are weary and worn out with fighting, and we are fresh."

"As for me," said King Lot, "I wish every knight would do his part as I will do mine."

And then they advanced their banners and clashed together and shattered all their spears to pieces; and Arthur's knights, with the help of the Knight with the Two Swords and his brother Balan, got the better of King Lot and his army. But King Lot kept himself always in the very front, and did marvellous deeds of arms, for his whole army was held up by his hands, for he stood against every knight. Alas, he could not last, and that was a great pity, that so worthy a knight as he was should be overmatched, who not long before had been one of King Arthur's knights, and had married King Arthur's sister. And because King Arthur had lain with King Lot's wife, who was Arthur's sister, and fathered Mordred on her, King Lot held out against Arthur.

So there was a knight who was called the Knight with the Strange Beast, and at that time his right name was Pellinore, and he was a good man of prowess. And he struck a mighty blow at King Lot as he fought against all his enemies, and he missed his stroke and struck the horse's neck, so that it fell to the ground with King Lot. And with that, at once, Pellinore struck him a great blow through the helmet and the head, down to the brows. And then all the army of Orkney fled because of the death of King Lot, and many mothers' sons were killed there. But King Pellinore bore the blame for the death of King Lot, and for that reason Sir Gawain avenged the death of his father in the tenth year after he was made a knight, and killed King Pellinore with his own hands. Also there were killed at that battle twelve kings on the side of King Lot and Nero, and all were buried in the Church of Saint Stephen's in Camelot, and the rest of the knights and of the others were buried in a great rock.
