Chapter 11: Of the burial of twelve kings, and of Merlin's prophecy, and how Balin would strike the Dolorous Stroke

So to the burial came King Lot's wife Morgause with her four sons, Gawain, Agravain, Gaheris and Gareth. Also there came King Uriens, Sir Uwain's father, and Morgan le Fay his wife, who was King Arthur's sister. All these came to the burial. But of all these twelve kings, King Arthur had the tomb of King Lot made exceedingly rich, and had his tomb made by itself; and then Arthur had twelve images made of brass and copper, and gilded over with gold, to stand for the twelve kings, and each one of them held a wax taper that burned day and night. And King Arthur was made as a figure standing above them with a drawn sword in his hand, and all the twelve figures had faces like men who had been overcome. All this Merlin made by his subtle craft, and there he told the king, "When I am dead these tapers will burn no longer, and soon after that the adventures of the Holy Grail will come among you and be achieved." Also he told Arthur how Balin, the honourable knight, would strike the Dolorous Stroke, from which great vengeance would fall.

"Oh, where are Balin and Balan and Pellinore?" said King Arthur.

"As for Pellinore," said Merlin, "he will meet you soon. And as for Balin, he will not be long away from you. But the other brother will go away, and you will see him no more."

"On my faith," said Arthur, "they are two marvellous knights, and above all Balin surpasses in prowess any knight I ever found, for I owe him a great deal. I wish to God he would stay with me."

"Sir," said Merlin, "see that you keep the scabbard of Excalibur well, for you will lose no blood while you have the scabbard on you, though you have as many wounds on you as you can have."

So afterwards, out of great trust, Arthur gave the scabbard into the keeping of Morgan le Fay his sister. And she loved another knight better than her husband King Uriens or King Arthur, and she wanted to have Arthur her brother killed. And so she had another scabbard made like it by enchantment, and gave the scabbard of Excalibur to her lover; and the knight's name was Accolon, who afterwards nearly killed King Arthur. After this Merlin told King Arthur of the prophecy that there would be a great battle near Salisbury, and that Mordred his own son would be against him. Also he told him that Bagdemagus was his cousin, and closely related to King Uriens.
