Chapter 12: How a sorrowful knight came before Arthur, and how Balin fetched him, and how that knight was slain by an invisible knight

Within a day or two King Arthur was somewhat sick, and he had his tent pitched in a meadow, and there he lay down on a straw bed to sleep, but he could get no rest. Just then he heard a great noise of a horse, and with that the king looked out at the entrance of the tent, and saw a knight coming right past him, grieving greatly.

"Wait, fair sir," said Arthur, "and tell me why you are grieving like this."

"You can do little to help me," said the knight, and so rode on to the castle of Meliot.

Soon afterwards Balin came by, and when he saw King Arthur he got down from his horse, and came to the king on foot, and greeted him.

"By my head," said Arthur, "you are welcome. Sir, just now a knight came riding this way grieving greatly, for what reason I cannot tell. So I would ask you, out of your courtesy and your noble nature, to bring that knight back, either by force or else of his own free will."

"I will do more than that for you, my lord," said Balin. And so he rode at better than a walking pace, and found the knight with a damsel in a forest, and said, "Sir knight, you must come with me to King Arthur, to tell him of your sorrow."

"That I will not do," said the knight, "for it will do me great harm, and you no good."

"Sir," said Balin, "I beg you, make ready, for you must go with me, or else I must fight you and bring you by force, and I would be very unwilling to do that."

"Will you be my safeguard," said the knight, "if I go with you?"

"Yes," said Balin, "or else I will die for it."

And so he made ready to go with Balin, and left the damsel where she was. And just as they were in front of King Arthur's tent, someone invisible came and struck the knight who was riding with Balin right through the body with a spear.

"Alas," said the knight, "I have been killed while under your protection, by a knight called Garlon. So take my horse, which is better than yours, and ride to the damsel, and follow the quest I was on as she leads you, and avenge my death when you can."

"That I will do," said Balin, "and I make a vow of it on my knighthood." And so he left this knight with great sorrow.

So King Arthur had this knight buried richly, and had an inscription made on his tomb telling how Herlews le Berbeus was killed there, and by whom the treachery was done, the knight Garlon. But the damsel always carried with her the broken shaft of the spear that Sir Herlews was killed with.
