Chapter 13: How Balin and the damsel met a knight who was slain in the same way, and how the damsel gave her blood for the custom of a castle

So Balin and the damsel rode into a forest, and there they met a knight who had been out hunting, and that knight asked Balin why he was grieving so greatly.

"I don't care to tell you," said Balin.

"Now," said the knight, "if I were armed as you are, I would fight you."

"There would be little need of that," said Balin. "I am not afraid to tell you." And he told him the whole reason, how it had happened.

"Ah," said the knight, "is that all? Here I promise you, on my life, never to leave you as long as I live."

And so they went to the inn, and the knight armed himself, and so rode on with Balin. And as they came by a hermitage right beside a churchyard, the knight Garlon came invisible, and struck this knight, Perin de Mountbeliard, through the body with a spear.

"Alas," said the knight, "I am killed by this traitor knight who rides invisible."

"Alas," said Balin, "this is not the first insult he has done me."

And there the hermit and Balin buried the knight under a rich stone, in a royal tomb. And in the morning they found letters of gold written there, saying that Sir Gawain would avenge his father King Lot's death on King Pellinore.

Soon after this Balin and the damsel rode until they came to a castle, and there Balin dismounted, and he and the damsel started to go into the castle. And as soon as Balin came inside the castle gate, the portcullis fell down behind him, and a crowd of men fell upon the damsel, and would have killed her. When Balin saw that, he was badly upset, for he could not help the damsel. Then he went up into the tower, and leapt over the walls into the moat, and did not hurt himself; and at once he pulled out his sword and would have fought them. And they all said no, they would not fight him, for they were only keeping the old custom of the castle. And they told him how their lady was sick, and had been bedridden for many years, and she could not be cured unless she had a silver dish full of the blood of a pure maiden who was a king's daughter. "And so the custom of this castle is that no damsel shall pass this way unless she bleeds a silver dish full of her blood."

"Well," said Balin, "she shall bleed as much as she can bleed, but I will not let her lose her life while my life lasts."

And so Balin had her bleed, with her consent, but her blood did not help the lady. And so he and she rested there all night, and were given a very good welcome there, and in the morning they went on their way. And as it is told later in the story of the Holy Grail, Sir Percival's sister helped that lady with her blood, and died of it.
