Chapter 14: How Balin met the knight named Garlon at a feast and slew him there, to have his blood to heal his host's son

Then they rode for three or four days and never met with any adventure, and by chance they were lodged with a gentleman who was a rich man and lived in comfort. And as they sat at their supper, Balin heard someone near him, in a chair, groaning grievously.

"What is this noise?" said Balin.

"Truly," said his host, "I will tell you. I was at a joust not long ago, and there I jousted with a knight who is brother to King Pellam, and twice I struck him down. And then he promised to pay me back through my best friend; and so he wounded my son, who cannot be healed until I have some of that knight's blood. And he always rides invisible, but I do not know his name."

"Ah!" said Balin. "I know that knight. His name is Garlon. He has killed two knights of mine in the same way, and so I would rather meet that knight than have all the gold in this realm, for the insults he has done me."

"Well," said his host, "I will tell you. King Pellam of Listeneise has had a great feast proclaimed throughout this country, to be held within these twenty days, and no knight may come to it unless he brings his wife with him, or his lady-love. And that knight, your enemy and mine, you will see there that day."

"Then I promise you," said Balin, "some of his blood to heal your son with."

"We will set out tomorrow morning," said his host.

So in the morning all three of them rode toward Pellam's country, and they had fifteen days' journey before they got there; and that same day the great feast began. And so they dismounted and stabled their horses, and went into the castle; but Balin's host could not be let in, because he had no lady. Then Balin was well received and brought to a chamber, and took off his armour; and robes were brought to him, as he pleased, and they wanted Balin to leave his sword behind him.

"No," said Balin, "that I will not do, for it is the custom of my country that a knight always keeps his weapon with him, and I will keep that custom, or else I will leave as I came."

Then they gave him leave to wear his sword, and so he went into the castle hall, and was seated among knights of honour, and his lady in front of him.

Soon Balin asked a knight, "Is there not a knight in this court whose name is Garlon?"

"There he goes, over there," said a knight, "the one with the dark face. He is the most extraordinary knight now living, for he destroys many good knights, for he goes invisible."

"Ah, well," said Balin, "is that him?"

Then Balin thought it over for a long time: "If I kill him here I will not escape, and if I leave him now, perhaps I will never meet him again at such a chance, and he will do much harm if he lives."

With that this Garlon noticed that Balin was looking at him, and then he came and struck Balin in the face with the back of his hand, and said, "Knight, what are you staring at me for? Shame on you. Eat your food and do what you came for."

"That's true enough," said Balin. "This is not the first insult you have done me, and so I will do what I came for." And he rose up fiercely and split Garlon's head to the shoulders.

"Give me the broken spear shaft," said Balin to his lady, "that he killed your knight with."

At once she gave it to him, for she always carried the shaft with her. And with that Balin struck him through the body with it, and said for all to hear, "With that shaft you killed a good knight, and now it sticks in your own body."

And then Balin called his host to him, saying, "Now you can fetch blood enough to heal your son with."
