Chapter 16: How Balin was freed by Merlin, and saved a knight who would have killed himself for love

Then Merlin came there and lifted Balin up, and got him a good horse, for his own was dead, and told him to ride out of that country.

"I want my damsel," said Balin.

"Look," said Merlin, "there she lies dead."

And King Pellam lay like that for many years, badly wounded, and could never be healed until Galahad, the high prince, healed him in the quest of the Holy Grail. For in that place was part of the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which Joseph of Arimathea brought into this land, and it was Joseph himself who lay in that rich bed. And that was the same spear with which Longius struck our Lord to the heart. And King Pellam was close kin to Joseph, and he was the most honourable man who lived in those days, and his hurt was a great pity, for through that stroke all turned to great grief, sorrow and suffering.

Then Balin left Merlin, and said, "In this world we will never meet again."

So he rode on through the fair countries and cities, and found the people dead, killed on every side. And all who were still alive cried out, "O Balin, you have caused great damage in these countries! Because of the Dolorous Stroke you gave King Pellam, three countries are destroyed, and have no doubt the vengeance will fall on you in the end."

When Balin was past those countries he was exceedingly glad.

So he rode for eight days before he met with any adventure. And at last he came into a fair forest in a valley, and noticed a tower, and close by it he saw a great warhorse tied to a tree, and beside it a fine knight sat on the ground grieving greatly; and he was a handsome man, and well built.

Balin said, "God save you, why are you so sad? Tell me, and I will put it right, if it is in my power."

"Sir knight," he answered, "you are doing me great harm, for I was lost in happy thoughts, and now you are putting me in more pain."

Balin went a little way off from him, and looked at his horse. Then Balin heard him say this: "Ah, fair lady, why have you broken your promise to me? For you promised to meet me here by noon. And I may curse you for ever giving me this sword, for with this sword I will kill myself." And he pulled it out.

And with that Balin leapt to him and took him by the hand.

"Let go of my hand," said the knight, "or else I will kill you."

"There will be no need of that," said Balin, "for I promise you my help to win your lady, if you will tell me where she is."

"What is your name?" said the knight.

"My name is Balin le Savage."

"Ah, sir, I know you well enough. You are the Knight with the Two Swords, and the man of greatest prowess with his hands now living."

"What is your name?" said Balin.

"My name is Garnish of the Mount, a poor man's son, but for my prowess and boldness a duke made me a knight, and gave me lands. His name is Duke Hermel, and his daughter is the one I love, and she loves me, as I believed."

"How far from here is she?" said Balin.

"Only six miles," said the knight.

"Now let us ride from here," said these two knights.

So they rode at better than a walking pace, until they came to a fair castle, well walled and moated.

"I will go into the castle," said Balin, "and see if she is there."

So he went in and searched from chamber to chamber, and found her bed, but she was not in it. Then Balin looked into a fair little garden, and under a laurel tree he saw her lying on a quilt of green samite, and a knight in her arms, the two of them holding each other close, and grass and herbs under their heads. When Balin saw her lying like that with the ugliest knight he had ever seen, and she a fair lady, then Balin went back through all the chambers again, and told the knight how he had found her as if she were fast asleep, and so brought him to the place where she lay sound asleep.
