Chapter 17: How that knight killed his love and a knight lying beside her, and afterwards killed himself with his own sword, and how Balin rode toward a castle where he lost his life

And when Garnish saw her lying like that, out of pure sorrow his mouth and nose burst out bleeding, and with his sword he struck off both their heads. And then he grieved beyond measure, and said, "O Balin, you have brought great sorrow on me, for if you had not shown me that sight I would have got over my sorrow."

"Truly," said Balin, "I did it so that it would raise your spirits, and so that you could see and know her falseness, and to make you give up loving such a lady. God knows I did nothing but what I would want you to do for me."

"Alas," said Garnish, "now my sorrow is doubled, so that I cannot bear it. Now I have killed what I loved most in all my life." And with that he suddenly ran himself through on his own sword up to the hilt.

When Balin saw that, he made off from there, in case people would say he had killed them. And so he rode on, and within three days he came by a cross, and on it were letters of gold written, which said, "It is not for any knight to ride alone toward this castle."

Then he saw an old white-haired gentleman coming toward him, who said, "Balin le Savage, you are going beyond your bounds to come this way. So turn back, and it will be to your good." And at once he vanished away.

And then he heard a horn blow as if for the death of a hunted beast.

"That blast," said Balin, "is blown for me, for I am the prey, and yet I am not dead."

At once with that he saw a hundred ladies and many knights, who welcomed him with friendly faces, and gave him an exceedingly good welcome to all appearances, and led him into the castle, and there was dancing and music and every kind of joy.

Then the chief lady of the castle said, "Knight with the Two Swords, you must fight and joust with a knight near here who guards an island, for no man may pass this way unless he jousts before he passes."

"That is an unlucky custom," said Balin, "that a knight may not pass this way unless he jousts."

"You will only have to fight one knight," said the lady.

"Well," said Balin, "since I must, I am ready. But travelling men are often weary, and their horses too. But though my horse is weary, my heart is not weary. I would gladly be where my death is to be."

"Sir," said a knight to Balin, "I think your shield is not good. I will lend you a bigger one."

"I beg you, do."

And so he took the shield that was unknown and left his own, and so rode to the island, and put himself and his horse in a great boat. And when he came to the other side he met a damsel, and she said, "O Knight Balin, why have you left your own shield? Alas, you have put yourself in great danger, for by your shield you would have been known. It is as great a pity about you as ever there was about any knight, for in prowess and boldness you have no equal living."

"I regret," said Balin, "that I ever came into this country. But I cannot turn back now for shame, and whatever adventure befalls me, be it life or death, I will take the adventure that comes to me."

And then he looked over his armour, and saw that he was well armed, and with that he crossed himself and mounted his horse.
