Chapter 18: How Balin met his brother Balan, and how each of them slew the other without knowing him, until both were mortally wounded

Then in front of him he saw a knight come riding out of a castle, with his horse trapped all in red, and himself in the same colour. When this knight in red saw Balin, he thought it must be his brother Balin, because of his two swords, but because he did not know his shield he decided it was not him. And so they set their spears in rest and came together marvellously fast, and they struck each other on the shields; but their spears and their charge were so mighty that it bore down horse and man, so that they both lay in a faint. But Balin was badly bruised by the fall of his horse, for he was weary from travelling. And Balan was the first to get to his feet, and he drew his sword and went toward Balin, and Balin rose and went against him. But Balan struck Balin first, and Balin put up his shield, and Balan struck him through the shield and cut into his helm. Then Balin struck him back with that ill-fated sword, and very nearly felled his brother Balan, and so they fought there together until their breath failed. Then Balin looked up to the castle and saw the towers full of ladies. So they went into battle again, and wounded each other grievously, and then they stopped for breath many times, and so went into battle again, until all the place where they fought was blood red. And by that time each of them had given the other seven great wounds, so that the least of them might have been the death of the mightiest giant in this world.

Then they went into battle again so marvellously that it was dreadful to hear of that battle, for the great bloodshed; and their hauberks had burst their rivets, so that they were bare on every side. At last Balan, the younger brother, drew back a little and lay down.

Then Balin le Savage said, "What knight are you? For before now I never found a knight who matched me."

"My name," he said, "is Balan, brother to the good knight Balin."

"Alas," said Balin, "that I should ever see this day." And with that he fell backward in a faint.

Then Balan crawled on his hands and feet, and took the helm off his brother, and could not recognise him by his face, it was so hacked and bloody. But when Balin came to, he said, "O Balan, my brother, you have killed me and I you, and so all the wide world will speak of us both."

"Alas," said Balan, "that I ever saw this day, that by ill luck I could not recognise you. For I saw your two swords well enough, but because you had another shield I thought you were another knight."

"Alas," said Balin, "an ill-fated knight in the castle did all this, for he made me leave my own shield, to the destruction of us both. And if I could live, I would destroy that castle for its evil customs."

"That would be well done," said Balan, "for I have never been allowed to leave them since I came here. For here it happened that I killed a knight who guarded this island, and since then I could never leave; and no more could you, brother, if you had managed to kill me, as you have, and escaped with your own life."

Just then the lady of the tower came to them with four knights and six ladies and six yeomen, and there she heard how they made their lament to each other, and said, "We both came out of one tomb, that is to say one mother's womb, and so we shall both lie in one grave."

So Balan begged the lady, out of her kindness, in return for his true service, to bury them both in the same place where the battle was fought. And she granted them, weeping, that it would be done richly, in the best way.

"Now, will you send for a priest, so that we may receive our sacrament, and receive the blessed body of our Lord Jesus Christ?"

"Yes," said the lady, "it shall be done." And so she sent for a priest and gave them their last rites.

"Now," said Balin, "when we are buried in one tomb, and the inscription made over us telling how two brothers killed each other, no good knight or good man will ever see our tomb without praying for our souls."

And so all the ladies and gentlewomen wept for pity. Then soon Balan died, but Balin did not die until the midnight after; and so they were both buried, and the lady had an inscription made for Balan, telling how he was killed there by his brother's hands, but she did not know Balin's name.
