Chapter 19: How Merlin buried them both in one tomb, and of Balin's sword

In the morning Merlin came and had Balin's name written on the tomb in letters of gold: "Here lies Balin le Savage, who was the Knight with the Two Swords, and he who struck the Dolorous Stroke."

Also Merlin had a bed made there, such that no man should ever lie in it without going out of his mind; yet Lancelot du Lake undid that bed through his nobility.

And soon after Balin was dead, Merlin took his sword, and took off the pommel and put on another pommel. Then Merlin told a knight who stood in front of him to handle that sword, and he tried, and he could not handle it. Then Merlin laughed.

"Why are you laughing?" said the knight.

"This is the reason," said Merlin. "No man shall ever handle this sword but the best knight in the world, and that will be Sir Lancelot or else Galahad his son. And with this sword Lancelot will kill the man he loved best in the world, and that will be Sir Gawain."

All this he had written on the pommel of the sword.

Then Merlin had a bridge of iron and of steel made out to that island, and it was only half a foot wide, and no man shall ever cross that bridge, or have the courage to go over it, unless he is an exceedingly good man and a good knight, without treachery or baseness. Also Merlin left the scabbard of Balin's sword on this side of the island, so that Galahad would find it. Also Merlin by his subtle craft had Balin's sword set in a marble stone standing upright, as big as a millstone, and the stone floated always above the water, and did so for many years. And so by chance it floated down the stream to the City of Camelot, which in English is Winchester. And that same day Galahad, the high prince, came with King Arthur, and so Galahad brought the scabbard with him and won the sword that was there in the marble stone floating on the water. And on Whitsunday he won the sword, as it is told in the book of the Holy Grail.

Soon after this was done, Merlin came to King Arthur and told him of the Dolorous Stroke that Balin gave King Pellam, and how Balin and Balan fought together the most marvellous battle that was ever heard of, and how they were both buried in one tomb.

"Alas," said King Arthur, "this is the greatest pity I ever heard tell of two knights, for I know of no two such knights in the world."

So ends the tale of Balin and of Balan, two brothers born in Northumberland, good knights.

Here follows the third book.
