Chapter 1: How King Arthur took a wife and married Guinevere, daughter of Leodegrance, King of the Land of Cameliard, from whom he received the Round Table

In the beginning of Arthur's reign, after he was chosen king by chance and by grace, most of the barons did not know that he was Uther Pendragon's son, except as Merlin made it openly known. And yet many kings and lords made great war against him for that reason. But Arthur overcame them all well, for for most of the days of his life he was guided much by the counsel of Merlin. So it happened one time that King Arthur said to Merlin, "My barons will give me no rest, but I must take a wife, and I will take none except by your counsel and by your advice."

"It is well done," said Merlin, "that you take a wife, for a man of your goodness and nobility should not be without a wife. Now, is there any woman you love more than another?"

"Yes," said King Arthur. "I love Guinevere, the daughter of King Leodegrance of the land of Cameliard, who keeps in his house the Round Table that you told me he had from my father Uther. And this damsel is the most worthy and the fairest lady that I know living, or that I could ever find."

"Sir," said Merlin, "as for her beauty and fairness, she is one of the fairest alive. But if you did not love her as well as you do, I could find you a damsel of beauty and of goodness who would suit you and please you, if your heart were not set. But where a man's heart is set, he will be unwilling to turn back."

"That is true," said King Arthur.

But Merlin warned the king in veiled words that Guinevere was not good for him to take as his wife, for he warned him that Lancelot would love her, and she him in return. And so he turned his talk to the adventures of the Holy Grail.

Then Merlin asked the king for men to go with him to make enquiries about Guinevere, and the king granted it him. And Merlin went off to King Leodegrance of Cameliard, and told him of the king's wish to have his daughter Guinevere as his wife.

"That is the best news I ever heard," said King Leodegrance, "that so worthy a king, of such prowess and nobility, will marry my daughter. And as for my lands, I would give them to him if I knew it would please him, but he has lands enough; he needs none. But I will send him a gift that will please him much more, for I will give him the Round Table, which Uther Pendragon gave me. And when it is fully complete, there are a hundred and fifty knights at it. As for a hundred good knights, I have them myself, but I lack fifty, for so many have been killed in my days."

And so Leodegrance handed over his daughter Guinevere to Merlin, and the Round Table with the hundred knights, and so they rode briskly, with great royal splendour, partly by water and partly by land, until they came near to London.
