Chapter 3: How a poor man riding a thin mare asked King Arthur to make his son a knight

Straight away a poor man came into the court, and brought with him a handsome young man of eighteen years of age riding on a thin mare. And the poor man asked everyone he met, "Where will I find King Arthur?"

"There he is," said the knights. "Do you want something with him?"

"Yes," said the poor man, "that is why I came here."

As soon as he came before the king, he greeted him and said, "O King Arthur, the flower of all knights and kings, I pray Jesus save you. Sir, I was told that at this time of your marriage you would give any man the gift he asked for, except one that was unreasonable."

"That is true," said the king. "I had such proclamations made, and I will keep to it, so long as it does not weaken my realm or my estate."

"You speak well and graciously," said the poor man. "Sir, I ask nothing else but that you will make my son here a knight."

"It is a great thing you ask of me," said the king. "What is your name?" said the king to the poor man.

"Sir, my name is Aries the cowherd."

"Does this come from you or from your son?" said the king.

"No, sir," said Aries, "this wish comes from my son and not from me. For I tell you, I have thirteen sons, and they will all turn to whatever work I set them to, and are very glad to work. But this boy will not work for me, whatever my wife or I may do, but he is always shooting or throwing darts, and glad to see battles and to watch knights, and always, day and night, he begs me to have him made a knight."

"What is your name?" said the king to the young man.

"Sir, my name is Tor."

The king looked at him hard, and saw that he was exceedingly good-looking and exceedingly well built for his years.

"Well," said King Arthur to Aries the cowherd, "bring all your sons before me so that I can see them."

And so the poor man did, and they were all shaped much like the poor man. But Tor was not like any of them, in build or in face, for he was much bigger than any of them.

"Now," said King Arthur to the cowherd, "where is the sword he will be made a knight with?"

"It is here," said Tor.

"Take it out of the sheath," said the king, "and ask me to make you a knight."

Then Tor got down off his mare and drew his sword, kneeling, and asked the king to make him a knight, and that he might be a knight of the Round Table.

"As for a knight, I will make you one." And with that he struck him on the neck with the sword, saying, "Be a good knight, and I pray to God that you may be so; and if you prove to be of prowess and worth, you shall be a knight of the Round Table. Now, Merlin," said Arthur, "say whether this Tor will be a good knight or not."

"Yes, sir, he ought to be a good knight, for he comes from as good a man as any alive, and of kings' blood."

"How so, sir?" said the king.

"I will tell you," said Merlin. "This poor man, Aries the cowherd, is not his father; he is no kin to him at all, for King Pellinore is his father."

"I don't believe it," said the cowherd.

"Bring your wife before me," said Merlin, "and she will not deny it."

At once the wife was fetched, and she was a handsome housewife. And there she answered Merlin very modestly, and there she told the king and Merlin that when she was a girl and went out to milk the cows, a stern knight met her, "and half by force he took my virginity, and at that time he fathered my son Tor, and he took away from me my greyhound that I had with me at that time, and said that he would keep the greyhound for love of me."

"Ah," said the cowherd, "I never suspected this, but I can well believe it, for he never had any of my ways about him."

"Sir," said Tor to Merlin, "do not dishonour my mother."

"Sir," said Merlin, "it brings you more honour than harm, for your father is a good man and a king, and he may very well advance you and your mother, for you were conceived before ever she was married."

"That is true," said the wife.

"It is the less grief to me," said the cowherd.
