Chapter 6: How Sir Gawain rode to bring back the hart, and how two brothers fought each other over the hart

Sir Gawain rode at better than a walking pace, and his brother Gaheris rode with him in place of a squire, to serve him. So as they rode they saw two knights fighting on horseback exceedingly hard, so Sir Gawain and his brother rode between them, and asked them why they were fighting like that.

One knight answered and said, "We are fighting over a trivial matter, for we two are brothers, born and fathered of one man and one woman."

"Alas," said Sir Gawain, "why are you doing this?"

"Sir," said the elder, "a white hart came this way today, and many hounds chased him, and a little white hound was always right behind him. And we understood it was an adventure sent for the high feast of King Arthur, and so I would have gone after it to win myself honour. And here my younger brother said he would go after the hart, because he was a better knight than I. And for this reason we fell to quarrelling, and so we thought to prove which of us was the better knight."

"This is a trivial cause," said Sir Gawain. "You should quarrel with strangers, and not brother with brother. So unless you will follow my advice I will fight you; that is, you shall surrender to me, and go to King Arthur and surrender to his mercy."

"Sir knight," said the two brothers, "we are worn out with fighting, and we have lost much blood through our own wilfulness, and so we would be unwilling to fight you."

"Then do as I tell you," said Sir Gawain.

"We agree to do your will. But by whom shall we say we were sent there?"

"You may say: by the knight who follows the quest of the white hart. Now what is your name?" said Gawain.

"Sorlouse of the Forest," said the elder.

"And my name," said the younger, "is Brian of the Forest."

And so they left and went to the king's court, and Sir Gawain went on his quest.

And as Gawain followed the hart by the baying of the hounds, there was a great river right in front of him, and the hart swam across. And as Sir Gawain was about to follow after, there stood a knight on the other side, and said, "Sir knight, do not come across after this hart unless you will joust with me."

"I will not fail on that account," said Sir Gawain, "to follow the quest I am on." And so he made his horse swim across the water.

And at once they took their spears and ran together very hard; but Sir Gawain struck him off his horse, and then he turned his horse and ordered him to surrender.

"No," said the knight, "not so, even though you have the better of me on horseback. I ask you, valiant knight, get down on foot, and let us match ourselves with swords."

"What is your name?" said Sir Gawain.

"Allardin of the Isles," said the other.

Then each of them set his shield and they struck at each other, but Sir Gawain struck him so hard through the helmet that it went into the brain, and the knight fell down dead.

"Ah!" said Gaheris. "That was a mighty stroke for a young knight."
