Chapter 7: How the hart was chased into a castle and slain there, and how Sir Gawain killed a lady

Then Gawain and Gaheris rode at better than a walking pace after the white hart, and let slip three couple of greyhounds at the hart. And so they chased the hart into a castle, and in the main courtyard of the castle they killed the hart; Sir Gawain and Gaheris followed after. Just then a knight came out of a chamber with a drawn sword in his hand and killed two of the greyhounds, right in front of Sir Gawain, and the rest he chased out of the castle with his sword.

And when he came back, he said, "O my white hart, I grieve that you are dead, for my sovereign lady gave you to me, and I have kept you badly, and your death will be dearly paid for if I live."

And at once he went into his chamber and armed himself, and came out fiercely, and there he met Sir Gawain.

"Why have you killed my hounds?" said Sir Gawain. "For they only did what is in their nature, and I would rather you had taken out your anger on me than on a dumb beast."

"You speak the truth," said the knight. "I have taken my revenge on your hounds, and I will on you too, before you go."

Then Sir Gawain got down on foot and set his shield, and they struck at each other mightily, and split their shields, and battered their helmets, and broke their hauberks so that the blood ran down to their feet.

At last Sir Gawain struck the knight so hard that he fell to the ground, and then he begged for mercy, and surrendered, and begged him, as he was a knight and a gentleman, to spare his life.

"You die," said Sir Gawain, "for killing my hounds."

"I will make amends," said the knight, "as far as I am able."

Sir Gawain would have no mercy, but unlaced his helmet to strike off his head. Just then his lady came out of a chamber and fell over him, and so he struck off her head by mischance.

"Alas," said Gaheris, "that is foully and shamefully done; that shame will never leave you. Also, you should give mercy to those who ask for mercy, for a knight without mercy is without honour."

Sir Gawain was so stunned by the death of this fair lady that he did not know what he was doing, and said to the knight, "Get up, I will give you mercy."

"No, no," said the knight, "I care nothing for mercy now, for you have killed my love and my lady, whom I loved best of all earthly things."

"I bitterly regret it," said Sir Gawain, "for I meant to strike at you. But now you shall go to King Arthur and tell him of your adventures, and how you were overcome by the knight who went on the quest of the white hart."

"I don't care," said the knight, "whether I live or die."

But for fear of death he swore to go to King Arthur, and Gawain made him carry one greyhound in front of him on his horse, and another behind him.

"What is your name?" said Sir Gawain, "before we part."

"My name," said the knight, "is Ablamar of the Marsh."

So he left for Camelot.
