Chapter 8: How four knights fought against Gawain and Gaheris, and how they were overcome, and their lives spared at the request of four ladies

And Sir Gawain went into the castle, and made ready to stay there all night, and was about to take off his armour.

"What are you doing?" said Gaheris. "Will you take off your armour in this country? You can be sure you have many enemies here."

No sooner had he said that than four knights came, well armed, and attacked Sir Gawain hard, and said to him, "You new-made knight, you have shamed your knighthood, for a knight without mercy is dishonoured. You have also killed a fair lady, to your great shame to the world's end. And make no mistake, you will have great need of mercy before you leave us."

And with that one of them struck Sir Gawain such a great blow that he nearly fell to the ground, and Gaheris struck him back hard. And so they fought, on the one side and on the other, until Sir Gawain and Gaheris were in danger of their lives. And one with a bow, an archer, shot Sir Gawain through the arm, so that it pained him terribly. And as they were about to be killed, four fair ladies came and begged the knights to show grace to Sir Gawain. And courteously, at the ladies' request, they gave Sir Gawain and Gaheris their lives, and made them surrender as prisoners. Then Gawain and Gaheris grieved greatly.

"Alas!" said Sir Gawain. "My arm pains me badly; I am likely to be maimed." And so he lamented pitifully.

Early the next morning one of the four ladies, who had heard all his lament, came to Sir Gawain and said, "Sir knight, how are you?"

"Not well," he said.

"It is your own fault," said the lady, "for you have done an exceedingly foul deed in killing the lady, which will be a great disgrace to you. But are you not of King Arthur's kin?" said the lady.

"Yes, truly," said Sir Gawain.

"What is your name?" said the lady. "You must tell me before you go."

"My name is Gawain, son of King Lot of Orkney, and my mother is King Arthur's sister."

"Ah! Then you are King Arthur's nephew," said the lady, "and I will speak for you so that you will have safe conduct to go to King Arthur, for love of him."

And so she left and told the four knights that their prisoner was King Arthur's nephew, and that his name was Sir Gawain, King Lot of Orkney's son. And they gave him the hart's head, because it was his quest. Then at once they released Sir Gawain on this condition: that he should carry the dead lady with him in this way. Her head was hung around his neck, and the whole of her body lay in front of him on his horse's mane. And so he rode off to Camelot.

And as soon as he arrived, Merlin asked King Arthur to have Sir Gawain sworn to tell of all his adventures, and how he killed the lady, and how he would give no mercy to the knight, which was how the lady came to be killed. Then the king and the queen were greatly displeased with Sir Gawain for the killing of the lady. And there, by order of the queen, a jury of ladies was set to judge Sir Gawain. And they sentenced him, for ever, as long as he lived, to be on the side of all ladies, and to fight for their causes; and that he should always be courteous, and never refuse mercy to anyone who asks for mercy. So Gawain was sworn on the Four Gospels that he would never fight against a lady or a gentlewoman, unless he was fighting for one lady and his opponent was fighting for another. And so ends the adventure that Sir Gawain had at the marriage of King Arthur. Amen.
