Chapter 9: How Sir Tor rode after the knight with the little hound, and of his adventures along the way

When Sir Tor was ready, he mounted his horse and rode after the knight with the little hound. And as he rode, he suddenly met a dwarf, who struck his horse on the head with a staff, so that it went backward a spear's length.

"Why did you do that?" said Sir Tor.

"Because you shall not pass this way," said the dwarf, "unless you joust with those knights in the tents over there."

Then Tor saw that there were two tents there, with great spears standing outside them, and two shields hanging on trees by the tents.

"I cannot stay," said Sir Tor, "for I am on a quest that I must follow."

"You shall not pass," said the dwarf, and with that he blew his horn.

Then there came a man armed on horseback, and he set his shield in place and came fast toward Tor, and Tor squared up to him, and they ran together so that Tor bore him off his horse. And at once the knight yielded himself to Tor's mercy.

"But, sir," he said, "I have a companion in that tent over there who will fight with you at once."

"He will be welcome," said Sir Tor.

Then he saw another knight coming at a great charge, and they set themselves at each other so that it was a marvel to see. But the knight struck Sir Tor a great stroke in the middle of the shield, so that his spear shattered to pieces. And Sir Tor struck him through the shield, low down, so that the spear went into the knight's side, but the stroke did not kill him. And with that Sir Tor dismounted and struck him a great stroke on the helm, and with that the knight yielded himself and begged him for mercy.

"Gladly," said Sir Tor, "but you and your companion must go to King Arthur, and give yourselves up to him as prisoners."

"By whom shall we say we were sent there?"

"You shall say by the knight who went on the quest of the knight who went with the little hound. Now, what are your two names?" said Sir Tor.

"My name," said the one, "is Sir Felot of Langduk."

"And my name," said the other, "is Sir Petipase of Winchelsea."

"Now go your way," said Sir Tor, "and God speed you and me."

Then the dwarf came and said to Sir Tor, "I beg you to grant me a gift."

"Gladly," said Sir Tor. "Ask."

"I ask no more," said the dwarf, "than that you will allow me to serve you, for I will serve no more cowardly knights who beg for their lives."

"Take a horse," said Sir Tor, "and ride on with me."

"I know you are riding after the knight with the white hound, and I will bring you to where he is," said the dwarf.

And so they rode through a forest, and at last they saw two tents, close by a priory, with two shields, and the one shield was painted white, and the other shield was red.
