Chapter 10: How Sir Tor found the little hound with a lady, and how a knight attacked him over the hound

With that Sir Tor dismounted and gave the dwarf his sword, and so he came to the white tent, and saw three damsels lying in it, on one pallet, asleep. And so he went to the other tent, and found a lady lying asleep in it, but the white hound was there, and it bayed at her hard. And with that the lady went out of the tent, and all her damsels too. But as soon as Sir Tor saw the white hound, he took her by force and handed her to the dwarf.

"What, will you do that," said the lady, "take my hound from me?"

"Yes," said Sir Tor. "I have searched for this hound all the way here from King Arthur's court."

"Well, knight," said the lady, "you will not get far with her before you are met and made to suffer for it."

"I will face whatever adventure comes, by the grace of God," he said, and so he mounted his horse and went on his way toward Camelot. But it was so near night that he could go only a little further.

"Do you know of any lodging?" said Tor.

"I know of none," said the dwarf, "but there is a hermitage close by here, and there you must take lodging as you find it."

And within a while they came to the hermitage and took lodging there. And there was grass, oats and bread for their horses. That was soon seen to, and their own supper was very poor; but there they rested all night until the morning, and heard a mass devoutly, and took their leave of the hermit, and Sir Tor asked the hermit to pray for him. He said he would, and commended him to God. And so they mounted and rode towards Camelot a long while.

With that they heard a knight who was coming after them call out loud, and he said, "Knight, stop and give back my hound that you took from my lady!"

Sir Tor turned back and looked at him, and saw that he was a handsome knight, well mounted, and well armed at every point. Then Sir Tor set his shield in place, and took his spear in his hands, and the other came fiercely at him, and they struck each other down, both horse and man, to the earth. At once they got nimbly to their feet and drew their swords as fiercely as lions, and put their shields in front of them, and struck through the shields so that pieces fell off on both sides. They battered each other's helms too, so that the hot blood ran out, and they hacked and tore apart the thick mail of their hauberks, so that the hot blood ran to the earth, and both had many wounds and were exceedingly weary. But Sir Tor saw that the other knight was weakening, and then he pressed hard upon him, and doubled his strokes, and forced him to the earth on one side. Then Sir Tor told him to yield.

"That I will not," said Abelleus, "while my life lasts and the soul is in my body, unless you give me the hound."

"That I will not do," said Sir Tor, "for it was my quest to bring back your hound, or you, or both."
