Chapter 11: How Sir Tor overcame the knight, and how that knight lost his head at the request of a lady

With that a damsel came riding on a palfrey as fast as she could drive it, and called out to Sir Tor in a loud voice.

"What do you want with me?" said Sir Tor.

"I beg you," said the damsel, "for King Arthur's love, grant me a gift. I ask it of you, good knight, as you are a man of noble birth."

"Now," said Tor, "ask a gift and I will give it to you."

"Thank you," said the damsel. "Now I ask for the head of the false knight Abelleus, for he is the most violent knight alive, and the greatest murderer."

"I regret the gift I have granted you," said Sir Tor. "Let him make amends for the wrong he has done you."

"Now," said the damsel, "he cannot, for he killed my own brother before my own eyes, and my brother was a better knight than he, if he had had the luck. And I knelt half an hour in the mud in front of him to save my brother's life, though my brother had done him no harm, but had fought him by the chance of arms. And for all that I could do, he struck off his head. And so I ask you, as you are a true knight, to give me my gift, or else I will shame you before all the court of King Arthur; for he is the falsest knight living, and a great destroyer of good knights."

Then when Abelleus heard this, he was more afraid, and yielded himself and asked for mercy.

"I cannot now," said Sir Tor, "unless I am to be found false to my promise. For when I would have granted you mercy, you would ask for none, unless you had the hound back, and that was my quest."

And with that he took off his helm, and Abelleus got up and ran, and Sir Tor went after him, and struck his head clean off.

"Now, sir," said the damsel, "it is near night. I beg you to come and lodge with me here at my house; it is close by here."

"Gladly," said Sir Tor, for his horse and he had fared badly since they left Camelot. And so he rode with her, and had an exceedingly good welcome from her. And she had for her husband an old knight, a very fine one, who gave him an exceedingly good welcome, and made both his horse and him thoroughly comfortable. And in the morning he heard mass, and had breakfast, and took his leave of the knight and the lady, who begged him to tell them his name.

"Truly," he said, "my name is Sir Tor, who was lately made a knight, and this was the first quest of arms that I ever undertook: to bring back what this knight Abelleus took away from King Arthur's court."

"O fair knight," said the lady and her husband, "if you come into our country here, come and see our poor house, and it will always be at your command."

So Sir Tor left, and came to Camelot on the third day by noon. And the king and the queen and all the court were exceedingly glad of his coming, and rejoiced greatly that he had come back; for he went from the court with little help, except that King Pellinore his father gave him an old warhorse, and King Arthur gave him armour and a sword, and besides that he had no other help, but rode out like that, alone. And then the king and the queen, on Merlin's advice, made him swear to tell of his adventures, and so he told them and gave proof of his deeds, as has been told before, at which the king and the queen rejoiced greatly.

"No, no," said Merlin, "these are only trifles to what he will do. For he will prove a noble knight of prowess, as good as any living, and well-bred and courteous, and of good qualities, and exceedingly true to his promise, and he will never do a violent wrong."

Because of Merlin's words, King Arthur gave him an earldom of lands that had fallen to the crown. And here ends the quest of Sir Tor, King Pellinore's son.
