Chapter 12: How King Pellinore rode after the lady and the knight who had carried her off, and how a lady asked him for help, and how he fought two knights for that lady, killing one of them with the first stroke

Then King Pellinore armed himself and mounted his horse, and rode at better than a walking pace after the lady whom the knight had led away. And as he rode in a forest, he saw in a valley a damsel sitting by a spring, with a wounded knight in her arms, and Pellinore greeted her. And when she saw him, she cried out very loud, "Help me, knight, for Christ's sake, King Pellinore!"

And he would not stop, he was so eager in his quest, and she cried after him for help a hundred times. When she saw he would not stay, she prayed to God to send him as much need of help as she had, and that he might feel it before he died. So, as the book tells, the knight who lay wounded there died, and because of that the lady killed herself with his sword out of pure sorrow. As King Pellinore rode through that valley he met a poor man, a labourer.

"Did you see," said Pellinore, "a knight riding by and leading away a lady?"

"Yes," said the man, "I saw that knight, and the lady, who was grieving greatly. And down there in a valley you will see two tents, and one of the knights from the tents claimed that lady from that knight, and said she was his near cousin, and so he should lead her no further. And so they agreed to fight over that quarrel. The one said he would have her by force, and the other said he would have charge of her, because he was her kinsman, and would take her to her family. I left them fighting over this quarrel. And if you ride hard you will find them fighting, and the lady was left behind with the two squires in the tents."

"God thank you," said King Pellinore.

Then he rode at a gallop until he came in sight of the two tents and the two knights fighting. At once he rode to the tents, and saw the lady who was his quest, and said, "Fair lady, you must come with me to the court of King Arthur."

"Sir knight," said the two squires who were with her, "over there are two knights fighting for this lady. Go there and part them, and come to terms with them, and then you can have her as you please."

"You speak well," said King Pellinore.

And at once he rode between them, and parted them, and asked them why they were fighting.

"Sir knight," said the one, "I will tell you. This lady is my near kinswoman, my aunt's daughter, and when I heard her complain that she was with him against her will, I took up the fight with him."

"Sir knight," said the other, whose name was Hontzlake of Wentland, "I won this lady by my prowess in arms this very day at Arthur's court."

"That is untruly said," said King Pellinore, "for you came in suddenly where we were at the high feast, and took this lady away before any man could make himself ready. And so it was my quest to bring her back, and both of you, or else for one of us to remain on the field. So the lady will go with me, or I will die for it, for I have promised it to King Arthur. And so fight no more, for neither of you shall have any part of her this time. And if you wish to fight for her, fight with me, and I will defend her."

"Well," said the knights, "make yourself ready, and we will attack you with all our strength."

And as King Pellinore was turning his horse away from them, Sir Hontzlake ran his horse through with a sword, and said, "Now you're on foot, the same as us!"

When King Pellinore saw that his horse was killed, he leapt nimbly from his horse and pulled out his sword, and put his shield in front of him, and said, "Knight, look to your head, for you'll take a blow for killing my horse."

So King Pellinore gave him such a stroke on the helm that he split his head down to the chin, so that he fell to the earth dead.
