Chapter 13: How King Pellinore won the lady and brought her to Camelot, to the court of King Arthur

And then he turned to the other knight, who was badly wounded. But when that knight saw the blow the other had taken, he would not fight, but knelt down and said, "Take my cousin the lady with you, as you ask, and I beg you, as you are a true knight, to put her to no shame or dishonour."

"What," said King Pellinore, "will you not fight for her?"

"No, sir," said the knight, "I will not fight with a knight of such prowess as you are."

"Well," said Pellinore, "you speak well. I promise you she shall suffer no dishonour from me, as I am a true knight. But now I need a horse," said Pellinore, "and I will take Hontzlake's horse."

"You will not need to," said the knight, "for I will give you a horse that will please you, provided you will lodge with me, for it is near night."

"Gladly," said King Pellinore. "I will stay with you all night."

And there he had a very good welcome with him, and fared on the best, with exceedingly good wine, and had a merry rest that night. And in the morning he heard a mass and dined; and then a fine bay warhorse was brought to him, with King Pellinore's saddle set on it.

"Now, what shall I call you?" said the knight. "For you have my cousin as you desired, by your quest."

"Sir, I will tell you. My name is King Pellinore of the Isles, and I am a knight of the Round Table."

"Now I am glad," said the knight, "that such a noble man will have charge of my cousin."

"Now, what is your name?" said Pellinore. "I beg you to tell me."

"Sir, my name is Sir Meliot de Logres, and this lady my cousin is called Nimue. And the knight who was in the other tent is my sworn brother, an exceedingly good knight, and his name is Brian of the Isles. And he is very unwilling to do wrong, and very unwilling to fight with any man, unless he is hard pressed, so that for shame he cannot refuse."

"It is a wonder," said Pellinore, "that he will not fight with me."

"Sir, he will fight with no man unless it is at his own request."

"Bring him to the court one of these days," said Pellinore.

"Sir, we will come together."

"And you will be welcome," said Pellinore, "to the court of King Arthur, and greatly praised for your coming."

And so he left with the lady, and brought her to Camelot.

So as they rode in a valley, it was full of stones, and there the lady's horse stumbled and threw her down, so that her arm was badly bruised, and she nearly fainted with the pain.

"Alas, sir," said the lady, "my arm is out of joint, and because of it I must rest."

"So you shall," said King Pellinore.

And so he dismounted under a fine tree where there was good grass, and he put his horse to it, and so lay down under the tree and slept until it was nearly night. And when he woke he wanted to ride on.

"Sir," said the lady, "it is so dark that you might as well ride backward as forward."

So they stayed where they were and made their lodging there. Then Sir Pellinore took off his armour. Then a little before midnight they heard the trotting of a horse.

"Be still," said King Pellinore, "for we shall hear of some adventure."
