Chapter 14: How on the way, as he lay at night in a valley, King Pellinore overheard two knights, and of their adventures

And with that he armed himself. So right in front of him two knights met, the one coming from Camelot and the other from the north, and each greeted the other.

"What news at Camelot?" said the one.

"By my head," said the other, "I have been there and spied on the court of King Arthur, and there is such a fellowship there that it can never be broken, and nearly all the world holds with Arthur, for there is the flower of chivalry. Now for this reason I am riding into the north, to tell our chieftains about the fellowship of knights that Arthur keeps about him."

"As for that," said the other knight, "I have brought a remedy with me, the greatest poison you ever heard of, and I am taking it to Camelot. For we have a friend very close to King Arthur, and well loved by him, who will poison King Arthur; for he has promised our chieftains to do it, and received great gifts for doing it."

"Beware of Merlin," said the other knight, "for he knows all things by the devil's craft."

"I will not hold back for that," said the knight.

And so they parted. Soon after, Pellinore made himself ready, and his lady too, and rode toward Camelot. And as they came by the spring where the wounded knight and the lady had been, there he found the knight, and the lady eaten by lions or wild beasts, all except the head. And at that he grieved greatly, and wept exceedingly hard, and said, "Alas, I might have saved her life; but I was so fierce in my quest that I would not stop."

"Why do you grieve so?" said the lady.

"I do not know," said Pellinore, "but my heart mourns hard for her death, for she was an exceedingly beautiful lady, and a young one."

"Now, will you take my advice?" said the lady. "Take this knight and have him buried at a hermitage, and then take the lady's head and carry it with you to Arthur."

So King Pellinore took this dead knight on his shoulders, and brought him to the hermitage, and gave the hermit charge of the body, so that a service should be said for his soul, "and take his armour for your trouble."

"It shall be done," said the hermit, "as I will answer to God."
