Chapter 15: How when King Pellinore came to Camelot he was sworn on a book to tell the truth about his quest

And with that they left, and came to where the head of the lady lay, with its fair yellow hair, and it grieved King Pellinore exceedingly when he looked at it, for his heart was much drawn to that face. And so by noon they came to Camelot; and the king and the queen were exceedingly glad of his coming to the court. And there he was made to swear upon the Four Gospels to tell the truth of his quest from beginning to end.

"Ah, Sir Pellinore," said Queen Guinevere, "you were greatly to blame that you did not save this lady's life."

"Madam," said Pellinore, "you would be greatly to blame if you would not save your own life when you could. But, saving your pleasure, I was so fierce in my quest that I would not stop, and I am sorry for it, and shall be all the days of my life."

"Truly," said Merlin, "you ought to be bitterly sorry for it, for that lady was your own daughter, fathered on the lady of the Rule. And the knight who was dead was her love, and was to have married her, and he was a very good knight for a young man, and would have proved a good man. And he was on his way to this court, and his name was Sir Miles of the Launds. And a knight came up behind him and killed him with a spear, and his name is Loraine le Savage, a false knight and a coward. And she, for great sorrow and grief, killed herself with his sword, and her name was Elaine. And because you would not stop and help her, you will see your best friend fail you when you are in the greatest distress that you ever were or ever will be. And that is the penance God has ordained for you for that deed: that the man you trust most of any man alive will leave you where you will be killed."

"I am sorry," said King Pellinore, "that this will befall me, but God can well undo destiny."

Thus, when the quest of the white hart was done, which Sir Gawain followed; and the quest of the little hound, followed by Sir Tor, Pellinore's son; and the quest of the lady whom the knight took away, which King Pellinore followed at that time; then the king established all his knights, and to those who were not rich in lands he gave lands. And he charged them never to commit outrage or murder, and always to flee treason; and by no means to be cruel, but to give mercy to anyone who asks for mercy, on pain of forfeiting their honour and their lordship from King Arthur for evermore; and always to give help to ladies, damsels and gentlewomen, on pain of death. Also, that no man should take up a fight in a wrongful quarrel, not for any law, nor for any worldly goods. To this all the knights of the Round Table were sworn, both old and young. And every year they were sworn again at the high feast of Pentecost.

Here ends the Wedding of King Arthur.

Here follows the fourth book.
