Chapter 1: How Merlin was besotted with one of the ladies of the lake and doted on her, and how he was shut in a rock under a stone and died there

So after these quests of Sir Gawain, Sir Tor and King Pellinore, it happened that Merlin fell into a foolish passion for the damsel whom King Pellinore had brought to court; and she was one of the damsels of the lake, and her name was Nimue. But Merlin would give her no rest, but always wanted to be with her. And she always gave him a good welcome until she had learned from him everything she wanted to know; and he was so besotted with her that he could not keep away from her. So one time he told King Arthur that he would not last long, but that for all his crafts he would be put into the earth alive. And so he told the king many things that would come to pass, but always he warned the king to guard his sword and the scabbard well, for he told him how the sword and the scabbard would be stolen from him by a woman, one he trusted most. He also told King Arthur that he would miss him: "And yet you would rather have me back than have all your lands."

"Ah," said the king, "since you know what is going to happen to you, provide against it, and put away that misfortune with your crafts."

"No," said Merlin, "it will not be." And so he left the king.

And within a while the Damsel of the Lake left, and Merlin went with her always, wherever she went. And many times Merlin would have liked to have his way with her in secret by his subtle crafts; then she made him swear that he would never work any enchantment on her, if he wanted to have his will. And so he swore. So she and Merlin went over the sea to the land of Benwick, where King Ban was king, who was fighting a great war against King Claudas. And there Merlin spoke with King Ban's wife, a fair lady and a good one, and her name was Elaine; and there he saw young Lancelot. There the queen grieved greatly for the deadly war that King Claudas was making on her lord and on her lands.

"Do not be so sad," said Merlin, "for this same child, within twenty years from now, will take revenge for you on King Claudas, so that all Christendom will speak of it. And this same child will be the man of greatest honour in the world; and his first name is Galahad, that I know well," said Merlin, "and since then you have had him confirmed as Lancelot."

"That is true," said the queen. "His first name was Galahad. Oh, Merlin," said the queen, "shall I live to see my son such a man of prowess?"

"Yes, lady, on my life you shall see it, and live many winters after."

And so, soon after, the lady and Merlin left, and on the way Merlin showed her many wonders, and they came into Cornwall. And all the time Merlin was pressing the lady to take her maidenhood, and she was exceedingly weary of him, and would gladly have been rid of him, for she was afraid of him because he was a devil's son; and she could not shake him off by any means. And so one time it happened that Merlin showed her a great wonder in a rock, made by enchantment, that went in under a great stone. So by her subtle working she got Merlin to go in under that stone to let her know of the marvels there; but she worked her craft on him there so that he never came out again, for all the craft he could do. And so she left, and left Merlin there.
