Chapter 2: How five kings came into this land to make war on King Arthur, and what counsel Arthur took against them

And King Arthur rode to Camelot, and held a great feast there with mirth and joy, and soon after he returned to Cardoile. And there new tidings came to Arthur that the King of Denmark, and the King of Ireland who was his brother, and the King of the Vale, and the King of Soleise, and the King of the Isle of Longtains, all these five kings with a great army, had entered King Arthur's land, and were burning and killing everything before them, both cities and castles, so that it was pitiful to hear.

"Alas," said Arthur, "I have never yet had one month's rest since I was crowned king of this land. Now I shall never rest until I meet those kings in a fair field, and I make my vow on that. For my true and loyal people shall not be destroyed through my failing. Come with me who will, and stay behind who will."

Then the king had a letter written to King Pellinore, and begged him to make ready in all haste, with as many men as he could most quickly raise, and to hurry after him in all haste. All the barons were secretly angry that the king would leave so suddenly; but the king would by no means wait, but sent letters to those who were not there, and told them to hurry after him, those who were not at the court at that time. Then the king came to Queen Guinevere, and said, "Lady, make yourself ready, for you shall go with me, for I cannot be without you for long. You will make me all the bolder, whatever chance befalls me. I will not have my lady be in any danger."

"Sir," she said, "I am at your command, and I shall be ready whenever you are ready."

So in the morning the king and the queen left with such company as they had, and came into the north, into a forest beside the Humber, and camped there. When the word and the tidings came to the five kings named above that Arthur was in a forest beside the Humber, there was a knight, brother to one of the five kings, who gave them this advice: "You know well that Sir Arthur has the flower of the chivalry of the world with him, as was proved by the great battle he fought with the eleven kings. And therefore hurry to him night and day until we are near him, for the longer he waits the bigger he grows, and we always the weaker. And he is so bold in himself that he has come to the field with few men, and therefore let us set upon him before daybreak, and we shall cut them down. Of his knights not one shall escape."
