Chapter 3: How King Arthur fought them and defeated them, killed the five kings, and put the rest to flight

These five kings agreed to this advice, and so they went on with their army through North Wales, and came upon Arthur by night, and fell on his army while the king and his knights were in their tents. King Arthur was unarmed, and had lain down to rest with his Queen Guinevere.

"Sir," said Sir Kay, "it is not good for us to be unarmed."

"We shall have no need," said Sir Gawain and Sir Griflet, who lay in a little tent beside the king.

With that they heard a great noise, and many cried, "Treason, treason!"

"Alas," said King Arthur, "we are betrayed! To arms, my fellows!" he cried then.

So they were armed at once, from head to foot. Then a wounded knight came to the king, and said, "Sir, save yourself and my lady the queen, for our army is destroyed, and many of our men are killed."

So at once the king and the queen and the three knights took their horses, and rode towards the Humber to cross it; and the water was so rough that they were afraid to cross.

"Now you may choose," said King Arthur, "whether you will stay and take your chance on this side; for if you are taken, they will kill you."

"I would rather," said the queen, "die in the water than fall into your enemies' hands and be killed there."

And as they stood there talking, Sir Kay saw the five kings coming on horseback by themselves, alone, with their spears in their hands, straight towards them.

"Look," said Sir Kay, "there are the five kings. Let us go at them and take them on."

"That would be folly," said Sir Gawain, "for we are only three and they are five."

"That is true," said Sir Griflet.

"No matter," said Sir Kay. "I will take on two of them, and then you three can take on the other three."

And with that Sir Kay let his horse run as fast as it could, and struck one of them through the shield and the body a fathom deep, so that the king fell to the earth stone dead. Sir Gawain saw that, and charged another king so hard that he struck him through the body. And with that King Arthur charged another, and struck him through the body with a spear, so that he fell to the earth dead. Then Sir Griflet charged the fourth king, and gave him such a fall that his neck broke. At once Sir Kay charged the fifth king, and struck him so hard on the helm that the stroke split the helm and the head down to the earth.

"That was a fine stroke," said King Arthur, "and you have kept your promise honourably, and so I shall honour you as long as I live."

And with that they put the queen in a barge on the Humber. But all the while Queen Guinevere praised Sir Kay for his deeds, and said, "Whatever lady you love, if she does not love you back, she would be greatly to blame. And among ladies," said the queen, "I shall spread your noble fame, for you spoke a great word, and you fulfilled it honourably." And with that the queen left.

Then the king and the three knights rode into the forest, for they expected to hear there of those who had escaped; and there he found most of his people, and told them all how the five kings were dead. "And therefore let us hold together until it is day, and when their army sees that their chieftains are killed, they will grieve so wildly that they will be no more able to help themselves."

And just as the king said, so it was; for when they found the five kings dead, they grieved so wildly that they fell from their horses. With that King Arthur came on them with only a few men, and killed them on the left hand and on the right, so that very nearly not a man escaped, but all were killed, to the number of thirty thousand. And when the battle was all over, the king knelt down and humbly thanked God. And then he sent for the queen, and soon she came, and she rejoiced greatly at the winning of that battle.
