Chapter 4: How the battle was over before King Pellinore came, and how King Arthur founded an abbey where the battle had been

With that someone came to King Arthur and told him that King Pellinore was within three miles with a great army.

And he said, "Go to him, and let him know how we have fared."

So within a while King Pellinore came with a great army, and greeted the people and the king, and there was great rejoicing on every side. Then the king had a search made to find how many of his side had been killed; and there were found to be only a little over two hundred men killed, and eight knights of the Round Table in their tents. Then the king had a fair abbey raised and planned on the same spot where the battle was fought, and endowed it with a great income, and had it called the Abbey of La Beale Adventure. But when some of them came into the countries where the five kings had been kings, and told them how they had been killed, there was great grief. And all King Arthur's enemies, such as the King of North Wales and the kings of the North, when they knew of the battle, were exceedingly downcast. And so the king returned to Camelot in haste.

And when he had come to Camelot he called King Pellinore to him, and said, "You understand well that we have lost eight of the best knights of the Round Table, and on your advice we will choose eight more, the best we can find in this court."

"Sir," said Pellinore, "I shall advise you the best I can as I see it. There are very noble knights in your court, both old and young; and therefore my advice is that you choose half from the old and half from the young."

"Which are the old?" said King Arthur.

"Sir," said King Pellinore, "it seems to me King Uriens, who has married your sister Morgan le Fay, and the King of the Lake, and Sir Hervise de Revel, a noble knight, and Sir Galagars as the fourth."

"This is well planned," said King Arthur, "and so it shall be. Now, which are the four young knights?" said Arthur.

"Sir," said Pellinore, "the first is Sir Gawain, your nephew, who is as good a knight for his age as any in this land. And the second, as it seems best to me, is Sir Griflet le Fise de Dieu, who is a good knight and very eager in arms, and whoever lives to see him will see him prove a good knight. And the third, as it seems to me, well fit to be one of the knights of the Round Table, is Sir Kay the Seneschal, for many times he has done very honourably, and now at your last battle he did most honourably in taking it on himself to kill two kings."

"By my head," said Arthur, "he is the most worthy to be a knight of the Round Table of any you have named, even if he had done no other deed of prowess in all his life."
