Chapter 5: How Sir Tor was made a knight of the Round Table, and how Bagdemagus was offended

"Now," said King Pellinore, "I shall put two knights before you, and you shall choose which is the more worthy: that is, Sir Bagdemagus, and Sir Tor, my son. But because Sir Tor is my son I may not praise him; but otherwise, if he were not my son, I would dare to say that for his age there is no better knight in this land than he is, nor one of better character, and loath to do any wrong, and loath to take any wrong."

"By my head," said Arthur, "he is as exceedingly good a knight as any you have spoken of today, that I know well," said the king. "For I have seen him proved; but he says little and he does much more. For I know no one in all this court, if he were as well born on his mother's side as he is on yours, who is his equal in prowess and in might. And therefore I will have him this time, and leave Sir Bagdemagus until another time."

So when they had been chosen in this way with the consent of all the barons, the names of every one of the knights named here were found written on their seats; and so they were set in their seats. At this Sir Bagdemagus was furiously angry, that Sir Tor had been advanced before him, and so he left the court suddenly, and took his squire with him, and rode a long way in a forest until they came to a cross; and there they dismounted, and he said his prayers devoutly. Meanwhile his squire found written on the cross that Bagdemagus should never return to the court again until he had won the body of a knight of the Round Table, body for body.

"So, sir," said the squire, "here I find writing about you, and therefore I advise you to go back to the court."

"That I will never do," said Bagdemagus, "until men speak of my great honour, and I am worthy to be a knight of the Round Table."

And so he rode on, and there on the way he found a branch of a holy herb that was the sign of the Holy Grail; and no knight found such tokens unless he lived a good life.

So, as Sir Bagdemagus rode on to seek out many adventures, he happened to come to the rock where the Lady of the Lake had put Merlin under the stone, and there he heard him lamenting greatly. And at that Sir Bagdemagus would have helped him, and went to the great stone; and it was so heavy that a hundred men could not have lifted it. When Merlin knew he was there, he told him to give up his labour, for it was all in vain, for he could never be helped except by her who put him there. And so Bagdemagus left, and achieved many adventures, and proved afterwards a very good knight, and came back to the court and was made a knight of the Round Table. So in the morning new tidings came, and other adventures.
