Chapter 6: How King Arthur, King Uriens, and Sir Accolon of Gaul chased a hart, and of their marvellous adventures

Then it happened that Arthur and many of his knights rode hunting into a great forest; and King Arthur, King Uriens and Sir Accolon of Gaul happened to follow a great hart, for the three of them were well mounted. And so they chased so fast that within a while the three of them were ten miles from their company. And at last they chased so hard that they killed their horses under them. Then all three of them were on foot, and all the time they saw the hart ahead of them, exceedingly weary and making for cover.

"What shall we do?" said King Arthur. "We are in a hard spot."

"Let us go on foot," said King Uriens, "until we can find some lodging."

Then they saw the hart lying on the bank of a great river, and a hound biting at his throat, and more hounds coming after. Then King Arthur blew the horn call for the kill, and dressed the hart.

Then the king looked all about him, and saw before him on a great river a little ship, all hung with silk down to the water; and the ship came straight to them and landed on the sands. Then Arthur went to the bank and looked in, and saw no earthly creature in it.

"Sirs," said the king, "come over here, and let us see what is in this ship."

So all three of them went in, and found it richly hung with silk cloth. By then it was dark night, and suddenly there were a hundred torches all about them, set on every side of the ship's planking, and they gave a great light. And with that twelve fair damsels came out and greeted King Arthur on their knees, and called him by his name, and said he was most welcome, and that he should have the best of such hospitality as they had. The king thanked them courteously. With that they led the king and his two companions into a fair room, and there a cloth was laid, richly furnished with everything that belonged to a table; and there they were served with every wine and every dish they could think of. At this the king marvelled greatly, for he had never fared better in his life at a single supper. And so when they had dined at their leisure, King Arthur was led into a room, and he never saw a more richly furnished room; and King Uriens was served the same, and led into another room like it; and Sir Accolon was led into the third room, exceedingly rich and well furnished. And so they were laid comfortably in their beds. And at once they fell asleep, and slept wonderfully deeply all night. And in the morning King Uriens was in Camelot, in bed in the arms of his wife, Morgan le Fay. And when he awoke he marvelled greatly how he had come there, for on the evening before he had been two days' journey from Camelot. And when King Arthur awoke he found himself in a dark prison, hearing all around him the many laments of wretched knights.
