Chapter 7: How Arthur undertook to fight to win his own release from prison, and also to free twenty knights who were in prison

"Who are you that lament like this?" said King Arthur.

"We are twenty knights here, prisoners," they said, "and some of us have lain here seven years, and some more and some less."

"For what reason?" said Arthur.

"We will tell you," said the knights. "The lord of this castle is called Sir Damas, and he is the falsest knight alive, and full of treason, and as complete a coward as any alive. And he has a younger brother, a good knight of prowess, whose name is Sir Ontzlake. And this traitor Damas, the elder brother, will give him no share of his inheritance, except what Sir Ontzlake holds by the prowess of his own hands. And so he holds from him a very fair manor, and a rich one, and Sir Ontzlake lives there honourably, and is well loved by all the people. And this Sir Damas, our master, is as much hated, for he is without mercy, and he is a coward. And there has been great war between the two of them, but Ontzlake always has the better of it; and he keeps offering to fight Sir Damas for the inheritance, body for body, but he will not do it, or else to find a knight to fight for him. Sir Damas agreed to find a knight, but he is so disliked and hated that there is not one knight who will fight for him. And when Damas saw this, that there was not one knight who would fight for him, he has lain in wait every day with many knights, and taken all the knights in this country who come to see and look for adventures; he has taken them by force and brought them to his prison. And so he took us one by one as we rode on our adventures; and many good knights have died of hunger in this prison, eighteen knights in number. And if any of us all who are here, or have been here, had been willing to fight his brother Ontzlake, he would have set us free; but because this Damas is so false and so full of treason, we would never fight for him, even if we die for it. And we are so thin with hunger that we can scarcely stand on our feet."

"God deliver you, of His mercy," said Arthur.

At once, with that, a damsel came to Arthur, and asked him, "How are you?"

"I cannot say," he said.

"Sir," she said, "if you will fight for my lord, you shall be released from prison; and otherwise you will never escape with your life."

"Now," said Arthur, "that is hard. Yet I would rather fight with a knight than die in prison. If by this," said Arthur, "I can be freed, and all these prisoners, I will fight the battle."

"Yes," said the damsel.

"I am ready," said Arthur, "if I had a horse and armour."

"You shall lack nothing," said the damsel.

"It seems to me, damsel, that I have seen you in the court of Arthur."

"No," said the damsel, "I have never been there. I am the daughter of the lord of this castle."

Yet she was false, for she was one of the damsels of Morgan le Fay.

At once she went to Sir Damas, and told him how he would fight the battle for him, and so he sent for Arthur. And when he came he had a good colour and was well made in his limbs, so that all the knights who saw him said it would be a pity for such a knight to die in prison. So Sir Damas and he agreed that he should fight for him on this condition, that all the other knights should be set free; and Sir Damas swore that to Arthur, and Arthur also swore to fight the battle to the uttermost. And with that all twenty knights were brought out of the dark prison into the hall and set free, and so they all stayed to see the battle.
