Chapter 8: How Accolon found himself beside a well, and undertook to do battle against Arthur

Now we leave Arthur and turn to Accolon of Gaul. When he awoke, he found himself beside a deep well, within half a foot of its edge, in great danger of death. And out of that spring there came a silver pipe, and out of that pipe water ran up high into a basin of marble. When Sir Accolon saw this, he crossed himself and said, "Jesus save my lord King Arthur and King Uriens, for these damsels in this ship have betrayed us. They were devils and not women. And if I can escape this mischance, I shall destroy these false damsels who use enchantments, wherever I can find them."

Just then there came a dwarf with a great mouth and a flat nose, and greeted Sir Accolon, and said that he came from Queen Morgan le Fay, "and she greets you well, and bids you be strong of heart, for you will fight tomorrow with a knight at the hour of prime, at six in the morning. And therefore she has sent you Excalibur, Arthur's sword, and the scabbard. And she bids you, as you love her, to fight the battle to the uttermost, without any mercy, just as you promised her when you spoke together in private. And whatever damsel brings her the head of the knight you will fight with, she will make her a queen."

"Now I understand you well," said Accolon. "I shall keep what I have promised her, now that I have the sword. When did you see my lady Queen Morgan le Fay?"

"Very lately," said the dwarf.

Then Accolon took him in his arms and said, "Commend me to my lady the queen, and tell her that everything I have promised her shall be done, or else I will die for it. Now I suppose," said Accolon, "she has made all these crafts and enchantments for this battle."

"You may well believe it," said the dwarf.

Just then there came a knight and a lady with six squires, and greeted Accolon, and begged him to get up and come and rest at their manor. And so Accolon mounted a spare horse, and went with the knight to a fair manor beside a priory, and there he was given an exceedingly good welcome.

Then Sir Damas sent word to his brother Sir Ontzlake, and told him to make ready by the next morning at the hour of prime, and to be in the field to fight with a good knight, for he had found a good knight who was ready to do battle in every way. When this word came to Sir Ontzlake he was exceedingly downcast, for a little before he had been wounded through both thighs with a spear, and he grieved greatly; but wounded as he was, he would have taken on the battle. So it happened at that time, through Morgan le Fay's contriving, that Accolon was lodged with Sir Ontzlake; and when he heard of that battle, and how Ontzlake was wounded, he said that he would fight for him. Because Morgan le Fay had sent him Excalibur and the sheath to fight the knight in the morning: that was the reason Sir Accolon took the battle on himself. Then Sir Ontzlake was exceedingly glad, and thanked Sir Accolon with all his heart for doing so much for him. And with that Sir Ontzlake sent word to his brother Sir Damas that he had a knight who would be ready in the field for him by the hour of prime.

So in the morning Sir Arthur was armed and well mounted, and asked Sir Damas, "When do we go to the field?"

"Sir," said Sir Damas, "you shall hear mass first."

And so Arthur heard a mass, and when mass was done a squire came on a great horse, and asked Sir Damas if his knight was ready, "for our knight is ready in the field." Then Sir Arthur mounted his horse, and all the knights and common people of that country were there; and so by common counsel twelve good men of the country were chosen to attend on the two knights. And just as Arthur was on horseback, a damsel came from Morgan le Fay, and brought Sir Arthur a sword like Excalibur, and the scabbard, and said to Arthur, "Morgan le Fay sends you your sword here, out of great love."

And he thanked her, and thought it was so; but she was false, for the sword and the scabbard were counterfeit, and brittle, and false.
