Chapter 9: Of the battle between King Arthur and Accolon

And then they took up their places at either end of the field, and let their horses run so fast that each struck the other in the middle of the shield with their spearheads, so that both horse and man went to the earth. And then they both leapt up, and drew their swords. While they were fighting like this, the Damsel of the Lake, who put Merlin under the stone, came into the field; and she came there out of love for King Arthur, for she knew how Morgan le Fay had arranged things so that King Arthur would be killed that day, and so she came to save his life. And so they went eagerly at the battle, and gave many great strokes; but all the time Arthur's sword did not bite like Accolon's sword. But for the most part, every stroke that Accolon gave wounded Arthur badly, so that it was a marvel he stood, and all the time his blood ran from him fast.

When Arthur saw the ground so soaked with his blood he was dismayed, and then he suspected treason, that his sword had been changed; for his sword did not bite into steel as it used to, and so he was sorely afraid he would die. For it always seemed to him that the sword in Accolon's hand was Excalibur, for at every stroke Accolon struck he drew blood from Arthur.

"Now, knight," said Accolon to Arthur, "look out for yourself."

But Arthur gave no answer, and gave him such a blow on the helm that it made him stoop, nearly falling to the earth. Then Sir Accolon drew back a little, and came on with Excalibur raised high, and struck Sir Arthur such a blow that he nearly fell to the earth. Then they were both angry, and gave each other many heavy strokes; but all the time Sir Arthur lost so much blood that it was a marvel he stood on his feet. But he was so full of knighthood that he endured the pain like a knight. And Sir Accolon lost not a drop of blood, and so he grew exceedingly lively, and Sir Arthur was exceedingly weak, and truly expected to die. But for all that he kept a face as though he could hold out, and kept Accolon as close as he could. But Accolon was so bold because of Excalibur that he grew exceedingly daring. But all the men who watched said they had never seen a knight fight as well as Arthur did, considering the blood he had lost. So all the people were sorry for him; but the two brothers would not come to terms. Then they went on fighting together like fierce knights, and Sir Arthur drew back a little to rest, and Sir Accolon called him back to the fight and said, "This is no time for me to let you rest."

And with that he came at Arthur fiercely; and Sir Arthur was angry for the blood he had lost, and struck Accolon high on the helm, so mightily that he made him nearly fall to the earth. And with that Arthur's sword burst at the crossguard, and fell in the grass among the blood, and he was left holding the pommel and the grip in his hands. When Sir Arthur saw that, he was in great fear of dying; but all the time he held up his shield, and gave no ground, and did not let his face fall.
