Chapter 10: How the sword King Arthur fought with broke, and how he won back his own sword Excalibur from Accolon and overcame his enemy

Then Sir Accolon began with treacherous words, and said, "Knight, you are beaten, and you can't hold out. You have no weapon, too, and you have lost a great deal of blood, and I am very unwilling to kill you. So yield to me and admit yourself beaten."

"No," said Sir Arthur, "I cannot do that, for I have promised on my life to fight this battle to the very end, while life lasts in me. And so I would rather die with honour than live with shame. And if it were possible for me to die a hundred times, I would rather die that many times than yield to you. For though I lack a weapon, I shall lack no honour, and if you kill me weaponless, the shame will be yours."

"Well," said Accolon, "as for the shame, I won't hold back for that. Now defend yourself, for you are as good as dead."

And with that Accolon gave him such a stroke that he nearly fell to the ground, and he would have had Arthur beg him for mercy. But Sir Arthur pressed in on Accolon with his shield, and struck him such a blow with the pommel in his hand that he went three strides backwards.

When the Damsel of the Lake saw Arthur, how full of prowess his body was, and the false treason that had been worked to have him killed, she had great pity that so good a knight and so honourable a man should be destroyed in that way. And at the next stroke Sir Accolon struck him such a blow that, by the damsel's enchantment, the sword Excalibur fell out of Accolon's hand to the ground. And with that Sir Arthur leapt swiftly to it, and got it in his hand, and at once he knew that it was his sword Excalibur, and said, "You have been away from me far too long, and you have done me great harm." And with that he saw the scabbard hanging by Accolon's side, and suddenly he leapt at him and pulled the scabbard off him, and threw it as far away as he could throw it.

"Now, knight," said Arthur, "this day you have done me great harm with this sword. Now you have come to your death, for I promise you that before we part you shall be paid back with this sword just as you have paid me. For you have made me endure much pain, and I have lost much blood."

And with that Sir Arthur rushed at him with all his might and pulled him to the ground, and then tore off his helmet, and struck him such a blow on the head that the blood came out of his ears, his nose and his mouth.

"Now I will kill you," said Arthur.

"You may well kill me," said Accolon, "if it pleases you, for you are the best knight I ever met, and I see well that God is with you. But because I promised to fight this battle to the very end," said Accolon, "and never to yield and beg for my life while I lived, I will never yield with my own mouth, and God do with my body what He will."

Then Sir Arthur stopped to think, and it seemed to him that he had seen this knight before.

"Now tell me," said Arthur, "or I will kill you: what country are you from, and what court?"

"Sir Knight," said Sir Accolon, "I am of the court of King Arthur, and my name is Accolon of Gaul."

Then Arthur was more dismayed than he had been before, for then he remembered his sister Morgan le Fay, and the enchantment of the ship.

"O sir knight," he said, "I beg you, tell me who gave you this sword, and from whom you had it."
