Chapter 11: How Accolon confessed the treason of Morgan le Fay, King Arthur's sister, and how she would have had Arthur killed

Then Sir Accolon thought it over, and said, "Cursed be this sword, for through it I have got my death."

"That may well be," said the king.

"Now, sir," said Accolon, "I will tell you. This sword has been in my keeping for most of this past year. And Morgan le Fay, King Uriens' wife, sent it to me yesterday by a dwarf, for this purpose: that I should kill King Arthur, her brother. For you must understand that King Arthur is the man in the world she hates most, because he has the most honour and prowess of anyone of her blood. Also she loves me beyond measure as her lover, and I love her in return. And if she could bring about Arthur's death by her arts, she would easily kill her husband King Uriens, and then she had planned for me to be king in this land, and so to reign, and she to be my queen. But that is all over now," said Accolon, "for I am sure of my death."

"Well," said Sir Arthur, "I can tell from what you say that you would have been king in this land. It would have been a great wrong to have destroyed your lord," said Arthur.

"That is the truth," said Accolon. "But now I have told you the truth, so I beg you, tell me where you are from, and of what court."

"O Accolon," said King Arthur, "now I tell you that I am King Arthur, to whom you have done great harm."

When Accolon heard that, he cried aloud, "Fair, sweet lord, have mercy on me, for I did not know you."

"O Sir Accolon," said King Arthur, "you shall have mercy, because I can tell from your words this time that you did not know who I was. But I understand well from your words that you agreed to my death, and so you are a traitor. But I blame you the less, for my sister Morgan le Fay, by her false arts, made you agree and consent to her false desires. But I shall be avenged on her so hard, if I live, that all Christendom will speak of it. God knows I have honoured her and esteemed her above all my kin, and I have trusted her more than my own wife and all my kin besides."

Then Sir Arthur called the keepers of the field, and said, "Sirs, come here, for here are two knights who have fought each other to the great harm of us both, and each of us was likely to have killed the other, if it had so happened. And if either of us had known the other, there would have been no battle here, and no stroke struck."

Then Accolon cried aloud to all the knights and men who were gathered there, and spoke to them in this way: "O lords, this noble knight I have fought with, which I bitterly regret, is the greatest man of prowess, of manhood and of honour in the world, for he is King Arthur himself, the liege lord of us all. And by mischance and misfortune I have fought this battle with the king and lord to whom I am bound."
