Chapter 12: How Arthur reconciled the two brothers and freed the twenty knights, and how Sir Accolon died

Then all the people fell down on their knees and begged King Arthur's pardon.

"You shall have mercy," said Arthur. "Here you can see what adventures often befall knights errant, how I have fought with a knight of my own, to my great harm and to his too. But, sirs, because I am badly hurt, and he is too, and I have great need of a little rest, you shall hear my judgement between you two brothers. As for you, Sir Damas, for whom I have been champion and won the field against this knight: even so I will judge that, because you, Sir Damas, are called a proud knight, and full of villainy, and your deeds have no prowess in them, you shall give your brother the whole manor with everything that belongs to it, on these terms: that Sir Ontzlake hold the manor from you, and give you a palfrey every year to ride on, for that will suit you better to ride on than a warhorse. Also I charge you, Sir Damas, on pain of death, that you never harass any knights errant who ride on their adventures. And also that you give back to these twenty knights, whom you have kept prisoner so long, all their armour, so that they are satisfied. And if any of them comes to my court and complains of you, by my head, you shall die for it. Also, Sir Ontzlake, as for you, because you are called a good knight, and full of prowess, and true and noble in all your deeds, this is the charge I give you: that with all good speed you come to me and my court, and you shall be a knight of mine. And if your deeds match your name, I shall so advance you, by the grace of God, that in a short time you will have the means to live as honourably as your brother Sir Damas."

"God thank you for your generosity, your goodness and your bounty. From now on I shall be at your command at all times. For, sir," said Sir Ontzlake, "as God willed it, I was lately wounded through both thighs by a knight seeking adventures, which hurt me badly, or else I would have fought this battle with you."

"Would to God," said Arthur, "it had been so, for then I would not have been hurt as I am. I will tell you the reason why: I would not have been hurt as I am, if it had not been for my own sword, which was stolen from me by treason. And this battle was arranged beforehand to have me killed, and so it was brought about by false treason and by false enchantment."

"Alas," said Sir Ontzlake, "it is a great pity that any man or woman could find it in their hearts to work treason against so noble a man as you are, in your deeds and your prowess."

"I shall reward them," said Arthur, "in a short time, by the grace of God. Now tell me," said Arthur, "how far am I from Camelot?"

"Sir, you are two days' journey from there."

"I would gladly be at some honourable place," said Sir Arthur, "where I might rest."

"Sir," said Sir Ontzlake, "near here there is a rich abbey of nuns, founded by your forefathers, only three miles away."

So the king took his leave of all the people, and mounted on horseback, and Sir Accolon with him. And when they had come to the abbey, he had doctors fetched to examine his wounds and Accolon's both. But Sir Accolon died within four days, for he had lost so much blood that he could not live; but King Arthur recovered well. So when Accolon was dead, he had him sent on a horse-bier with six knights to Camelot, and said, "Carry him to my sister Morgan le Fay, and say that I send him to her as a present, and tell her I have my sword Excalibur and the scabbard."

So they set off with the body.
