Chapter 14: How Queen Morgan le Fay grieved bitterly for the death of Accolon, and how she stole the scabbard from Arthur

Then news came to Morgan le Fay that Accolon was dead, and his body brought to the church, and that King Arthur had his sword again. But when Queen Morgan knew that Accolon was dead, she was so sorrowful that her heart nearly burst. But because she did not want it known, outwardly she kept her composure, and showed no sign of sorrow. But she knew well that if she stayed until her brother Arthur came there, no amount of gold would buy her life.

Then she went to Queen Guinevere, and asked her leave to ride into the country.

"You might wait," said Queen Guinevere, "until your brother the king comes home."

"I cannot," said Morgan le Fay, "for I have such urgent news that I cannot delay."

"Well," said Guinevere, "you may leave when you like."

So early in the morning, before it was day, she took her horse and rode all that day and most of the night, and the next morning by noon she came to the same abbey of nuns where King Arthur lay. And knowing he was there, she asked where he was. And they answered that he had gone to bed to sleep, for he had had very little rest these three nights.

"Well," she said, "I order that none of you wake him until I do."

And then she got down from her horse, meaning to steal his sword Excalibur, and so she went straight to his room, and no one dared disobey her command. And there she found Arthur asleep in his bed, with Excalibur naked in his right hand. When she saw that, she was exceedingly unhappy that she could not get at the sword without waking him, and then she knew well she would have been dead. Then she took the scabbard and went her way on horseback.

When the king woke and missed his scabbard, he was angry, and he asked who had been there. And they said his sister Queen Morgan had been there, and had put the scabbard under her cloak and was gone.

"Alas," said Arthur, "you have kept a false watch over me."

"Sir," they all said, "we did not dare disobey your sister's command."

"Ah," said the king, "have the best horse fetched that can be found, and tell Sir Ontzlake to arm himself in all haste, and take another good horse and ride with me."

So at once the king and Ontzlake were well armed, and rode after this lady. And so they came by a cross and found a cowherd, and they asked the poor man whether any lady had come riding that way.

"Sir," said this poor man, "just now a lady came riding with some forty horses, and she rode to that forest over there."

Then they spurred their horses, and followed fast, and after a while Arthur caught sight of Morgan le Fay. Then he chased as fast as he could. When she saw him following her, she rode at a greater pace through the forest until she came to a plain. And when she saw she could not escape, she rode to a lake nearby, and said, "Whatever becomes of me, my brother shall not have this scabbard." And then she threw the scabbard into the deepest part of the water, so that it sank, for it was heavy with gold and precious stones.

Then she rode into a valley where there were many great stones, and when she saw she must be overtaken, she turned herself, horse and man, by enchantment into a great marble stone. Right after that Sir Arthur and Sir Ontzlake came to where the king could recognise his sister and her men, and one knight from another.

"Ah," said the king, "here you can see the vengeance of God, and now I am sorry that this misfortune has happened."

And then he looked for the scabbard, but it could not be found, so he returned to the abbey he had come from. So when Arthur had gone, she turned them all back into the likeness they had had before, and said, "Sirs, now we can go wherever we like."
