Chapter 15: How Morgan le Fay saved a knight who was about to be drowned, and how King Arthur returned home again

Then Morgan said, "Did you see Arthur, my brother?"

"Yes," said her knights, "very well, and you would have found that out if we could have stirred from the spot, for by his warlike face he would have made us run."

"I believe you," said Morgan.

Soon after, as she rode, she met a knight leading another knight on his horse in front of him, bound hand and foot and blindfolded, to drown him in a spring. When she saw this knight bound like that, she asked him, "What are you going to do with that knight?"

"Lady," he said, "I am going to drown him."

"For what reason?" she asked.

"Because I found him with my wife, and she shall have the same death soon."

"That would be a pity," said Morgan le Fay. "Now, what do you say, knight? Is it true, what he says of you?" she said to the knight who was to be drowned.

"No, truly, madam, he does not speak rightly of me."

"Where are you from," said Morgan le Fay, "and of what country?"

"I am of the court of King Arthur, and my name is Manassen, cousin to Accolon of Gaul."

"You speak well," she said, "and for love of him you shall be set free, and you shall have your enemy in the same plight you are in."

So Manassen was untied and the other knight bound. And at once Manassen took off the other knight's armour, and armed himself in it, and so mounted on horseback, with the knight in front of him, and so threw him into the spring and drowned him. And then he rode back to Morgan, and asked if she had any message for King Arthur.

"Tell him that I rescued you, not for love of him but for love of Accolon. And tell him I do not fear him while I can turn myself and those who are with me into the likeness of stones. And let him know I can do much more when I see my time."

And so she went away into the country of Gore, and there she was richly received, and she made her castles and towns exceedingly strong, for she always greatly feared King Arthur.

When the king had rested well at the abbey, he rode to Camelot, and found his queen and his barons very glad of his coming. And when they heard of his strange adventures, as told above, they all marvelled at the falseness of Morgan le Fay; many knights wished her burnt. Then Manassen came to court and told the king of his adventure.

"Well," said the king, "she is a kind sister! I shall be so avenged on her, if I live, that all Christendom will speak of it."

So in the morning a damsel came from Morgan to the king, and she brought with her the richest cloak that was ever seen in that court, for it was set as full of precious stones as they could stand one beside another, and they were the richest stones the king ever saw. And the damsel said, "Your sister sends you this cloak, and asks that you accept this gift from her. And in whatever way she has offended you, she will make amends entirely as you please."

When the king looked at this cloak it pleased him greatly, but he said very little.
