Chapter 16: How the Damsel of the Lake saved King Arthur from a cloak that would have burnt him

With that the Damsel of the Lake came to the king, and said, "Sir, I must speak with you in private."

"Say what you like," said the king.

"Sir," said the damsel, "do not put on this cloak until you have seen more, and on no account let it come on you, or on any knight of yours, until you command the one who brought it to put it on herself."

"Well," said King Arthur, "it shall be done as you advise me."

And then he said to the damsel who had come from his sister, "Damsel, this cloak you have brought me, I want to see it on you."

"Sir," she said, "it would not be fitting for me to wear a king's garment."

"By my head," said Arthur, "you shall wear it before it comes on my back, or on the back of any man here."

And so the king had it put on her, and at once she fell down dead, and never spoke a word again, and was burnt to cinders. Then the king was furiously angry, more than he had been before, and said to King Uriens, "My sister, your wife, is always plotting to betray me, and I know well that either you or my nephew, your son, is in league with her to have me destroyed. But as for you," said the king to King Uriens, "I do not much believe that you are in league with her, for Accolon confessed to me with his own mouth that she would have destroyed you as well as me, so I hold you excused. But as for your son, Sir Uwain, I hold him under suspicion, so I charge you to send him away from my court."

So Sir Uwain was dismissed. And when Sir Gawain knew of it, he made ready to go with him, and said, "Whoever banishes my first cousin banishes me."

So the two of them left, and rode into a great forest, and so they came to an abbey of monks, and there they were well lodged. But when the king learned that Sir Gawain had left the court, there was great sorrow among all the ranks.

"Now," said Gaheris, Gawain's brother, "we have lost two good knights for the love of one."

So in the morning they heard mass in the abbey, and so they rode on until they came to a great forest. Then Sir Gawain saw in a valley, by a tower, twelve fair damsels, and two knights armed on great horses, and the damsels were walking to and fro by a tree. And then Sir Gawain saw that a white shield hung on that tree, and every time the damsels came by it they spat on it, and some threw mud on the shield.
