Chapter 17: How Sir Gawain and Sir Uwain met twelve fair damsels, and how they complained of Sir Marhaus

Then Sir Gawain and Sir Uwain went and greeted them, and asked why they were insulting the shield like that.

"Sir," said the damsels, "we will tell you. There is a knight in this country who owns this white shield, and he is an exceedingly good fighter, but he hates all ladies and gentlewomen, and so we heap all this insult on the shield."

"I will tell you," said Sir Gawain, "it ill becomes a good knight to despise all ladies and gentlewomen. And perhaps, though he hates you, he has some particular reason, and perhaps somewhere else he loves ladies and gentlewomen, and is loved in return, if he is such a man of prowess as you say. Now, what is his name?"

"Sir," they said, "his name is Marhaus, the son of the king of Ireland."

"I know him well," said Sir Uwain. "He is as fine a knight as any alive, for I saw him tested once at a joust where many knights were gathered, and that time no man could stand against him."

"Ah, damsels!" said Sir Gawain. "I think you are to blame. For it is to be supposed that whoever hung that shield there will not be long away from it, and then those knights may match him on horseback, and that would be more to your honour than this. For I will not stay any longer to see a knight's shield dishonoured."

And with that Sir Uwain and Gawain moved off a little way from them, and then they saw Sir Marhaus come riding on a great horse straight toward them. And when the twelve damsels saw Sir Marhaus, they fled into the tower as if they were wild, so that some of them fell on the way. Then one of the knights of the tower set his shield, and called out loudly, "Sir Marhaus, defend yourself!"

And so they charged together, so that the knight broke his spear on Marhaus, and Marhaus struck him so hard that he broke his neck and the horse's back. The other knight of the tower saw that, and squared up to Marhaus, and they met so fiercely that the knight of the tower was soon struck down, horse and man, stone dead.
