Chapter 18: How Sir Marhaus jousted with Sir Gawain and Sir Uwain, and unhorsed them both

And then Sir Marhaus rode to his shield, and saw how it had been fouled, and said, "For this insult I am partly avenged. But for love of her who gave me this white shield, I will wear you, and hang mine where you were." And so he hung it around his neck.

Then he rode straight to Sir Gawain and Sir Uwain, and asked them what they were doing there. They answered him that they had come from King Arthur's court to look for adventures.

"Well," said Sir Marhaus, "here I am, ready: a knight in search of adventure who will carry out any adventure you wish." And so he rode away from them, to take his distance for the charge.

"Let him go," said Sir Uwain to Sir Gawain, "for he is as fine a knight as any living. I would not, if I had my way, have either of us matched against him."

"No," said Sir Gawain, "not so. It would be a shame to us if he were not tried, however good a knight he may be."

"Well," said Sir Uwain, "I will try him before you, for I am weaker than you, and if he strikes me down, then you can avenge me."

So these two knights came together with a great charge, so that Sir Uwain struck Sir Marhaus and his spear burst in pieces on the shield, and Sir Marhaus struck him so hard that he bore him to the ground, horse and man, and wounded Sir Uwain on the left side.

Then Sir Marhaus turned his horse and rode toward Gawain with his spear. And when Sir Gawain saw that, he set his shield, and they set their spears in rest, and they came together with all the might of their horses, so that each knight struck the other very hard in the middle of the shield. But Sir Gawain's spear broke, and Sir Marhaus' spear held, and with that Sir Gawain and his horse went crashing down to the ground. And Sir Gawain rose swiftly to his feet, and drew his sword, and squared up to Sir Marhaus on foot. And Sir Marhaus saw that, and drew his sword, and began to come at Sir Gawain on horseback.

"Sir knight," said Sir Gawain, "get down on foot, or else I will kill your horse."

"Many thanks," said Sir Marhaus. "Out of your courtesy you teach me good manners, for it is not right for one knight to be on foot and the other on horseback."

And with that Sir Marhaus set his spear against a tree and dismounted, and tied his horse to a tree, and set his shield, and each came at the other fiercely, and they struck at each other with their swords so that their shields flew in pieces, and they battered their helmets and their hauberks, and wounded each other. But from past nine o'clock in the morning Sir Gawain grew ever stronger and stronger, for then it was coming on to the hour of noon, and his strength was increased threefold. Sir Marhaus saw all this, and wondered greatly how his strength increased, and so they wounded each other exceedingly badly. And then, when it was past noon, and when it drew toward evening, Sir Gawain's strength weakened, and he grew exceedingly faint, so that he could scarcely hold out any longer, and Sir Marhaus was then stronger and stronger.

"Sir knight," said Sir Marhaus, "I have felt well that you are an exceedingly good knight, and as marvellous a man of strength as I ever felt, while it lasts. And our quarrel is not great, and so it would be a pity to do you harm, for I can feel that you are exceedingly weak."

"Ah," said Sir Gawain, "noble knight, you say the very word that I should say."

And with that they took off their helmets, and kissed each other, and there they swore together to love each other as brothers. And Sir Marhaus begged Sir Gawain to lodge with him that night. And so they took their horses, and rode toward Sir Marhaus' house. And as they rode along the way, Sir Gawain said, "Sir knight, I wonder that so valiant a man as you are loves no ladies or damsels."

"Sir," said Sir Marhaus, "those who give me that name call me so wrongly. But I know well it is the damsels of the tower who call me so, and others like them. Now I will tell you why I hate them: for many of them are sorceresses and enchantresses, and however good a knight may be in body, and as full of prowess as a man can be, they will make him an utter coward to get the better of him. And this is the chief reason I hate them. And to all good ladies and gentlewomen I owe my service, as a knight ought to."

As the book tells in French, there were many knights who outmatched Sir Gawain, for all the threefold strength that he had: Sir Lancelot du Lake, Sir Tristram, Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Percival, Sir Pelleas and Sir Marhaus; these six knights had the better of Sir Gawain. Then within a little while they came to Sir Marhaus' place, which was in a little priory, and there they dismounted, and ladies and damsels unarmed them, and quickly saw to their wounds, for all three of them were hurt. And so all three had good lodging with Sir Marhaus, and a warm welcome. For when he knew that they were the sons of King Arthur's sisters, he made them all the welcome that lay in his power. And so they stayed there a week, and were well healed of their wounds, and at last they left.

"Now," said Sir Marhaus, "we will not part so easily, for I will bring you through the forest." And they rode day after day for a good seven days before they found any adventure.

At last they came into a great forest that was called the country and forest of Arroy, and the country of strange adventures.

"In this country," said Sir Marhaus, "no knight ever came since it was christened but he found strange adventures."

And so they rode, and came into a deep valley full of stones, and nearby they saw a fair stream of water. Above it, at the head of the stream, was a fair spring, and three damsels sitting beside it. And then they rode up to them, and greeted each other. And the eldest had a garland of gold about her head, and she was sixty winters old or more, and her hair was white under the garland. The second damsel was thirty winters old, with a circlet of gold about her head. The third damsel was only fifteen years old, with a garland of flowers about her head. When these knights had looked at them, they asked them why they sat at that spring.

"We are here," said the damsels, "for this reason: in case we see any knights errant, to lead them to strange adventures. And you are three knights who seek adventures, and we are three damsels, and so each one of you must choose one of us. And when you have done so, we will lead you to where three roads part, and there each of you shall choose a road, and his damsel with him. And this day twelve months from now you must meet here again, if God spares your lives, and to this you must pledge your word."

"This is well said," said Sir Marhaus.
