Chapter 20: How a knight and a dwarf quarrelled over a lady

And with that he rode over to one side of the clearing; and on the other side Sir Gawain saw ten knights who waited there without moving, and made themselves ready with their shields and spears against the one knight who had passed by Sir Gawain.

Then this one knight set a great spear in rest, and one of the ten knights rode against him, but this woeful knight struck him so hard that he fell back over his horse's tail. So this same sorrowful knight served them all, so that at the very least he struck down horse and man, and he did all of it with one spear. And so when all ten were on foot, they went to that one knight, and he stood stock still, and let them pull him down off his horse, and bind him hand and foot, and tie him under the horse's belly, and so they led him away with them.

"O Jesus!" said Sir Gawain. "This is a sorry sight, to see that knight treated like that. And by the look of the knight it seems he lets them bind him so, for he puts up no resistance."

"No," said his host, "that is the truth, for if he wanted to, they would all be too weak to do that to him."

"Sir," said the damsel to Sir Gawain, "I think it would be to your honour to help that sorrowful knight, for I think he is one of the best knights I ever saw."

"I would do it for him," said Sir Gawain, "but it seems he will have no help."

"Then," said the damsel, "I think you have no wish to help him."

As they were talking they saw a knight on the other side of the clearing, all armed except for his head. And on the other side there came a dwarf on horseback, all armed except for his head, with a great mouth and a short nose. And when the dwarf came near he said, "Where is the lady who was to meet us here?" And with that she came out of the wood. And then they began to quarrel over the lady; for the knight said he would have her, and the dwarf said he would have her.

"Shall we do the sensible thing?" said the dwarf. "There is a knight over there at the cross. Let us leave it to him, both of us, and as he judges, so it shall be."

"Gladly," said the knight. And so all three went to Sir Gawain and told him why they were quarrelling.

"Well, sirs," he said, "will you put the matter in my hands?"

"Yes," they both said.

"Now, damsel," said Sir Gawain, "you shall stand between the two of them, and whichever of them you would rather go to, he shall have you."

And when she was set between the two of them, she left the knight and went to the dwarf, and the dwarf took her and went on his way singing, and the knight went on his way grieving greatly.

Then two knights came, fully armed, and called out loudly, "Sir Gawain! Knight of King Arthur's, make ready in all haste and joust with me!"

So they ran together, so that each fell down, and then on foot they drew their swords and fought very vigorously. Meanwhile the other knight went to the damsel, and asked her why she stayed with that knight. "And if you would stay with me, I will be your faithful knight."

"And with you I will be," said the damsel, "for I cannot find it in my heart to be with Sir Gawain. For just now here was a knight who beat ten knights, and in the end he was led away like a coward; and so let us two go while they are fighting."

And Sir Gawain fought with that other knight a long time, but in the end the two of them made peace. And then the knight begged Sir Gawain to lodge with him that night. So as Sir Gawain went along with this knight he asked him, "Who is that knight in this country who struck down the ten knights? For when he had done so manfully, he let them bind him hand and foot, and so they led him away."

"Ah," said the knight, "that is the best knight in the world, I believe, and the man of greatest prowess, and he has been treated the way he was more than ten times. His name is Sir Pelleas, and he loves a great lady in this country, and her name is Ettard. And so, when he fell in love with her, a great three-day joust was proclaimed in this country, and all the knights of this country were there, and gentlewomen too. And whoever proved himself the best knight was to have an exceedingly good sword and a circlet of gold, and the knight was to give the circlet to the fairest lady who was at the jousts. And this knight Sir Pelleas was the best knight there, and there were five hundred knights; but there was never a man that Sir Pelleas met whom he did not strike down, or else knock from his horse. And on every one of the three days he struck down twenty knights, and so they gave him the prize. And at once he went to where the Lady Ettard was, and gave her the circlet, and said openly that she was the fairest lady there, and that he would prove it on any knight who said otherwise."
