Chapter 21: How Sir Pelleas let himself be taken prisoner so that he could catch sight of his lady, and how Sir Gawain promised to win him his lady's love

"And so he chose her for his sovereign lady, and vowed never to love any other but her. But she was so proud that she scorned him, and said that she would never love him even if he died for her. Because of this all the ladies and gentlewomen scorned her for being so proud, for there were fairer ladies there than she was, and there was not one of them there who would not have loved him for his noble prowess, if Sir Pelleas had offered them his love. And so this knight promised the Lady Ettard to follow her into this country, and never to leave her until she loved him. And so he is here, close to her, most of the time, and lodges by a priory, and every week she sends knights to fight with him. And when he has beaten them, then he lets them take him prisoner of his own free will, because he wants a sight of this lady. And she always treats him with great contempt, for sometimes she has her knights tie him to his horse's tail, and sometimes bind him under the horse's belly; and so he is brought to her in the most shameful ways she can think of. And she does all this to make him leave this country, and give up his love; but none of it can make him leave. For if he had chosen to fight on foot, he could have beaten the ten knights on foot as well as on horseback."

"Alas," said Sir Gawain, "it is a great pity for him. And after tonight I will look for him tomorrow in this forest, to give him all the help I can."

So in the morning Sir Gawain took his leave of his host Sir Carados, and rode into the forest; and at last he met Sir Pelleas, grieving beyond measure. So they greeted each other, and Sir Gawain asked him why he was in such sorrow. And Sir Pelleas told Sir Gawain all that has been told above. "But I always let her knights treat me the way you saw yesterday, trusting to win her love in the end, for she knows well that all her knights could not easily win against me, if I chose to fight them to the utmost. So, if I did not love her so much, I would rather die a hundred times, if I could die so often, than put up with that insult. But I trust she will have pity on me at last, for love makes many a good knight suffer to have his desire. But alas, I am unlucky." And with that he grieved and sorrowed so greatly that he could scarcely keep his seat on his horse.

"Now," said Sir Gawain, "leave off your mourning, and I promise you on my life to do all in my power to win you the love of your lady, and I will give you my solemn word on it."

"Ah," said Sir Pelleas, "what court are you from? Tell me, please, my good friend."

And then Sir Gawain said, "I am of the court of King Arthur, and his sister's son, and King Lot of Orkney was my father, and my name is Sir Gawain."

And then he said, "My name is Sir Pelleas, born in the Isles, and I am lord of many isles, and I have never loved lady or damsel until now, in an ill-fated hour. And, sir knight, since you are so close a kinsman to King Arthur, and a king's son, do not betray me, but help me. For I can never come at her except by means of some good knight, for she is in a strong castle close by here, within four miles, and she is lady of all this country. And so I can never come into her presence except by letting her knights take me; and if I did not do that, so that I could have a sight of her, I would have been dead long before now. And yet I never had a kind word from her, but when I am brought before her she rebukes me in the foulest way. And then they take my horse and armour and put me out of the gates, and she will not allow me to eat or drink. And I always offer myself to be her prisoner, but she will not allow that, for I would ask for nothing more, whatever pains I had, if only I could have a sight of her every day."

"Well," said Sir Gawain, "I will put all this right, if you will do as I plan. I will have your horse and your armour, and so I will ride to her castle and tell her that I have killed you. And so I will get inside with her and make her treat me kindly, and then I will play my part faithfully, so that you shall not fail to have her love."
