Chapter 22: How Sir Gawain came to the Lady Ettard, and how Sir Pelleas found them sleeping

And with that Sir Gawain gave his solemn word to Sir Pelleas to be true and faithful to him; so each gave his word to the other, and so they exchanged horses and armour, and Sir Gawain left, and came to the castle where the lady's tents stood outside the gate. And as soon as Ettard saw Sir Gawain she fled towards the castle. Sir Gawain called out loudly, and told her to wait, for he was not Sir Pelleas. "I am another knight, who has killed Sir Pelleas."

"Take off your helmet," said the Lady Ettard, "so that I can see your face."

And so when she saw that it was not Sir Pelleas, she told him to dismount, and led him into her castle, and asked him in good faith whether he had killed Sir Pelleas. And he told her yes, and told her his name was Sir Gawain, of the court of King Arthur, and his sister's son.

"Truly," she said, "that is a great pity, for he was an exceedingly good knight in his own person. But of all men alive I hated him most, for I could never be rid of him. And since you have killed him, I will be your woman, and do anything that might please you."

So she gave Sir Gawain a warm welcome. Then Sir Gawain said that he loved a lady, and that she would on no account love him.

"She is to blame," said Ettard, "if she will not love you. For you are so well-born a man, and such a man of prowess, that there is no lady in the world too good for you."

"Will you," said Sir Gawain, "promise me on your faith to do all you can to win me the love of my lady?"

"Yes, sir," she said, "and I promise you that on my faith."

"Now," said Sir Gawain, "it is you yourself that I love so well; so I beg you, keep your promise."

"I have no choice," said the Lady Ettard, "unless I am to break my oath." And so she granted him all his desire.

So it was then in the month of May that she and Sir Gawain went out of the castle and had supper in a tent, and a bed was made there, and there Sir Gawain and the Lady Ettard went to bed together. And in another tent she put her damsels to sleep, and in the third tent she put some of her knights to sleep, for by then she had no fear of Sir Pelleas. And there Sir Gawain lay with her in that tent for two days and two nights. And on the third day, early in the morning, Sir Pelleas armed himself, for he had never slept since Sir Gawain left him; for Sir Gawain had promised him on his life to come back to him at his tent by that priory within the space of a day and a night.

Then Sir Pelleas mounted his horse and came to the tents that stood outside the castle, and in the first tent he found three knights in three beds, and three squires lying at their feet. Then he went to the second tent and found four gentlewomen lying in four beds. And then he went to the third tent and found Sir Gawain lying in bed with his Lady Ettard, each with their arms around the other. And when he saw that, his heart nearly burst for sorrow, and he said, "Alas, that ever a knight should be found so false!" And then he took his horse, and could stay no longer for pure sorrow. And when he had ridden nearly half a mile he turned back, and meant to kill them both. And when he saw the two of them lying there so fast asleep, he could scarcely keep his seat on his horse for sorrow, and he said to himself, "However false this knight may be, I will never kill him sleeping, for I will never destroy the high order of knighthood." And with that he left again. And before he had ridden half a mile he turned back again, and this time meant to kill them both, grieving more than any man ever grieved. And when he came to the tents, he tied his horse to a tree, and drew his sword and went with it naked in his hand to where they lay. And still he thought it would be shameful to kill them sleeping, and he laid the naked sword across both their throats, and so took his horse and rode away.

And when Sir Pelleas came back to his tents he told his knights and his squires how he had fared, and said to them, "For the true and good service you have done me I will give you all my goods, for I am going to my bed and will never get up until I am dead. And when I am dead, I order you to take the heart out of my body and carry it to her between two silver dishes, and tell her how I saw her lying with the false knight Sir Gawain."

Then and there Sir Pelleas took off his armour and went to his bed, grieving and sorrowing marvellously.

When Sir Gawain and Ettard woke from their sleep and found the naked sword across their throats, she knew well that it was Sir Pelleas' sword.

"Alas!" she said to Sir Gawain. "You have betrayed me and Sir Pelleas both, for you told me you had killed him, and now I know well it is not so: he is alive. And if Sir Pelleas had been as discourteous to you as you have been to him, you would be a dead knight. But you have deceived me and betrayed me falsely, so that all ladies and damsels may take warning from you and me."

And with that Sir Gawain made himself ready and went into the forest. So it happened then that the Damsel of the Lake, Nimue, met a knight of Sir Pelleas' who was going on foot in the forest, grieving greatly, and she asked him the cause. And so the woeful knight told her how his master and lord had been betrayed through a knight and a lady, and how he would never get up out of his bed until he was dead.

"Bring me to him," she said at once, "and I will guarantee his life: he shall not die for love. And she who has made him love like this shall be in as bad a plight as he is before long, for there is no joy in such a proud lady, who will have no mercy on such a valiant knight."

At once that knight brought her to him, and when she saw him lying in his bed, she thought she had never seen so handsome a knight. And with that she cast an enchantment on him, and he fell asleep. And meanwhile she rode to the Lady Ettard, and ordered that no man should wake him until she came back. So within two hours she brought the Lady Ettard there, and both ladies found him asleep.

"Look," said the Damsel of the Lake, "you ought to be ashamed to murder such a knight."

And with that she cast such an enchantment on her that she loved him so desperately she was nearly out of her mind.

"O Lord Jesus," said the Lady Ettard, "how has it come about that I now love the man I have hated most of any man alive?"

"That is the righteous judgement of God," said the damsel.

And then at once Sir Pelleas woke and looked at Ettard; and when he saw her he knew her, and then he hated her more than any woman alive, and said, "Away, traitress! Never come into my sight again."

And when she heard him say that, she wept and grieved beyond measure.
