Chapter 24: How Sir Marhaus rode with the damsel, and how he came to the Duke of the South Marches

Now we turn to Sir Marhaus, who rode southward with the damsel who was thirty years old. And so they came into a deep forest, and as luck would have it night overtook them, and they rode a long way along a deep track, and at last they came to a farmyard, and there they asked for shelter. But the man of the farmyard would not lodge them, however they tried to bargain with him. But this much the good man did say: "If you will take your chances on your lodging, I will bring you to where you shall be lodged."

"What chance is it that I shall have to take for my lodging?" said Sir Marhaus.

"You will find out when you get there," said the good man.

"Sir, whatever chance it is, bring me there, please," said Sir Marhaus, "for I am weary, and so are my damsel and my horse."

So the good man went and opened the gate, and within an hour he brought him to a fine castle. And then the poor man called the porter, and at once he was let into the castle, and so he told the lord that he had brought him a knight errant and a damsel who wanted lodging with him.

"Let him in," said the lord. "It may be he will regret that they took their lodging here."

So Sir Marhaus was let in by torchlight, and there was a fine company of young men who welcomed him. And then his horse was led into the stable, and he and the damsel were brought into the hall, and there stood a mighty duke with many fine men about him. Then this lord asked him what his name was, and where he came from, and whose household he belonged to.

"Sir," he said, "I am a knight of King Arthur's and a knight of the Round Table, and my name is Sir Marhaus, and I was born in Ireland."

And then the duke said to him, "I am very sorry to hear it, and this is why: I have no love for your lord, nor for any of your fellows of the Round Table. So rest yourself tonight as best you can, for tomorrow I and my six sons will take you on."

"Is there no help for it but that I must fight you and your six sons at once?" said Sir Marhaus.

"No," said the duke, "for I made my vow for this reason: Sir Gawain killed my seven sons in an encounter. So I made my vow that no knight of King Arthur's court should ever lodge with me, or come anywhere I could fight him, without my taking revenge for my sons' death."

"What is your name?" said Sir Marhaus. "I ask you to tell me, if you please."

"Know this: I am the Duke of the South Marches."

"Ah," said Sir Marhaus, "I have heard it said that you have long been a great enemy of my lord Arthur and of his knights."

"You will feel that tomorrow," said the duke.

"Shall I have to fight you?" said Sir Marhaus.

"Yes," said the duke. "You have no choice about it. And so go to your room, and you shall have everything that is fitting for you."

So Sir Marhaus left and was led to a room, and his damsel was led to her room. And in the morning the duke sent to Sir Marhaus and told him to make ready. And so Sir Marhaus got up and armed himself, and then a mass was sung before him, and he had breakfast, and so he mounted his horse in the courtyard of the castle where they were to fight. So there was the duke, all ready on horseback, fully armed, and his six sons beside him, and each of them had a spear in his hand. And so they charged, and the duke and two of his sons broke their spears on him, but Sir Marhaus held up his spear and touched none of them.
