Chapter 25: How Sir Marhaus fought the duke and his four sons and made them surrender

Then the four sons came two by two, and two of them broke their spears, and so did the other two. And all this while Sir Marhaus did not touch them. Then Sir Marhaus ran at the duke, and struck him with his spear so that horse and man fell to the ground, and he served his sons the same way. And then Sir Marhaus dismounted and told the duke to yield or else he would kill him. And then some of his sons got up again and would have set on Sir Marhaus. Then Sir Marhaus said to the duke, "Call off your sons, or I'll do my worst to all of you."

Then, when the duke saw he could not escape death, he called out to his sons and ordered them to yield to Sir Marhaus; and they all knelt down and held out the pommels of their swords to the knight, and so he accepted their surrender. And then they helped their father up, and so by common consent they promised Sir Marhaus never to be enemies of King Arthur, and to come at the next Pentecost, the duke and his sons, and put themselves at the king's mercy.

Then Sir Marhaus left, and within two days his damsel brought him to where there was a great tournament that the Lady de Vawse had proclaimed. And whoever did best was to have a rich circlet of gold worth a thousand gold coins. And there Sir Marhaus did so nobly that he was renowned, and at one time had forty knights down, and so the circlet of gold was awarded to him. Then he left them with great honour. And so within seven nights his damsel brought him to an earl's place; his name was Earl Fergus, who was later Sir Tristram's knight. And this earl was only a young man, and had lately come into his lands, and there was a giant close by him called Taulurd, who had another brother in Cornwall called Taulas, whom Sir Tristram killed when he was out of his mind. So this earl complained to Sir Marhaus that there was a giant near him who was destroying all his lands, and that because of him he dared not ride or walk anywhere.

"Sir," said the knight, "does he usually fight on horseback or on foot?"

"No," said the earl, "no horse can carry him."

"Well," said Sir Marhaus, "then I will fight him on foot."

So in the morning Sir Marhaus asked the earl for one of his men to bring him to where the giant was; and so he was brought, for he saw him sitting under a holly tree with many iron clubs and battle-axes around him. So this knight squared up to the giant, holding his shield before him, and the giant took an iron club in his hand, and with the first stroke he split Sir Marhaus' shield in two. And there he was in great danger, for the giant was a crafty fighter; but at last Sir Marhaus struck off his right arm above the elbow.

Then the giant fled, and the knight after him, and so he drove him into the water; but the giant was so tall that he could not wade in after him. And then Sir Marhaus made Earl Fergus' man fetch him stones, and with those stones the knight gave the giant many hard knocks, until at last he made him fall down into the water, and so he died there. Then Sir Marhaus went to the giant's castle, and there he freed twenty-four ladies and twelve knights from the giant's prison, and there he found great riches beyond counting, so that he was never a poor man all the days of his life. Then he went back to Earl Fergus, who thanked him greatly, and would have given him half his lands, but he would take none. So Sir Marhaus stayed with the earl nearly half a year, for he was badly bruised by the giant, and at last he took his leave. And as he rode along the way, he met Sir Gawain and Sir Uwain; and so by chance he met four knights of Arthur's court: the first was Sir Sagramore le Desirous, then Sir Osanna, Sir Dodinas le Savage, and Sir Felot of Listinoise. And there Sir Marhaus struck down these four knights with one spear, and badly hurt them. So he went on his way, to keep the meeting on the appointed day.
