Chapter 26: How Sir Uwain rode with the damsel of sixty years, and how he won the prize at a tournament

Now we turn to Sir Uwain, who rode westward with his damsel of sixty years of age, and she brought him to where there was a tournament near the border of Wales. And at that tournament Sir Uwain struck down thirty knights, and so the prize was given to him, and that was a gerfalcon, and a white horse trapped with cloth of gold. So then Sir Uwain had many strange adventures through the old damsel, and so she brought him to a lady who was called the Lady of the Rock, who was very courteous. Now there were two knights in that country who were brothers, and they were called the two perilous knights: the one knight was called Sir Edward of the Red Castle, and the other Sir Hue of the Red Castle. And these two brothers had robbed the Lady of the Rock of a barony of lands by their extortion. And while this knight was lodging with this lady, she made her complaint to him about these two knights.

"Madam," said Sir Uwain, "they are to blame, for they act against the high order of knighthood, and the oath that they made. And if you please, I will speak with them, because I am a knight of King Arthur's, and I will try to persuade them fairly; and if they will not be persuaded, I will do battle with them, in defence of your right."

"Many thanks," said the lady, "and where I cannot repay you, God will."

So in the morning the two knights were sent for, to come there to speak with the Lady of the Rock; and you may be sure they did not fail to come, for they came with a hundred horsemen. But when this lady saw them come in such strength, she would not let Sir Uwain go out to them on any guarantee or for any fair words, but she made him speak with them from a tower. But in the end these two brothers would not be persuaded, and answered that they would keep what they had.

"Well," said Sir Uwain, "then I will fight one of you, and prove that you are doing this lady wrong."

"We will not do that," they said, "for if we do battle, we two will fight one knight together. And so if you will fight that way, we will be ready at whatever hour you choose. And if you beat us in battle, the lady shall have her lands back."

"Well said," said Sir Uwain. "So make yourselves ready, and be here tomorrow, in defence of the lady's right."
