Chapter 27: How Sir Uwain fought two knights and overcame them

So assurances were given on both sides that no treachery should be done by either side. So then the knights left and made themselves ready, and that night Sir Uwain was given a warm welcome. And in the morning he got up early and heard mass, and had breakfast, and so he rode to the plain outside the gates, where the two brothers waited for him on their horses. So they rode at each other exceedingly hard, so that Sir Edward and Sir Hue broke their spears on Sir Uwain. And Sir Uwain struck Sir Edward so that he fell over his horse, and still his spear did not break. And then he spurred his horse and came at Sir Hue and overthrew him. But they soon got up again, and set their shields and drew their swords, and told Sir Uwain to dismount and fight his battle to the utmost. Then Sir Uwain quickly got clear of his horse, and put his shield before him and drew his sword, and so they squared up to each other, and each gave the other such strokes. And there these two brothers wounded Sir Uwain so grievously that the Lady of the Rock thought he would die. And so they fought together for five hours, like men gone out of their minds with rage. And at last Sir Uwain struck Sir Edward such a stroke on the helmet that his sword cut down to his collarbone; and then Sir Hue lost heart, but Sir Uwain pressed hard on him to kill him. Sir Hue saw that: he knelt down and yielded to Sir Uwain. And Sir Uwain, out of his nobility, accepted his sword, and took him by the hand, and they went into the castle together. Then the Lady of the Rock was exceedingly glad, and the other brother grieved greatly for his brother's death. Then all the lady's lands were restored to her, and Sir Hue was ordered to be at the court of King Arthur at the next feast of Pentecost. So Sir Uwain stayed with the lady nearly half a year, for it was a long time before he could be healed of his great wounds. And so when it drew near the appointed day when Sir Gawain, Sir Marhaus and Sir Uwain were to meet at the crossroads, each knight made his way there to keep the promise they had made. And Sir Marhaus and Sir Uwain brought their damsels with them, but Sir Gawain had lost his damsel, as has been told before.
