Chapter 28: How at the year's end all three knights met with their three damsels at the spring

Then and there, at the twelvemonth's end, all three knights met at the spring, and their damsels with them. But the damsel Sir Gawain had had could say little to his honour. So they parted from the damsels and rode through a great forest, and there they met a messenger who had come from King Arthur, who had been looking for them for nearly a year throughout all England, Wales and Scotland, and had orders, if ever he could find Sir Gawain and Sir Uwain, to bring them back to the court. And then they were all glad, and so they begged Sir Marhaus to ride with them to the king's court. And so within twelve days they came to Camelot, and the king was exceedingly glad of their coming, and so was all the court. Then the king made them swear on a book to tell him all the adventures that had happened to them that year, and so they did. And there Sir Marhaus was well known, for there were knights there he had fought before, and he was named as one of the best knights living.

Before the feast of Pentecost the Damsel of the Lake came and brought Sir Pelleas with her; and at that high feast there was great jousting of knights, and of all the knights who were at those jousts Sir Pelleas won the prize, and Sir Marhaus was named next. But Sir Pelleas was so strong that very few knights could stand a blow of his spear. And at that next feast Sir Pelleas and Sir Marhaus were made knights of the Round Table, for there were two empty seats, because two knights had been killed that year; and King Arthur had great joy of Sir Pelleas and of Sir Marhaus. But Pelleas never loved Sir Gawain afterwards, though he spared him for the love of King Arthur; but many times at jousts and tournaments Sir Pelleas paid Sir Gawain back, for so it is told in the French book. So, many days after, Sir Tristram fought with Sir Marhaus on an island, and there they fought a great battle, but in the end Sir Tristram killed him. And Sir Tristram was so badly wounded that he could scarcely recover, and lay at a nunnery for half a year. And Sir Pelleas was an honourable knight, and was one of the four who achieved the Holy Grail. And the Damsel of the Lake saw to it, by her arts, that he never fought Sir Lancelot du Lake; for wherever Sir Lancelot was at any jousts or any tournament, she would not let him be there that day, unless it was on Sir Lancelot's side.

Here ends the fourth book.

Here follows the fifth book.
