Chapter 1: How twelve aged ambassadors from Rome came to King Arthur to demand tribute for Britain

When King Arthur had rested after long war, and was holding a royal feast and a Round Table with his allies, the kings, princes and noble knights, all of the Round Table, there came into his hall, as he sat on his royal throne, twelve old men, each of them carrying a branch of olive, as a sign that they came as ambassadors and messengers from the Emperor Lucius, who was called at that time Dictator, or Procurator of the Commonwealth of Rome. These messengers, after they had entered and come into the presence of King Arthur, made their obeisance to him and bowed to him with reverence, and spoke to him in this way: "The high and mighty Emperor Lucius sends greeting to the King of Britain, and commands you to acknowledge him as your lord, and to send him the tribute that this realm owes to the Empire, which your father and others of your predecessors have paid, as is on record. And you, as a rebel who does not acknowledge him as your sovereign, withhold it and keep it back, against the statutes and decrees made by the noble and worthy Julius Caesar, conqueror of this realm and first Emperor of Rome. And if you refuse his demand and his command, know for certain that he will make strong war against you, your realms and your lands, and will punish you and your subjects, so that it will be an example forever to all kings and princes who would deny their tribute to that noble Empire which rules over the whole world."

Then when they had delivered the substance of their message, the king commanded them to withdraw, and said he would take counsel and give them an answer. Then some of the young knights, hearing their message, would have rushed at them and killed them, saying that it was an insult to all the knights who were present to allow them to speak so to the king. And at once the king commanded that none of them, on pain of death, should speak ill of them or do them any harm, and he commanded a knight to bring them to their lodging, "and see that they have all that is necessary and fitting for them, with the best welcome, and that no delicacy is spared, for the Romans are great lords. And though their message does not please me or my court, still I must remember my honour."

After this the king had all his lords and knights of the Round Table called to take counsel on this matter, and asked them to give their advice. Then Sir Cador of Cornwall spoke first, and said, "Sir, this message pleases me well, for we have rested many days and been idle, and now I hope you will make sharp war on the Romans, where I have no doubt we shall win honour."

"I can well believe," said Arthur, "that this matter pleases you well, but this message cannot be answered so lightly, for the demand grieves me badly. For truly I will never pay tribute to Rome, and so I ask you to advise me. I have learned that Belinus and Brenius, kings of Britain, held the Empire in their hands for many days, and also Constantine the son of Helena, which is plain evidence that we owe no tribute to Rome, but that by right we who are descended from them have the right to claim the title of the Empire."
