Chapter 2: How the kings and lords promised King Arthur aid and help against the Romans

Then King Anguish of Scotland answered, "Sir, by right you ought to be above all other kings, for there is none like you or equal to you in Christendom, in knighthood or in dignity. And I advise you never to obey the Romans, for when they reigned over us they oppressed our forefathers, and burdened this land with great extortions and taxes. And so I make my vow here to avenge myself on them; and to strengthen your cause I will supply twenty thousand good fighting men, and pay their wages at my own cost, and they shall attend on you, with me, whenever it pleases you."

And the king of Little Britain, that is, Brittany, promised him thirty thousand for the same purpose, and King Arthur thanked them for it. And then every man agreed to make war, and to help as far as he was able. That is to say, the lord of West Wales promised to bring thirty thousand men, and Sir Uwain and Sir Ider his son, with their cousins, promised to bring thirty thousand. Then Sir Lancelot and all the others in the same way each promised a great host of men.

And when King Arthur understood their spirit and their good will, he thanked them heartily, and afterwards had the ambassadors called to hear their answer. And in the presence of all his lords and knights he spoke to them in this way: "It is my will that you go back to your lord, the Procurator of the Commonwealth of the Romans, and say this to him: that I set no value on his demand and his command, and that I know of no tribute or payment that I owe to him, or to any earthly prince, Christian or heathen. Rather, I claim to have and hold the sovereignty of the Empire, to which I am entitled by the right of my predecessors, who were once kings of this land. And tell him that I am determined and fully resolved to go with my army, in strength and in power, to Rome, by the grace of God, to take possession of the Empire and to subdue those who are rebels. And so I command him and all the people of Rome that they do homage to me forthwith, and acknowledge me as their Emperor and Governor, on pain of what will follow."

And then he commanded his treasurer to give them great and generous gifts, and to pay all their expenses, and he appointed Sir Cador to escort them out of the land. And so they took their leave and departed, and took ship at Sandwich, and travelled on through Flanders, Germany, the mountains, and all Italy, until they came to Lucius. And after they had made their bow, they reported their answer, just as you have heard it already.

When the Emperor Lucius had fully understood their report, he was badly shaken, as if he were in a rage, and said, "I had supposed that Arthur would have obeyed my command, and come to serve you himself, as was fitting for him or for any other king to do."

"O sir," said one of the senators, "leave off such empty words, for I tell you that my fellows and I were sorely afraid to look upon his face. I'm afraid you have made a rod for your own back, for he means to be lord of this Empire, which is greatly to be feared if he comes. For he is a different man altogether from what you think, and he keeps the noblest court in the world; no other kings or princes can compare with his noble state. On New Year's Day we saw him in his royal state, which was the most royal we ever saw, for he was served at his table by nine kings, and by the noblest fellowship of other princes, lords and knights that there is in the world, and every knight proven, and like a lord, and he keeps the Round Table. And in his own person he is the most manly man alive, and is likely to conquer all the world, for the world is too small for his spirit. And so I advise you to guard your borders well, and the passes in the mountains, for certainly he is a lord to be feared."

"Well," said Lucius, "before Easter I mean to cross the mountains, and so on into France, and there strip him of his lands, with the Genoese and other mighty warriors of Tuscany and Lombardy. And I will send for all those who are subjects and allies of the Empire of Rome to come to my aid."

And at once he sent old, wise knights to the countries that follow: first to Ambage and Arrage, to Alexandria, to India, to Armenia, where the river Euphrates runs into Asia, to Africa, and to Europe the Large, to Ertayne and Elamye, to Arabia, to Egypt, and to Damascus, to Damietta and Cayer, to Cappadocia, to Tarsus, Turkey, Pontus and Pamphylia, to Syria and Galatia. And all these were subject to Rome, and many more, such as Greece, Cyprus, Macedonia, Calabria, Cateland and Portugal, with many thousands of Spaniards. So all these kings, dukes and emirs assembled around Rome, sixteen kings at once, with a great multitude of people. When the emperor learned of their coming, he made ready his Romans and all the people between him and Flanders.

He had also brought with him fifty giants who had been fathered by fiends, and they were appointed to guard his person, and to break the front line of King Arthur's army. And so he set out from Rome, and came down over the mountains to destroy the lands that Arthur had conquered, and came to Cologne, and besieged a castle near it, and soon won it, and garrisoned it with two hundred Saracens, or infidels. And afterwards he destroyed many fair countries which Arthur had won from King Claudas. And so Lucius came with all his army, which was spread out sixty miles wide, and commanded them to meet him in Burgundy, for he meant to destroy the realm of Brittany.
