Chapter 4: How King Arthur, on board ship and lying in his cabin, had a marvellous dream, and of its interpretation

And as the king lay in his cabin in the ship, he fell into a doze and dreamed a marvellous dream. It seemed to him that a dreadful dragon drowned many of his people, and he came flying out of the west, and his head was enamelled with azure, and his shoulders shone like gold, his belly was like mail of a marvellous hue, his tail was all in tatters, his feet were covered in fine sable fur, and his claws were like fine gold. And a hideous flame of fire flew out of his mouth, as if the land and the water were all ablaze. After that, it seemed to him, there came out of the east a grim boar, all black, in a cloud, and his paws were as big as a post. He was shaggy and rough-looking, he was the foulest beast that ever man saw, and he roared and bellowed so hideously that it was a marvel to hear. Then the dreadful dragon came on and swooped down on the wind like a falcon, giving great strokes on the boar, and the boar struck back at him with his grisly tusks so that the dragon's breast was all bloody, and the hot blood made all the sea red. Then the dragon flew away high up, and came down with such a rush of wind, and struck the boar on the spine, which was ten feet long from the head to the tail, and struck the boar all to powder, both flesh and bones, so that it fluttered all over the sea.

And with that the king woke at once, and was badly shaken by this dream, and sent at once for a wise philosopher, commanding him to tell him the meaning of his dream.

"Sir," said the philosopher, "the dragon that you dreamed of stands for your own person, sailing here, and the colours of his wings are your realms that you have won, and his tail, which is all in tatters, means the noble knights of the Round Table. And the boar that the dragon killed, coming from the clouds, stands for some tyrant who torments the people; or else you are likely to fight with some giant yourself, horrible and abominable, whose equal you never saw in all your days. And so do not be afraid at all of this dreadful dream, but go forward yourself as a conqueror."

Then soon after this they sighted land, and sailed until they arrived at Barflete in Flanders, and when they were there he found many of his great lords ready, as they had been commanded, to wait on him.
