Chapter 5: How a local man told him of a monstrous giant, and how he fought and conquered him

Then a farmer of that country came to him, and told him how there was, in the country of Constantine near Brittany, a great giant who had slain, murdered and devoured many people of the country, and had fed himself for seven years on the children of the common people of that land, so that the children were all slain and destroyed. "And just lately he has taken the Duchess of Brittany as she rode with her household, and has carried her off to his lair, which is on a mountain, to rape her and lie with her for the rest of her life. And many people followed her, more than five hundred, but for all that they could not rescue her, and they left her shrieking and crying pitifully. And so I suppose that he has killed her in satisfying his foul lust. She was the wife of your cousin Sir Howell, whom we count very near of your blood. Now, as you are a rightful king, have pity on this lady, and avenge us all, as you are a noble conqueror."

"Alas," said King Arthur, "this is a great misfortune. I would rather have given the best realm I have than not have been a furlong ahead of him, to have rescued that lady. Now, fellow," said King Arthur, "can you take me to where this giant has his haunt?"

"Yes, sir," said the good man. "Look over there, where you see those two great fires. There you will find him, and more treasure than I suppose there is in all France."

When the king had understood this pitiful matter, he went back into his tent. Then he called Sir Kay and Sir Bedivere to him, and commanded them secretly to make ready horses and armour for himself and the two of them, for after evensong he would ride on pilgrimage, with the two of them only, to Saint Michael's Mount. And then at once he made himself ready, and armed himself at all points, and took his horse and his shield. And so the three of them set off from there and rode on as fast as ever they could, until they came to the foreshore below that mount. And there they dismounted, and the king commanded them to wait there, for he would go up that mount himself. And so he climbed up that hill until he came to a great fire, and there he found a sorrowful widow wringing her hands and grieving greatly, sitting by a newly made grave. And then King Arthur greeted her, and asked her why she was lamenting so.

And she answered him and said, "Sir knight, speak softly, for over there is a devil. If he hears you speak he will come and destroy you. I count you an unlucky man. What are you doing here on this mountain? For if there were fifty of you, such as you are, you could not hold out against this devil. Here lies a duchess dead, who was the fairest woman in all the world, wife of Sir Howell, Duke of Brittany. He has murdered her in forcing himself on her, and has split her open to the navel."

"Lady," said the king, "I come from the noble conqueror King Arthur, to negotiate with that tyrant on behalf of his liege people."

"A curse on such negotiations," she said. "He cares nothing for the king, or for any man else. But if you had brought Arthur's wife, Dame Guinevere, he would be gladder than if you had given him half France. Take care, do not go too near him, for he has vanquished fifteen kings, and has had a coat made for himself, full of precious stones, and embroidered with their beards, which they sent him to win his favour, for the safety of their people, this last Christmas. And if you want to, speak with him at that great fire over there, at his supper."

"Well," said Arthur, "I will carry out my message, for all your fearful words."

And he went on along the crest of that hill, and saw where the giant sat at his supper, gnawing on a man's limb, warming his huge limbs by the fire, with no breeches on; and three fair damsels were turning three spits, and on the spits were skewered twelve young children, newly born, like young birds.

When King Arthur saw that pitiful sight, he had great compassion on them, so that his heart bled for sorrow, and he hailed the giant, saying this: "May He who rules all the world give you a short life and a shameful death, and the devil have your soul! Why have you murdered these young innocent children, and murdered this duchess? So get up and arm yourself, you glutton, for this day you shall die by my hand."

Then the glutton at once jumped up, and took a great club in his hand, and struck at the king so that the circlet on his helm fell to the ground. And the king struck him back so that he slashed open his belly and cut off his genitals, so that his guts and his entrails fell down to the ground. Then the giant threw away his club, and caught the king in his arms so that he crushed his ribs. Then the three maidens knelt down and called on Christ for help and comfort for Arthur. And then Arthur writhed and twisted, so that one moment he was underneath and the next on top. And so, writhing and wrestling, they rolled down the hill until they came to the high-water mark, and all the while as they rolled Arthur stabbed him with his dagger.

And it so happened that they came to the place where the two knights were, keeping Arthur's horse. Then, when they saw the king held fast in the giant's arms, they came and freed him. And then the king commanded Sir Kay to strike off the giant's head, and to set it on the broken shaft of a spear, and carry it to Sir Howell, and tell him that his enemy was slain. "And after that, have this head fixed on a gate-tower, so that all the people can see it and look at it. And you two, go up to the mountain and fetch me my shield, my sword and the club of iron. And as for the treasure, take it yourselves, for you will find riches there beyond counting. As long as I have the coat and the club, I want nothing more. This was the fiercest giant I ever met, except one on the mountain of Araby, whom I overcame; but this one was bigger and fiercer."

Then the knights fetched the club and the coat, and some of the treasure they took for themselves, and went back to the army. And at once this became known through all the country, and so the people came and thanked the king.

And he answered them, "Give the thanks to God, and share out the goods among yourselves."

And after that King Arthur told and commanded his cousin Howell that he should arrange for a church to be built on the same hill, in honour of Saint Michael. And in the morning the king moved on with his great army, and came into Champagne, into a valley, and there they pitched their tents. And as the king sat at his dinner, two messengers came in, one of whom was the Marshal of France, and told the king that the emperor had entered France, and had destroyed a great part of it, and was in Burgundy, and had destroyed and made great slaughter of the people, and burnt towns and boroughs, "and so, if you do not come quickly, they will have to surrender their bodies and their goods."
