Chapter 6: How King Arthur sent Sir Gawain and others to Lucius, and how they were attacked and escaped with honour

Then the king had Sir Gawain, Sir Bors, Sir Lionel and Sir Bedivere called, and commanded them to go straight to Sir Lucius, "and tell him that he is to get out of my land at once; and if he will not, tell him to make ready for battle, and not to harass the poor people."

Then at once these noble knights mounted their horses, and when they came to the green wood, they saw many tents of silk of various colours set up in a meadow beside a river, and the emperor's tent was in the middle, with an eagle displayed above it. Our knights rode toward that tent, and arranged that Sir Gawain and Sir Bors should deliver the message, and left Sir Lionel and Sir Bedivere in ambush. And then Sir Gawain and Sir Bors delivered their message, and commanded Lucius, in Arthur's name, to leave his land, or else to make ready for battle without delay.

Lucius answered them and said, "You shall go back to your lord, and tell him that I will subdue him and all his lands."

Then Sir Gawain was angry, and said, "I would rather fight against you than have all France."

"And so would I," said Sir Bors, "rather than have all Brittany or Burgundy."

Then a knight named Sir Gainus, a near cousin of the emperor, said, "Look how full of pride and boasting these Britons are, and they brag as if they held up the whole world."

Then Sir Gawain was badly stung by these words, and pulled out his sword and struck off his head. And with that they turned their horses and rode over rivers and through woods until they came to their ambush, where Sir Lionel and Sir Bedivere were waiting. The Romans followed hard after them, on horseback and on foot, across an open field to a wood. Then Sir Bors turned his horse and saw a knight coming on fast, and he struck him through the body with a spear so that he fell down dead to the earth. Then came Caliburn, one of the strongest men of Pavia, and struck down many of Arthur's knights. And when Sir Bors saw him do so much harm, he made for him, and struck him through the breast, so that he fell down dead to the earth. Then Sir Feldenak thought to avenge the death of Gainus on Sir Gawain, but Sir Gawain saw it coming, and struck him on the head, and the stroke did not stop until it came to his breast. And then he turned back and came to his fellows in the ambush. And there was a clash, for the ambush broke out on the Romans, and slew and hewed down the Romans, and forced the Romans to flee and turn back, and the noble knights chased them to their tents.

Then the Romans gathered more men, and foot soldiers came on as well, and there was a new battle, and so many men that Sir Bors and Sir Berel were taken. But when Sir Gawain saw that, he took with him Sir Idrus, the good knight, and said he would never see King Arthur again unless he rescued them, and he pulled out Galatine, his good sword, and went after the men who were leading those two knights away. And he struck down the man who was leading Sir Bors, and took Sir Bors from him and handed him over to his fellows. And Sir Idrus in the same way rescued Sir Berel. Then the battle began to be great, so that our knights were in great danger, and so Sir Gawain sent to King Arthur for help, asking him to hurry, "for I am badly wounded, and our prisoners can pay ransoms beyond counting."

And the messenger came to the king and told him his message. And at once the king had his army assembled; but straight away, before he set out, the prisoners arrived, and Sir Gawain and his fellows had won the field and put the Romans to flight, and afterwards returned and came back with their company in such a way that no man of honour among them was lost, except that Sir Gawain was badly hurt. Then the king had his wounds probed, and comforted him. And so this was the beginning of the first engagement between the Britons and the Romans, and more than ten thousand of the Romans were slain, and there was great joy and merriment that night in King Arthur's army. And in the morning he sent all the prisoners to Paris under the guard of Sir Lancelot, with many knights, and of Sir Cador.
