Chapter 7: How Lucius sent spies to lie in ambush to recapture his knights who had been taken prisoner, and how they were stopped

Now we turn to the Emperor of Rome, who learned that these prisoners were to be sent to Paris, and at once he sent certain knights and princes with sixty thousand men to lie in ambush, to rescue his knights and lords who were prisoners. And so the next morning, as Lancelot and Sir Cador, the chieftains and commanders of all those who were escorting the prisoners, were about to pass through a wood, Sir Lancelot sent certain knights ahead to scout whether anyone was in the woods to stop them. And when these knights came into the wood, at once they spotted the great ambush, and went back and told Sir Lancelot that sixty thousand Romans lay in wait for them. And then Sir Lancelot, with such knights as he had, and fighting men to the number of ten thousand, put them in battle order, and met them and fought them bravely, and killed and cut to pieces many of the Romans, and killed many knights and emirs on the side of the Romans and Saracens. There the king of Lyly was killed, and three great lords, Aladuke, Herawd and Heringdale. But Sir Lancelot fought so nobly that no man could withstand a stroke of his hand, and wherever he went he showed his prowess and his might, for he cut men down on every side; and the Romans and Saracens fled from him like sheep from the wolf or from the lion, and he put all of them who were left alive to flight.

And they fought so long that word came to King Arthur, and at once he made himself ready and came to the battle. And when he saw how his knights had won the battle, he embraced them in his arms, knight by knight, and said, "You are worthy to hold all your honour and renown. There was never a king, except myself, who had such noble knights."

"Sir," said Cador, "not one of us failed another. But the prowess and manhood of Sir Lancelot were more than a wonder to tell of, and so too were those of his cousins, who did many noble feats of war that day."

And Sir Cador also told which of his knights had been killed, such as Sir Berel, and others, Sir Moris and Sir Maurel, two good knights. Then the king wept, and dried his eyes with a handkerchief, and said, "Your courage very nearly destroyed you. For even if you had turned back, you would have lost no honour; for I call it folly for knights to stand their ground when they are outmatched."

"No," said Lancelot and the others, "for shame once taken can never be won back."
