Chapter 8: How a senator told Lucius of their defeat, and also of the great battle between Arthur and Lucius

Now we leave King Arthur and his noble knights, who had won the field and had brought their prisoners to Paris, and speak of a senator who escaped from the battle, and came to Lucius the emperor, and said to him, "Sir emperor, I advise you to withdraw. What are you doing here? You will win nothing in these borderlands but great blows beyond all measure, for today one of Arthur's knights was worth a hundred of ours in the battle."

"Shame on you," said Lucius. "You talk like a coward. Your words grieve me more than all the loss I had today."

And at once he sent out a king called Sir Leomie, with a great army, and ordered him to hurry on ahead, and he would follow close behind. King Arthur was warned in secret, and sent his people to Sessoine, and took the towns and castles there from the Romans. Then the king commanded Sir Cador to take the rearguard, and to take with him certain knights of the Round Table, "and Sir Lancelot, Sir Bors, Sir Kay, Sir Marrok, with Sir Marhaus, shall wait upon our own person." So King Arthur divided his army into several parts, so that his enemies should not escape.

When the emperor had entered the vale of Sessoine, he could see where King Arthur was drawn up for battle with his banner displayed; and he was surrounded on every side by his enemies, so that he had no choice but to fight or surrender, for he could not flee. But he said openly to the Romans, "Sirs, I urge you to fight today and acquit yourselves like men, and remember how Rome rules and is chief and head over all the earth and the whole world, and do not let these Britons stand against us today."

And with that he had his trumpets blow the bloody calls to battle, so that the ground trembled and shook.

Then the armies drew near, and shoved and shouted on both sides, and great blows were struck on both sides, and many men were overthrown, wounded and killed; and great deeds of valour, prowess and feats of war were shown that day, too many to recount, the noble feats of every man, for they would fill a whole volume. But above all, King Arthur rode through the battle urging his knights to do well, and he himself did as nobly with his own hands as any man could do. He drew out Excalibur his sword, and watched always for where the Romans were thickest and were hurting his people most, and at once he turned to that place, and hewed and cut men down on every side, and rescued his people. And he killed a great giant named Galapas, who was a man of huge size and height. He cut him shorter, and struck off both his legs at the knees, saying, "Now you're a better size to deal with than you were!" And afterwards he struck off his head. There Sir Gawain fought nobly and killed three emirs in that battle. And so did all the knights of the Round Table. So the battle between King Arthur and Lucius the Emperor went on a long time. Lucius had many Saracens on his side, and they were killed. And so the battle was great, and often one side had the advantage and then at once the disadvantage, and it went on so long that at last King Arthur saw where Lucius the Emperor was fighting, and doing wonders with his own hands. And at once he rode at him. And each struck the other fiercely, and at last Lucius struck Arthur across the face, and gave him a broad wound. And when King Arthur felt himself hurt, at once he struck him back with Excalibur, so that it split his head from the crown, and did not stop until it came to his breast. And then the emperor fell down dead, and there his life ended.

And when it was known that the emperor was killed, at once all the Romans with all their army took to flight, and King Arthur with all his knights followed the chase, and cut down all those they could overtake. And so the victory was given to King Arthur, and the triumph; and more than a hundred thousand were killed on the side of Lucius. And afterwards King Arthur had the dead bodies searched, and had those of his own following who were killed buried, every man according to his estate and rank. And for those who were wounded, he had the surgeons examine their hurts and wounds, and commanded them to spare no salves or medicines until they were healed.

Then the king rode straight to the place where the Emperor Lucius lay dead, and with him he found killed the Sultan of Syria, and the King of Egypt and the King of Ethiopia, who were two noble kings, with seventeen other kings of various countries, and also sixty senators of Rome, all noble men. All of these the king had embalmed with many good aromatic gums, and afterwards had them wrapped in sixty folds of waxed cloth of sendal, a fine silk, and laid in chests of lead, so that they would not rot or smell; and on all these bodies their shields with their arms and banners were set, so that it would be known what country they were from. And afterwards he found three senators who were alive, and he said to them, "To save your lives, I want you to take these dead bodies and carry them with you to great Rome, and present them to the Potestate, Rome's governor, on my behalf, showing him my letters, and tell them that I in my own person will soon be at Rome. And I expect the Romans will think twice before they demand any tribute of me. And I command you to say, when you come to Rome, to the Potestate and all the Council and Senate, that I send them these dead bodies for the tribute they have demanded. And if they are not content with these, I will pay more when I come, for I owe no other tribute, and no other will I pay. And I think this is enough for Britain, Ireland and all the German lands. And furthermore, I charge you to tell them that I command them, on pain of their heads, never to demand tribute or tax from me or from my lands."

Then with this charge and command, the three senators already named departed with all the dead bodies, laying the body of Lucius all alone in a cart covered with the arms of the Empire; and after it always two bodies of kings in a chariot, and then the bodies of the senators after them. And so they went toward Rome, and delivered their embassy and message to the Potestate and the Senate, recounting the battle fought in France, and how the field was lost and a great many people killed, beyond counting. And so they advised them by no means to make any more war against that noble conqueror Arthur, for his might and prowess were greatly to be feared, seeing the noble kings and the great multitude of knights of the Round Table, with whom no earthly prince can compare.
