Chapter 9: How Arthur, after he had won the battle against the Romans, entered Germany, and then Italy

Now we turn to King Arthur and his noble knights, who, after the great battle won against the Romans, entered Lorraine, Brabant and Flanders, and then went back into Upper Germany, and so over the mountains into Lombardy, and after that into Tuscany. And there was a city there that would by no means surrender or obey, so King Arthur besieged it, and lay a long time around it, and made many assaults on the city; and those inside defended themselves bravely. Then one day the king called Sir Florence, a knight, and said to him that they were short of food, "and not far from here are great forests and woods, where many of my enemies are, with a great deal of cattle. I want you to make ready and go there foraging, and take with you Sir Gawain my nephew, Sir Wisshard, Sir Clegis, Sir Cleremond, and the Captain of Cardiff, with others, and bring back with you all the beasts you can get there."

And at once these knights made ready, and rode over woods and hills, through forests and woods, until they came into a fair meadow full of fair flowers and grass; and there they rested themselves and their horses all that night. And at the break of day the next morning, Sir Gawain took his horse and stole away from his companions, to look for some adventures. And at once he caught sight of an armed man walking his horse at an easy pace along the side of a wood, with his shield laced to his shoulder, sitting on a strong warhorse, with no man with him except a page carrying a mighty spear. The knight bore on his shield three griffins of gold on black, with a carbuncle, and the top band of the shield in silver. When Sir Gawain saw this splendid knight, he set his spear in its rest, and rode straight at him, and asked him where he came from. The other answered and said he was from Tuscany, and he asked Sir Gawain, "What, proud knight, are you challenging me so boldly? You'll get no plunder here. Try what you like: you'll be my prisoner before you leave."

Then Gawain said, "You boast a great deal and speak proud words. I advise you, for all your boasting, to make yourself ready and take up your weapons, before worse harm comes to you."
