Chapter 10: Of a fight between Sir Gawain and a Saracen, who afterwards surrendered and became a Christian

Then they took their spears and charged at each other with all the might they had, and struck each other through their shields into their shoulders. So at once they pulled out their swords, and struck such great blows that the sparks flew from their helmets. Then Sir Gawain was thoroughly shaken, and with Galatine his good sword he struck through the shield and the thick hauberk made of thick rings of mail, and smashed the precious stones on it all to pieces, and gave him a broad wound, so that men could see both liver and lung. Then that knight groaned, and turned on Sir Gawain, and with a backhand stroke gave him a great wound and cut a vein, which hurt Gawain badly, and he bled heavily.

Then the knight said to Sir Gawain, "Bind up your wound before the bleeding drains your colour, for you are bloodying all your horse and your fine armour. And all the barber-surgeons of Brittany will not be able to stop your blood, for whoever is hurt with this blade will never stop bleeding."

Then Gawain answered, "It troubles me very little. Your big words will not frighten me or lessen my courage; but you will suffer pain and sorrow before we part. But tell me quickly who can stop my bleeding."

"I can do that," said the knight, "if I want to, and so I will, if you will help and support me so that I may be christened and believe in God. And I ask this of you by your manhood, and it will be a great merit for your soul."

"I grant it," said Gawain, "so help me God, to fulfil all your wish. But first tell me what you were looking for here like this, alone, and what land you are from, and whose allegiance you owe."

"Sir," he said, "my name is Priamus, and my father is a great prince, and he has rebelled against Rome and overrun many of their lands. My father is descended in the direct line from Alexander and from Hector. And Duke Joshua and Maccabaeus were of our lineage. I am the rightful heir of Alexandria and Africa, and all the outer islands; yet I will believe in the Lord you believe in, and for your trouble I will give you treasure enough. I was so proud and haughty in my heart that I thought no man was my equal, or like me. I was sent into this war with seven score knights, and now I have met with you, who have given me my fill of fighting. So, sir knight, I beg you to tell me who you are."

"I am no knight," said Gawain. "I have been brought up for many years in the wardrobe of the noble King Arthur, the department that keeps his gear, to look after his armour and his other clothing, and to lace up the short coats that belong to him. Last Christmas he made me a yeoman, and gave me a horse and armour, and a hundred pounds in money; and if fortune is my friend, I have no doubt I will be well advanced and helped by my liege lord."

"Ah," said Priamus, "if his servants are so keen and fierce, his knights must be exceedingly good. Now for the love of the King of Heaven, whether you are a servant or a knight, tell me your name."

"By God," said Sir Gawain, "now I will tell you the truth. My name is Sir Gawain, and I am known in his court and in his chamber, and I am one of the knights of the Round Table. He dubbed me a duke with his own hand. So do not resent it if this grace has fallen to me; it is the goodness of God that lent me my strength."

"Now I am better pleased," said Priamus, "than if you had given me all Provence and rich Paris. I would rather have been torn apart by wild horses than that any servant should have won such renown, or that any page or hard rider should have had the prize over me. But now, sir knight, I warn you that near here is a Duke of Lorraine with his army, and the noblest men of Dauphiny, and lords of Lombardy, with the garrison of Godard, and Saracens of Southland, numbering sixty thousand good men-at-arms. So unless we hurry away from here, it will go hard with us both, for we are badly hurt and not likely ever to recover. But keep an eye on my page, so that he does not blow his horn; for if he does, there are a hundred knights waiting close by here to attend on me, and if they take you, no ransom of gold or silver will set you free."

Then Sir Gawain rode across a river to save himself, and the knight followed him, and so they rode on until they came to his companions, who were in the meadow where they had been all night. As soon as Sir Wisshard caught sight of Sir Gawain and saw that he was hurt, he ran to him weeping with sorrow, and asked him who had hurt him like this. And Gawain told how he had fought with that man, and each of them had wounded the other, and how he had salves to heal them, "but I can tell you other news: soon we will have to fight many enemies."

Then Sir Priamus and Sir Gawain dismounted, and let their horses graze in the meadow, and took off their armour, and then the blood ran fresh from their wounds. And Priamus took from his page a flask full of the four waters that came out of Paradise, and anointed their wounds with a certain balm, and washed them with that water, and within an hour they were both as sound as they had ever been. And then they were all called together to council with a trumpet, and there Priamus told them what lords and knights had sworn to rescue him, and that without fail they would be attacked by many thousands; so he advised them to withdraw.

Then Sir Gawain said it would be a great shame to them to leave without striking a blow. "So I advise that we take up our arms and make ready to meet these Saracens and unbelievers, and with the help of God we shall overthrow them and have a fine day of it against them. And Sir Florence shall stay here in this field to hold the position, as a noble knight, and we shall not abandon those fellows over there."

"Now," said Priamus, "stop talking, for I warn you, you will find many dangerous knights in those woods over there. They will drive out beasts to lure you on. They are past counting, and you are not more than seven hundred, which is far too few to fight with so many."

"Nevertheless," said Sir Gawain, "we will meet them once, and see what they can do, and the best shall have the victory."
