Chapter 11: How the Saracens came out of a wood to rescue their cattle, and of a great battle

Then Sir Florence called Sir Floridas to him, with a hundred knights, and drove off the herd of beasts. Then seven hundred men-at-arms followed him; and Sir Ferant of Spain came galloping out of the woods on a fine steed, and came to Sir Florence and asked him why he was running away. Then Sir Florence took his spear and rode against him, and struck him in the forehead and broke his neck. Then all the others were stirred up, and meant to avenge the death of Sir Ferant, and charged in among them; and there was a great fight, and many were killed and laid on the ground. And Sir Florence with his hundred knights held the position the whole time, and fought bravely.

Then, when Priamus the good knight saw how great the fight was, he went to Sir Gawain and told him to go and help his companions, who were hard pressed by their enemies.

"Sir, don't worry," said Sir Gawain, "for the prize will be theirs. I will not move my horse one step toward them unless I see more of the enemy than there are now; for they are strong enough to match them."

And with that he saw an earl called Sir Ethelwold, and the duke of the Germans, come charging out of a wood with many thousands, and Priamus' knights with them, and they came straight into the battle. Then Sir Gawain encouraged his knights, and told them not to be dismayed, for it would all be theirs. Then they began to gallop, and met their enemies, and men were killed and overthrown on every side. Then the knights of the Round Table thrust in among them, and struck to the earth all those who stood against them, so that they forced them to fall back and flee.

"By God," said Sir Gawain, "this gladdens my heart, for now they are fewer by twenty thousand."

Then Jubance, a giant, entered the battle, and fought and cut men down on every side, and harmed many of our knights, among whom Sir Gherard, a knight of Wales, was killed. Then our knights took heart, and killed many Saracens. And then Sir Priamus came in with his pennon, and rode with the knights of the Round Table, and fought so bravely that many of their enemies lost their lives. And there Sir Priamus killed the Marquis of Moises land, and Sir Gawain and his companions acquitted themselves so well that they won the field. But in that fight Sir Chestelaine was killed, a young squire who was Sir Gawain's ward, and there was great grief for it, and his death was soon avenged. So the battle ended, and many lords of Lombardy and many Saracens were left dead on the field.

Then Sir Florence and Sir Gawain lodged their people safely, and took a great quantity of cattle, and of gold and silver, and great treasure and riches, and went back to King Arthur, who was still at the siege. And when they came to the king, they presented their prisoners and told of their adventures, and how they had defeated their enemies.
