Chapter 12: How Sir Gawain returned to King Arthur with his prisoners, and how the King won a city, and how he was crowned Emperor

"Now God be thanked," said the noble King Arthur. "But what sort of man is that standing by himself? He doesn't look like a prisoner."

"Sir," said Gawain, "this is a good man-at-arms. He matched me, but he has yielded himself to God, and to me, to become a Christian. If it had not been for him, we would never have come back. So I beg you to let him be baptised, for there lives no nobler man, nor a better knight with his hands."

Then the king had him christened at once, and had him called by his first name, Priamus, and made him a duke and a knight of the Round Table. And then at once the king had the assault on the city proclaimed, and there was raising of ladders and breaking of walls, and the ditch was filled, so that men could enter the city with little trouble. Then a duchess came out, and Clarisin the countess, with many ladies and damsels, and knelt before King Arthur, and begged him for the love of God to accept the city's surrender and not to take it by storm, for then many innocent people would be killed. Then the king lowered his visor, with a meek and noble face, and said, "Madam, none of my subjects shall do any wrong to you or your maidens, or to anyone who belongs to you; but the duke shall abide my judgement."

Then at once the king commanded the assault to stop, and at once the duke's eldest son brought out the keys, and kneeling handed them to the king, and begged him for mercy; and the king took possession of the town with the consent of his lords, and took the duke and sent him to Dover, to stay there a prisoner for the rest of his life, and set aside certain rents for the duchess's dower and for her children.

Then he appointed lords to rule those lands, and made laws, as a lord ought to do in his own country; and afterwards he set out on his journey toward Rome, and sent Sir Floris and Sir Floridas ahead with five hundred men-at-arms. And they came to the city of Urbino and laid an ambush there, where it seemed best to them, and rode up before the town, where at once a great many people sallied out and skirmished with the scouts. Then the ambush broke out and won the bridge, and afterwards the town, and set the king's banner on the walls. Then the king came up on a hill, and saw the city and his banner on the walls, by which he knew that the city was won. And at once he sent word and commanded that none of his liegemen should dishonour or lie with any lady, wife or maiden; and when he came into the city, he went to the castle, and comforted those who were in sorrow, and appointed a captain there, a knight of his own country.

And when the people of Milan heard that this same city was won, they sent great sums of money to King Arthur, and begged him as their lord to have pity on them, promising to be his subjects for ever, and to do him homage and fealty for the lands of Piacenza and Pavia, Petersaint, and the Port of Tremble, and to give him a million in gold every year for all his lifetime. Then he rode into Tuscany, and won towns and castles, and laid waste everything in his way that would not obey him, and so on to Spoleto and Viterbo, and from there he rode into the Vale of Vicecount among the vines. And from there he sent to the senators, to learn whether they would acknowledge him as their lord. But soon afterwards, on a Saturday, all the senators who were left alive came to King Arthur, and the noblest cardinals who lived in Rome at that time, and begged him for peace, and offered him a great deal, and asked him as their ruler to give them leave for six weeks to assemble all the Romans, and then to crown him emperor with chrism, the holy anointing oil, as befits so high a rank.

"I agree," said the king, "just as you have proposed, and I will be crowned there at Christmas, and hold my Round Table with my knights as it pleases me."

And then the senators made ready for his enthronement. And on the appointed day, as the romance tells, he came into Rome, and was crowned emperor by the Pope's hand, with all the royal splendour that could be made, and stayed there for a time, and settled all his lands from Rome to France, and gave lands and realms to his servants and knights, to each according to what he deserved, in such a way that no one complained, rich or poor. And he gave Sir Priamus the duchy of Lorraine; and Priamus thanked him, and said he would serve him all the days of his life. And afterwards he made dukes and earls, and made every man rich.

Then after this all his knights and lords gathered before him, and said, "Blessed be God, your war is finished and your conquest achieved, so much so that we know of no one so great or mighty who dares make war against you. So we beg you to return home, and give us leave to go home to our wives, from whom we have been away a long time, and to rest, for your expedition is finished with honour and renown."

Then the king said, "You speak the truth, and it is no wisdom to tempt God. So make yourselves ready, and let us return to England."

Then there was packing of armour and baggage, and a great train of carts. And when leave had been given, he turned back, and commanded that no man, on pain of death, should rob or take food or anything else along the way unless he paid for it. And so he came over the sea and landed at Sandwich, where Queen Guinevere his wife came to meet him; and he was nobly received by all his common people in every city and town, and great gifts were presented to him to welcome him at his homecoming.

Here ends the fifth book, of the conquest that King Arthur won against Lucius the Emperor of Rome.

Here follows the sixth book, which is of Sir Lancelot du Lake.
