Chapter 1: How Sir Lancelot and Sir Lionel left the court, and how Sir Lionel left him sleeping and was captured

Soon after King Arthur had come back from Rome to England, all the knights of the Round Table gathered to the king, and held many jousts and tournaments. And some there were who were only plain knights, who grew so much in arms and in honour that they surpassed all their fellows in prowess and noble deeds, and that was well proved on many; but above all it was proved on Sir Lancelot du Lake. For in all tournaments and jousts and deeds of arms, both in sport and in earnest, he surpassed all other knights, and at no time was he ever overcome, unless it was by treason or enchantment. So Sir Lancelot grew so marvellously in renown and in honour that he is the first knight the French book makes mention of after King Arthur came back from Rome. And so Queen Guinevere held him in great favour above all other knights, and certainly he loved the queen in return above all other ladies and damsels all his life, and for her he did many deeds of arms, and saved her from the fire through his noble chivalry.

So Sir Lancelot rested a long while with play and games. And then he thought he would prove himself in strange adventures, and he told his nephew, Sir Lionel, to make himself ready, "for we two will go and look for adventures." So they mounted their horses, armed in every point, and rode into a deep forest and so out onto a wide plain. And then the weather was hot about noon, and Sir Lancelot had a great wish to sleep. Then Sir Lionel noticed a great apple tree that stood by a hedge, and said, "Brother, there is a fine shade over there. We can rest ourselves and our horses there."

"Well said, fair brother," said Sir Lancelot, "for these eight years I have not been as sleepy as I am now."

And so they dismounted there and tied their horses to separate trees, and so Sir Lancelot lay down under an apple tree, with his helmet under his head. And Sir Lionel kept watch while he slept. So Sir Lancelot was sound asleep.

And meanwhile three knights came riding, fleeing as fast as ever they could ride. And there followed them only one knight. And when Sir Lionel saw him, he thought he had never seen so big a knight, nor so fine-looking a man, nor one so well equipped in every point. So within a little while this strong knight had overtaken one of these knights, and there he struck him to the cold earth, so that he lay still. And then he rode at the second knight, and struck him so that man and horse fell down. And then he rode straight at the third knight, and struck him a spear's length out over his horse's rump. And then he dismounted and took his horse by the bridle, and tied all three knights fast with the reins of their own bridles. When Sir Lionel saw him do this, he thought he would try him, and made himself ready, and quietly and secretly he took his horse, and took care not to wake Sir Lancelot. And when he was mounted on his horse, he overtook this strong knight, and told him to turn. And the other struck Sir Lionel so hard that he bore horse and man to the earth, and so he dismounted and tied him fast, and threw him across his own horse. And so he served all four of them, and rode away with them to his own castle. And when he came there he had them stripped of their armour, and had them beaten naked with thorns, and afterwards put them in a deep prison where there were many more knights, who were grieving bitterly.
