Chapter 2: How Sir Ector followed to look for Sir Lancelot, and how he was captured by Sir Turquine

When Sir Ector de Maris learned that Sir Lancelot had left the court to look for adventures, he was angry with himself, and made himself ready to look for Sir Lancelot. And when he had ridden a long way in a great forest, he met a man who looked like a forester.

"Good fellow," said Sir Ector, "do you know of any adventures near here in this country?"

"Sir," said the forester, "I know this country well. And near here, within this mile, there is a strong manor, well moated, and by that manor, on the left hand, there is a good ford for horses to drink at, and over that ford there grows a fine tree, and on it hang many fine shields that once belonged to good knights. And on the trunk of the tree hangs a basin of copper and brass. Strike that basin three times with the butt of your spear, and soon after you will hear news, or else you will have the best luck that any knight has had for many a year who passed through this forest."

"Many thanks," said Sir Ector, and left, and came to the tree, and saw many fine shields. And among them he saw his brother Sir Lionel's shield, and many more that he knew, belonging to his fellows of the Round Table, which grieved his heart, and he vowed to avenge his brother.

Then at once Sir Ector beat on the basin like a madman, and then he gave his horse a drink at the ford. And a knight came up behind him and told him to come out of the water and make himself ready. And at once Sir Ector turned sharply, and set his spear in rest, and struck the other knight such a great blow that his horse spun round twice.

"That was well done," said the strong knight, "and you have struck me like a true knight."

And with that he drove his horse at Sir Ector, and seized him under his right arm, and carried him clean out of the saddle, and rode away with him into his own hall, and threw him down in the middle of the floor. The name of this knight was Sir Turquine. Then he said to Sir Ector, "Because you have done more to me today than any knight has done these twelve years, now I will grant you your life, as long as you will swear to be my prisoner all the days of your life."

"No," said Sir Ector, "I will never promise you that, but I will do the best I can for myself."

"I am sorry for that," said Sir Turquine.

And then he had him stripped of his armour, and had him beaten naked with thorns, and then put him down in a deep dungeon, where he found many of his fellows that he knew. But when Sir Ector saw Sir Lionel, he grieved greatly.

"Alas, brother," said Sir Ector, "where is my brother Sir Lancelot?"

"Fair brother, I left him asleep under an apple tree when I went away from him, and what has become of him I cannot tell you."

"Alas," said the knights, "unless Sir Lancelot helps us we can never be set free, for we know of no knight now who is able to match our master Turquine."
