Chapter 3: How four queens found Lancelot sleeping, and how he was captured by enchantment and taken to a castle

Now we leave these knights in prison, and speak of Sir Lancelot du Lake, who lies sleeping under the apple tree. Right about noon four queens of high rank came by him. And so that the heat should not trouble them, four knights rode around them, and carried a cloth of green silk on four spears, between them and the sun, and the queens rode on four white mules. And as they rode they heard a great horse neigh fiercely nearby, and then they noticed a sleeping knight who lay in full armour under an apple tree. As soon as these queens looked at his face, they knew it was Sir Lancelot. Then they began to quarrel over that knight, and each one said she would have him for her lover.

"We shall not quarrel," said Morgan le Fay, who was King Arthur's sister. "I will put an enchantment on him so that he will not wake for six hours, and then I will take him away to my castle. And when he is safely in my keeping, I will take the enchantment off him, and then let him choose which of us he will have for his lover."

So this enchantment was cast on Sir Lancelot, and then they laid him on his shield, and carried him that way on horseback between two knights, and brought him to the Castle Chariot. And there they laid him in a cold room, and at night they sent a fair damsel to him with his supper ready prepared. By then the enchantment had passed, and when she came she greeted him, and asked him how he was.

"I cannot say, fair damsel," said Sir Lancelot, "for I don't know how I came into this castle, unless it was by an enchantment."

"Sir," she said, "you must keep your spirits up. And if you are the kind of knight people say you are, I will tell you more tomorrow at first light."

"Many thanks, fair damsel," said Sir Lancelot. "I ask for your good will."

And so she left. And there he lay all that night without comfort from anyone. And early in the morning these four queens came, exceedingly richly dressed, all of them bidding him good morning, and he them in return.

"Sir knight," the four queens said, "you must understand you are our prisoner. And we know you well here, that you are Sir Lancelot du Lake, King Ban's son. And because we know your worth, that you are the noblest knight living, and as we well know, no lady can have your love but one, and that is Queen Guinevere: now you will lose her for ever, and she you. And so you must now choose one of us four. I am Queen Morgan le Fay, queen of the land of Gore, and here is the Queen of North Wales, and the Queen of Eastland, and the Queen of the Out Isles. Now choose one of us, whichever you will have for your lover, for if you do not choose, you will die in this prison."

"This is a hard case," said Sir Lancelot, "that either I must die or else choose one of you. Yet I would rather die in this prison with honour than have one of you for my lover against my will. And so you have your answer: I will have none of you, for you are false enchantresses. And as for my lady, Dame Guinevere, if I were at liberty as I was, I would prove it on you or on your champions that she is the truest lady to her lord alive."

"Well," said the queens, "is this your answer, that you will refuse us?"

"Yes, on my life," said Sir Lancelot, "I refuse you."

So they left and left him there alone, grieving greatly.
