Chapter 4: How Sir Lancelot was freed with the help of a damsel

Just then, at noon, the damsel came to him with his dinner, and asked him how he was.

"Truly, fair damsel," said Sir Lancelot, "never so badly in all the days of my life."

"Sir," she said, "I am sorry for that. But if you will be guided by me, I will help you out of this distress, and you will suffer no shame or dishonour, provided you keep a promise to me."

"Fair damsel, I will grant it you, for I am badly afraid of these sorceress queens, since they have destroyed many a good knight."

"Sir," said she, "that is true. And because of the renown and goodness they hear of in you, they want your love. And sir, they say your name is Sir Lancelot du Lake, the flower of knights, and they are exceedingly angry with you because you have refused them. But sir, if you would promise me to help my father next Tuesday, who has arranged a tournament between himself and the King of North Wales (for last Tuesday my father lost the field through three knights of Arthur's court), if you will be there next Tuesday and help my father, then tomorrow before first light, by the grace of God, I will set you completely free."

"Fair maiden," said Sir Lancelot, "tell me your father's name, and then I will give you an answer."

"Sir knight," she said, "my father is King Bagdemagus, who was shamefully beaten at the last tournament."

"I know your father well," said Sir Lancelot, "for a noble king and a good knight. And on my life, you shall have me ready to serve your father and you on that day."

"Sir," she said, "many thanks. And tomorrow see that you are ready early, and I will be the one who sets you free and brings you your armour and your horse, shield and spear. And near here, within ten miles, there is an abbey of white monks. There I beg you to wait for me, and I will bring my father to you there."

"All this shall be done," said Sir Lancelot, "as I am a true knight."

And so she left, and came early in the morning, and found him ready. Then she brought him out through twelve locks, and brought him to his armour. And when he was fully armed, she brought him to his own horse, and quickly he saddled him and took a great spear in his hand and so rode off, and said, "Fair damsel, I will not fail you, by the grace of God."

And so he rode into a great forest all that day, and could never find any highway, and so night fell on him. And then he noticed, in a little glen, a tent of red silk.

"By my faith," said Sir Lancelot, "I will lodge in that tent all this night."

And so he dismounted there, and tied his horse to the tent, and there he took off his armour, and there he found a bed, and lay down in it and fell sound asleep.
