Chapter 5: How a knight found Sir Lancelot lying in his lover's bed, and how Sir Lancelot fought the knight

Then within an hour the knight who owned the tent came, and he thought his lady-love was lying in that bed, and so he lay down beside Sir Lancelot, and took him in his arms and began to kiss him. And when Sir Lancelot felt a rough beard kissing him, he leapt nimbly out of the bed, and the other knight after him, and each of them got his sword in his hand. And out of the tent door went the knight of the tent, and Sir Lancelot followed him, and there in a little glen Sir Lancelot wounded him badly, close to death. And then he yielded to Sir Lancelot, and so Lancelot spared him, on condition that he would tell him why he came into the bed.

"Sir," said the knight, "the tent is my own, and I had arranged for my lady to sleep with me here tonight, and now I am likely to die of this wound."

"I am sorry for your hurt," said Lancelot, "but I was afraid of treason, for I was tricked not long ago. And so come along into your tent and take your rest, and I think I can stop your bleeding."

And so they both went into the tent, and at once Sir Lancelot stopped his bleeding.

With that the knight's lady came, who was an exceedingly beautiful lady, and when she saw that her lord Belleus was badly wounded, she cried out against Sir Lancelot, and grieved beyond measure.

"Peace, my lady and my love," said Belleus, "for this knight is a good man, and a knight-errant."

And there he told her the whole reason how he was wounded. "And when I yielded to him, he spared me courteously and has stopped my bleeding."

"Sir," said the lady, "I beg you to tell me what knight you are, and what is your name?"

"Fair lady," he said, "my name is Sir Lancelot du Lake."

"I always thought so from your speech," said the lady, "for I have often seen you before this, and I know you better than you think. But now, if you would promise me of your courtesy, for the harm you have done to me and my lord Belleus, that when he comes to Arthur's court you will have him made a knight of the Round Table; for he is an exceedingly good man of arms, and a mighty lord of lands in many outlying isles."

"Fair lady," said Sir Lancelot, "let him come to the court at the next high feast, and see that you come with him, and I will do all I can, if he proves himself valiant with his hands, so that you shall have your desire."

So in a little while, as they talked like this, the night passed, and the day shone, and then Sir Lancelot armed himself, and took his horse, and they showed him the way to the abbey, and he rode there within the space of two hours.
