Chapter 6: How Sir Lancelot was welcomed by King Bagdemagus' daughter, and how he made his complaint to her father

And as soon as Sir Lancelot came into the abbey yard, King Bagdemagus' daughter heard a great horse on the paving. And then she got up and went to a window, and there she saw Sir Lancelot. And at once she had men quickly take his horse from him and lead it into a stable, and he himself was led into a fine room, and his armour taken off, and the lady sent him a long gown, and soon she came herself. And then she gave Lancelot an exceedingly warm welcome, and she said he was the knight in the world who was most welcome to her. Then in all haste she sent for her father Bagdemagus, who was within twelve miles of that abbey, and before evening he came, with a fine company of knights with him. And when the king had dismounted from his horse, he went straight to Sir Lancelot's room, and there he found his daughter. And then the king embraced Sir Lancelot in his arms, and each greeted the other warmly.

At once Sir Lancelot made his complaint to the king of how he had been betrayed, and how his brother Sir Lionel had gone from him he did not know where, and how his daughter had freed him from prison. "So as long as I live I will serve her and all her kindred."

"Then I am sure of your help," said the king, "next Tuesday."

"Yes, sir," said Sir Lancelot, "I will not fail you, for I have promised so to my lady your daughter. But, sir, which knights of my lord Arthur's were they who were with the King of North Wales?"

And the king said it was Sir Mador de la Porte, and Sir Mordred, and Sir Gahalantine who had worsted all his knights, for against those three neither he nor his knights could hold out.

"Sir," said Sir Lancelot, "since I hear that the tournament is to be here, within three miles of this abbey, send me three knights of yours, such as you trust, and see that the three knights all have white shields, and I too, with no painting on the shields. And we four will come out of a little wood between the two sides, and we will fall on the front of our enemies and do them all the harm we can; and that way no one will know what knight I am."

So they took their rest that night, and this was on the Sunday. And so the king left, and sent Sir Lancelot three knights with the four white shields. And on the Tuesday they lodged themselves in a little leafy wood beside the place where the tournament was to be. And there were stands and viewing places so that lords and ladies might watch and award the prize. Then the King of North Wales came into the field with a hundred and sixty helmed knights. And the three knights of Arthur's stood by themselves. Then King Bagdemagus came into the field with eighty helmed knights. And then they set their spears in rest, and came together with a great crash, and at the first encounter twelve knights of King Bagdemagus' side were killed, and six of the King of North Wales' side, and King Bagdemagus' side was driven far back.
