Chapter 7: How Sir Lancelot bore himself in a tournament, and how he met Sir Turquine leading Sir Gaheris

With that came Sir Lancelot du Lake, and he thrust in with his spear into the thick of the crowd, and there he struck down five knights with one spear, and he broke the backs of four of them. And in that throng he struck down the King of North Wales, and broke his thigh in that fall. The three knights of Arthur's saw all this that Sir Lancelot did.

"There's a dangerous guest over there," said Sir Mador de la Porte, "so here goes, I'll have a go at him."

So they met, and Sir Lancelot bore him down, horse and man, so that his shoulder came out of joint.

"Now it falls to me to joust," said Mordred, "for Sir Mador has had a bad fall."

Sir Lancelot saw him, and got a great spear in his hand, and met him. And Sir Mordred broke a spear on him, and Sir Lancelot gave him such a blow that the saddlebow broke, and so he flew over his horse's tail, so that his helmet drove into the earth a foot and more, and his neck was nearly broken, and there he lay a long while in a faint.

Then Sir Gahalantine came in with a great spear, and Lancelot against him, with all the strength they could drive, so that both their spears burst right up to their hands. And then they flung out their swords and gave many a grim stroke. Then Sir Lancelot was angry beyond measure, and then he struck Sir Gahalantine on the helmet so that his nose burst out bleeding, and his ears and mouth both, and with that his head hung low. And with that his horse ran away with him, and he fell down to the earth. At once Sir Lancelot got a great spear in his hand, and before that great spear broke, he bore sixteen knights to the earth, some horse and man, and some the man and not the horse. And there was none he hit squarely who bore arms again that day. And then he got another great spear, and struck down twelve knights, and most of them never prospered afterwards. And then the knights of the King of North Wales would joust no more. And there the prize was given to King Bagdemagus.

So each side went off to its own place, and Sir Lancelot rode off with King Bagdemagus to his castle, and there he had an exceedingly warm welcome both from the king and from his daughter, and they offered him great gifts. And in the morning he took his leave, and told the king that he would go and look for his brother Sir Lionel, who had gone from him while he slept. So he took his horse, and commended them all to God. And there he said to the king's daughter, "If you ever have need of my service, I beg you let me know, and I will not fail you, as I am a true knight."

And so Sir Lancelot left, and by chance he came into the same forest where he had been captured sleeping. And in the middle of a highway he met a damsel riding on a white palfrey, and they greeted each other.

"Fair damsel," said Sir Lancelot, "do you know of any adventures in this country?"

"Sir knight," said the damsel, "there are adventures close by, if you dare try them."

"Why should I not try adventures?" said Sir Lancelot. "That is why I came here."

"Well," said she, "you certainly look like a good knight. And if you dare meet a good knight, I will bring you to where the best knight is, and the mightiest you ever met, as long as you will tell me your name, and what knight you are."

"Damsel, I care nothing about telling you my name. Truly my name is Sir Lancelot du Lake."

"Sir, you look the part well. There are adventures near here that are fit for you. For near here lives a knight who will not be overmatched by any man I know, unless you overmatch him, and his name is Sir Turquine. And as I understand, he has in his prison sixty-four good knights of Arthur's court, whom he has won with his own hands. But when you have done that day's work, you must promise me, as you are a true knight, to go with me, and to help me and other damsels who are wronged every day by a false knight."

"All your purpose and desire, damsel, I will fulfil, as long as you will bring me to this knight."

"Now, fair knight, come along."

And so she brought him to the ford and the tree where the basin hung.

So Sir Lancelot let his horse drink, and then he beat on the basin with the butt of his spear, so hard, with all his might, that the bottom fell out. And he went on a long while, but he saw nothing. Then he rode up and down along the gates of that manor for nearly half an hour. And then he caught sight of a great knight driving a horse in front of him, and across the horse there lay an armed knight, tied up. And as they came nearer and nearer, Sir Lancelot thought he ought to know him. Then Sir Lancelot saw that it was Sir Gaheris, Gawain's brother, a knight of the Round Table.

"Now, fair damsel," said Sir Lancelot, "I see a knight coming over there, tied fast, who is a fellow of mine, and he is Sir Gawain's brother. And from the very start I promise you, God willing, to rescue that knight; and unless his master sits better in the saddle, I will free all the prisoners he has from their peril, for I am sure he has two brothers of mine prisoner with him."

By the time each had seen the other, they gripped their spears.

"Now, fair knight," said Sir Lancelot, "put that wounded knight off the horse, and let him rest a while, and let us two try our strength. For as I am told, you do and have done great insult and shame to knights of the Round Table, and so now defend yourself."

"If you're of the Round Table," said Turquine, "I defy you and your whole fellowship."

"That is saying too much," said Sir Lancelot.
