Chapter 8: How Sir Lancelot and Sir Turquine fought each other

And then they set their spears in rest, and came together with their horses as fast as they could run, and each struck the other in the middle of his shield, so that both their horses' backs broke under them, and the knights were both stunned. And as soon as they could get clear of their horses, they took their shields in front of them, and drew their swords, and came together eagerly, and each gave the other many strong strokes, for neither shields nor armour could hold out against their strokes. And so within a little while they both had grim wounds, and bled exceedingly badly. So they went on for two hours or more, pressing and slashing at each other, wherever they could hit any bare place.

Then at last they were both out of breath, and stood leaning on their swords.

"Now, fellow," said Sir Turquine, "hold your hand a while, and answer what I ask you."

"Say on."

Then Turquine said, "You are the biggest man I ever met, and the one with the best wind, and like one knight I hate above all other knights. So as long as you are not he, I will gladly make peace with you, and for your sake I will free all the prisoners I have, which is sixty-four, as long as you will tell me your name. And you and I will be companions together, and I will never fail you as long as I live."

"Well said," said Sir Lancelot. "But since I may have your friendship on those terms, what knight is it that you hate so much above all others?"

"In good faith," said Sir Turquine, "his name is Sir Lancelot du Lake, for he killed my brother, Sir Carados, at the Dolorous Tower, who was one of the best knights alive. And so I except him out of all knights; for if I can once meet him, one of us will make an end of the other, I swear it. And for Sir Lancelot's sake I have killed a hundred good knights, and maimed as many so utterly that they could never help themselves afterwards, and many have died in prison. And I still have sixty-four, and all shall be freed, as long as you will tell me your name, provided you are not Sir Lancelot."

"Now I see well," said Sir Lancelot, "that if I were one kind of man I might have peace, and if I were another, there would be war to the death between us. And now, sir knight, at your request I want you to know for certain that I am Lancelot du Lake, King Ban's son of Benwick, and a true knight of the Round Table. And now I defy you, and do your worst."

"Ah," said Turquine, "Lancelot, you are the most welcome to me of any knight there ever was, for we shall never part until one of us is dead."

Then they crashed together like two wild bulls, rushing and lashing with their shields and swords, so that sometimes they both fell flat on their faces. So they fought on for two hours and more, and would never rest, and Sir Turquine gave Sir Lancelot many wounds, so that all the ground where they fought was spattered with blood.
