Chapter 9: How Sir Turquine was slain, and how Sir Lancelot told Sir Gaheris to free all the prisoners

Then at last Sir Turquine grew faint, and gave back somewhat, and held his shield low out of weariness. Sir Lancelot saw that, and leapt on him fiercely and got him by the visor of his helmet, and pulled him down on his knees, and at once he tore off his helmet, and struck his neck in two. And when Sir Lancelot had done this, he went to the damsel and said, "Damsel, I am ready to go with you wherever you want me, but I have no horse."

"Fair sir," said she, "take this wounded knight's horse, and send him into this manor, and command him to free all the prisoners."

So Sir Lancelot went to Gaheris, and begged him not to take it badly if he borrowed his horse.

"No, fair lord," said Gaheris, "I want you to take my horse to do with as you please, for you have saved both me and my horse. And this day I say you are the best knight in the world, for today, before my eyes, you have killed the mightiest man and the best knight, except you, that I ever saw. And, fair sir," said Gaheris, "I beg you, tell me your name."

"Sir, my name is Sir Lancelot du Lake, who ought by rights to help you for King Arthur's sake, and above all for the sake of my lord Sir Gawain, your own dear brother. And when you go into that manor over there, I am sure you will find many knights of the Round Table there, for I have seen many of their shields that I know on that tree over there. There is Kay's shield, and Sir Brandel's shield, and Sir Marhaus' shield, and Sir Galind's shield, and Sir Brian de Listnois' shield, and Sir Aliduke's shield, with many more that I can't call to mind now, and also my two brothers' shields, Sir Ector de Maris and Sir Lionel. So I beg you, greet them all from me, and say that I tell them to take whatever goods they find there, and that by all means my brothers are to go to the court and wait for me there until I come; for I mean to be there by the feast of Pentecost. For at this time I must ride with this damsel, to keep my promise."

And so he left Gaheris, and Gaheris went into the manor, and there he found a yeoman porter keeping many keys there. At once Sir Gaheris threw the porter to the ground and took the keys from him, and quickly he opened the prison door, and there he let out all the prisoners, and every man loosed the others from their bonds. And when they saw Sir Gaheris, they all thanked him, for they thought, since he was wounded, that it was he who had done it.

"Not so," said Gaheris. "It was Lancelot who killed him, honourably, with his own hands. I saw it with my own eyes. And he sends you all his greetings, and begs you to hurry to the court; and as for Sir Lionel and Ector de Maris, he begs you to wait for him at the court."

"That we will not do," say his brothers. "We will find him, if we live."

"So will I," said Sir Kay. "I will find him before I come to the court, as I am a true knight."

Then all those knights looked for the house where the armour was, and then they armed themselves, and every knight found his own horse, and everything that belonged to him. And when this was done, a forester came with four horses loaded with fat venison.

At once Sir Kay said, "Here is good food for us for one meal, for we haven't had a good meal for many a day."

And so that venison was roasted, baked and boiled. And so after supper some stayed there all night, but Sir Lionel and Ector de Maris and Sir Kay rode after Sir Lancelot, to find him if they could.
