Chapter 10: How Sir Lancelot rode with a damsel and slew a knight who preyed on all ladies, and also a low-born man who guarded a bridge

Now we turn to Sir Lancelot, who rode with the damsel along a fine highway.

"Sir," said the damsel, "along this road there haunts a knight who preys on all ladies and gentlewomen, and at the very least he robs them or lies with them."

"What?" said Sir Lancelot. "Is he a thief and a knight and a ravisher of women? He brings shame on the order of knighthood, and goes against his oath; it is a pity that he is alive. But, fair damsel, you ride on ahead by yourself, and I will keep myself under cover, and if he troubles you or harms you I will come to your rescue and teach him to behave like a knight."

So the maiden rode on along the road at a soft ambling pace, and after a while that knight came out of the wood on horseback, with his page beside him, and there he pulled the damsel from her horse, and then she cried out. With that Lancelot came as fast as he could until he reached that knight, saying, "You false knight, you traitor to knighthood, who taught you to prey on ladies and gentlewomen?"

When the knight saw Sir Lancelot rebuking him like this he did not answer, but drew his sword and rode at Sir Lancelot. And Sir Lancelot threw his spear away from him, and drew out his sword, and struck him such a blow on the helmet that he split his head and neck down to the throat.

"Now you have the payment you have long deserved!"

"That is true," said the damsel. "For just as Sir Turquine lay in wait to destroy knights, so this knight lay in wait to destroy and harm ladies, damsels and gentlewomen, and his name was Sir Peris de Forest Savage."

"Now, damsel," said Sir Lancelot, "do you want any more service from me?"

"No, sir," she said, "not at this time. But may almighty Jesus keep you wherever you ride or walk, for you are the most courteous knight, and the gentlest to all ladies and gentlewomen, of any now alive. But one thing, sir knight, I think you lack, you who are a knight without a wife: that you will not love some maiden or gentlewoman. For I never heard it said that you loved anyone at all, of any rank, and that is a great pity. But it is rumoured that you love Queen Guinevere, and that she has arranged by enchantment that you shall never love anyone but her, and that no other damsel or lady shall ever make you glad; and for that reason many in this land, of high rank and low, grieve greatly."

"Fair damsel," said Sir Lancelot, "I cannot stop people saying whatever they please about me. But as for being a married man, I do not intend it; for then I would have to lie with her, and give up arms and tournaments, battles and adventures. And as for taking my pleasure with lovers, that I refuse above all for fear of God. For knights who are adulterous or lecherous will not be lucky or fortunate in war: either they will be overcome by a lesser knight than themselves, or else, through ill luck and their own wickedness, they will kill better men than themselves. And so whoever keeps lovers will be unlucky, and everything around them is unlucky."

And so Sir Lancelot and she parted. And then he rode in a deep forest for two days and more, and had poor lodging. So on the third day he rode over a long bridge, and there a very ugly peasant leapt out at him suddenly, and struck his horse on the nose so that it turned around, and asked him why he was riding over that bridge without his permission.

"Why shouldn't I ride this way?" said Sir Lancelot. "I cannot ride round it."

"You don't get to choose," said the peasant, and swung at him with a great club shod with iron.

Then Sir Lancelot drew his sword and beat the blow aside, and split his head down to the chest. At the end of the bridge was a fine village, and all the people, men and women, cried out at Sir Lancelot, and said, "You never did a worse deed for yourself, for you have killed the chief porter of our castle."

Sir Lancelot let them say what they liked, and he went straight into the castle. And when he came into the castle he dismounted, and tied his horse to a ring on the wall, and there he saw a fine green courtyard, and he made his way there, for he thought it was a good place to fight in. So he looked about, and saw many people in doorways and windows, who said, "Fair knight, you are out of luck."
