Chapter 11: How Sir Lancelot slew two giants, and set a castle free

At that very moment two great giants came at him, well armed all except their heads, with two horrible clubs in their hands. Sir Lancelot put his shield in front of him and turned aside the blow of one giant, and with his sword he split his head in two. When his fellow saw that, he ran away as if he were mad, for fear of those horrible strokes, and Lancelot went after him with all his might, and struck him on the shoulder, and split him down to the navel. Then Sir Lancelot went into the hall, and there came before him sixty ladies and damsels, and they all knelt to him, and thanked God and him for their deliverance.

"For, sir," they said, "most of us have been their prisoners here these seven years, and we have worked all kinds of silk work for our food, and we are all gentlewomen of high birth. And blessed be the time, knight, that ever you were born, for you have done the most honourable deed that ever a knight did in this world, and we will bear witness to that. And we all beg you to tell us your name, so that we can tell our friends who freed us from prison."

"Fair damsels," he said, "my name is Sir Lancelot du Lake."

"Ah, sir," they all said, "you may well be he, for we judged that no knight but you could ever get the better of these two giants. For many good knights have tried it, and ended here, and many times we have wished for you, and these two giants feared no knight but you."

"Now you may tell your friends," said Sir Lancelot, "how you were freed and who freed you, and greet them all from me. And if I come into any of your lands, give me such welcome as you have cause to. And whatever treasure there is in this castle I give it to you as a reward for your suffering. And as for the lord who owns this castle, I would have him receive it, as is right."

"Fair sir," they said, "the name of this castle is Tintagil, and a duke once owned it who had married the fair Igraine, and after him Uther Pendragon married her, and fathered Arthur on her."

"Well," said Sir Lancelot, "I understand who this castle belongs to." And so he left them, and commended them to God.

And then he mounted his horse, and rode into many strange and wild countries, and through many rivers and valleys, and he was badly lodged. And at last, as luck would have it, towards nightfall he came to a fine house with a courtyard, and there he found an old gentlewoman who lodged him gladly, and there he was well looked after, he and his horse. And when it was time, his host brought him to a fine room in the garret, over the gate, to his bed. There Sir Lancelot took off his armour, and set it beside him, and went to bed, and he fell asleep at once. So soon afterwards someone came on horseback and knocked at the gate in great haste. And when Sir Lancelot heard this, he got up and looked out of the window, and saw by the moonlight three knights come riding after that one man, and all three laid into him at once with swords, and that one knight turned on them again like a true knight, and defended himself.

"Truly," said Sir Lancelot, "I will help that one knight, for it would be a shame for me to watch three knights on one, and if he is killed I am a partner in his death."

And with that he took his armour, and went out of the window, down a sheet, to the four knights. And then Sir Lancelot said loudly, "Turn to me, knights, and leave off fighting that knight."

And then all three of them left Sir Kay, and turned on Sir Lancelot, and there a great battle began, for all three dismounted, and struck many great blows at Sir Lancelot, and attacked him on every side. Then Sir Kay got ready to help Sir Lancelot.

"No, sir," he said, "I want none of your help. So if you want my help, leave me alone with them."

Sir Kay, to please the knight, let him have his way, and so stood aside. And then, within six strokes, Sir Lancelot had struck them to the ground.

And then all three of them cried, "Sir knight, we yield to you, as a man of might without equal."

"As to that," said Sir Lancelot, "I will not accept your surrender to me. But if you will yield to Sir Kay the Seneschal, on that condition I will spare your lives, and not otherwise."

"Fair knight," they said, "we would be loath to do that. For as for Sir Kay, we chased him here, and would have overcome him if it had not been for you; so to yield to him would make no sense."

"Well, as to that," said Lancelot, "think it over carefully, for you may choose whether you will die or live. For if you yield, it shall be to Sir Kay."

"Fair knight," they said then, "to save our lives we will do as you command us."

"Then," said Sir Lancelot, "on Whitsunday next you shall go to the court of King Arthur, and there you shall yield to Queen Guinevere, and put all three of you at her grace and mercy, and say that Sir Kay sent you there to be her prisoners."

"Sir," they said, "it shall be done, on our lives, if we are still living." And there every knight swore it upon his sword.

And so Sir Lancelot let them go. And then Sir Lancelot knocked at the gate with the pommel of his sword, and with that his host came, and Sir Kay and he went in.

"Sir," said his host, "I thought you were in your bed."

"So I was," said Sir Lancelot, "but I got up and leapt out of my window to help an old comrade of mine."

And so when they came near the light, Sir Kay saw clearly that it was Sir Lancelot, and with that he knelt down and thanked him for all his kindness, for he had saved him from death twice.

"Sir," he said, "I have done nothing but what I ought to do, and you are welcome, and here you shall rest and take your ease."

So when Sir Kay had taken off his armour, he asked for food; so food was fetched for him, and he ate heartily. And when he had had supper they went to bed, and were lodged together in one bed. In the morning Sir Lancelot got up early, and left Sir Kay sleeping, and Sir Lancelot took Sir Kay's armour and his shield, and armed himself, and so he went to the stable, and took his horse, and took his leave of his host, and so he left. Then soon afterwards Sir Kay got up and missed Sir Lancelot. And then he saw that he had his armour and his horse.

"Now, on my faith, I know well that he will trouble some of King Arthur's court; for knights will be bold with him, and think that it is me, and that will deceive them. And because of his armour and shield I am sure I shall ride in peace."

And then soon afterwards Sir Kay left, and thanked his host.
