Chapter 12: How Sir Lancelot rode disguised in Sir Kay's armour, and how he struck down a knight

Now we turn to Sir Lancelot, who had ridden a long way through a great forest, and at last he came into low country, full of fine rivers and meadows. And ahead of him he saw a long bridge, and three tents stood on it, of silks of various kinds and colours. And outside the tents hung three white shields on the shafts of spears, and great long spears stood upright by the tents, and at the door of every tent stood three lively squires. And so Sir Lancelot passed by them and said not a word. When he had passed, the three knights said to each other that it was the proud Kay.

"He thinks no knight is as good as he is, and the opposite is often proved."

"On my faith," said one of the knights (his name was Sir Gaunter), "I will ride after him and test him for all his pride, and you can watch how I get on."

So this knight, Sir Gaunter, armed himself, and hung his shield on his shoulder, and mounted a great horse, and took his spear in his hand, and galloped after Sir Lancelot. And when he came near him, he cried, "Stop, you proud knight Sir Kay, for you shall not get away free."

So Sir Lancelot turned, and each of them set his spear in rest, and they came together with all their might. And Sir Gaunter's spear broke, but Sir Lancelot struck him down, horse and man. And when Sir Gaunter was on the ground his brothers said to each other, "That knight is not Sir Kay, for he is bigger than he is."

"I'll bet my head," said Sir Gilmere, "that knight has killed Sir Kay and taken his horse and his armour."

"Whether it is so or not," said Sir Raynold, the third brother, "let us mount our horses now and rescue our brother Sir Gaunter, on pain of death. We shall all have work enough to match that knight, for by the look of him I think it is Sir Lancelot, or Sir Tristram, or Sir Pelleas, the good knight."

Then at once they took their horses and overtook Sir Lancelot. And Sir Gilmere put out his spear and ran at Sir Lancelot, and Sir Lancelot struck him down so that he lay in a faint.

"Sir knight," said Sir Raynold, "you are a strong man, and as I suppose you have killed my two brothers, and for that my heart rises hard against you. And if I could do it with honour I would not fight you, but I must take my part as they did. And so, knight," he said, "defend yourself."

And so they crashed together with all their might, and both their spears shattered to pieces. And then they drew their swords and laid into each other fiercely. Then at once Sir Gaunter got up, and came to his brother Sir Gilmere, and said to him, "Get up, and let us help our brother Sir Raynold, who is fighting that good knight over there with marvellous skill."

With that they leapt on their horses and charged at Sir Lancelot. And when he saw them coming he struck a hard blow at Sir Raynold, so that he fell off his horse to the ground, and then he struck at the other two brothers, and with two strokes he struck them down to the ground. With that Sir Raynold began to get up, with his head all bloody, and came straight at Sir Lancelot.

"Now let it be," said Sir Lancelot. "I was not far from you when you were made a knight, Sir Raynold, and I also know you are a good knight, and I would be loath to kill you."

"Many thanks," said Sir Raynold, "for your kindness. And I dare say, for me and my brothers, that we would not be loath to yield to you, provided we knew your name, for we know well you are not Sir Kay."

"As for that, let it be as it may, for you shall yield yourselves to Dame Guinevere. And see that you are with her on Whitsunday, and yield to her as prisoners, and say that Sir Kay sent you to her."

Then they swore it would be done, and so Sir Lancelot went on his way, and each of the brothers helped the others as well as he could.
