Chapter 13: How Sir Lancelot jousted against four knights of the Round Table and unhorsed them

So Sir Lancelot rode into a deep forest, and there in a little valley he saw four knights waiting on their horses under an oak, and they were of Arthur's court: one was Sir Sagramour le Desirous, and Ector de Maris, and Sir Gawain, and Sir Uwain. As soon as these four knights saw Sir Lancelot, they thought from his arms that it was Sir Kay.

"Now, on my faith," said Sir Sagramour, "I will test Sir Kay's strength." And he took his spear in his hand, and came towards Sir Lancelot.

Sir Lancelot saw him coming and knew him well, and set his spear in rest against him, and struck Sir Sagramour so hard that horse and man both fell to the ground.

"Look, my fellows," said he, "you can see what a blow he has there; that knight is much bigger than Sir Kay ever was. Now you shall see what I can do to him."

So Sir Ector took his spear in his hand and galloped towards Sir Lancelot, and Sir Lancelot struck him through the shield and shoulder, so that man and horse went to the ground, and still his spear held.

"On my faith," said Sir Uwain, "that is a strong knight, and I am sure he has killed Sir Kay; and I can see by his great strength that he will be hard to match."

And with that Sir Uwain took his spear in his hand and rode towards Sir Lancelot. And Sir Lancelot knew him well, and so he met him on the open ground, and gave him such a blow that he was stunned, so that for a long while he did not know where he was.

"Now I see clearly," said Sir Gawain, "that I must take on that knight."

Then he set his shield and took a good spear in his hand, and Sir Lancelot knew him well. And then they let their horses run with all their might, and each knight struck the other in the middle of the shield. But Sir Gawain's spear burst apart, and Sir Lancelot came down on him so hard that his horse went over upside down. And Sir Gawain had great trouble getting clear of his horse. And so Sir Lancelot rode on at a walk and smiled, and said, "God give joy to the man who made this spear, for there never came a better one into my hand."

Then the four knights went to each other and comforted each other.

"What do you make of this deed?" said Sir Gawain. "One spear has felled all four of us."

"We commend him to the devil," they all said, "for he is a man of great might."

"You may well say that he is a man of might," said Sir Gawain, "for I'll bet my head it is Sir Lancelot; I know him by his riding. Let him go," said Sir Gawain, "for when we come to the court then we shall know."

And then they had great trouble catching their horses again.
