Chapter 14: How Sir Lancelot followed a hound into a castle, where he found a dead knight, and how afterwards a damsel asked him to heal her brother

Now we leave that and speak of Sir Lancelot, who rode a long while in a deep forest, where he saw a black hound, casting about as if she were on the track of a wounded deer. And with that he rode after the hound, and he saw a large trail of blood lying on the ground. And then Sir Lancelot rode after her. And all the while the hound looked behind her, and so she went through a great marsh, and all the while Sir Lancelot followed. And then he caught sight of an old manor house, and the hound ran there, and so over the bridge. So Sir Lancelot rode over that bridge, which was old and weak; and when he came into the middle of a great hall, there he saw a dead knight lying, who was a handsome man, and the hound was licking his wounds. And with that a lady came out weeping and wringing her hands, and then she said, "O knight, you have brought me too much sorrow."

"Why do you say so?" said Sir Lancelot. "I never did this knight any harm, for this hound brought me here by the trail of blood. And so, fair lady, do not be displeased with me, for I am deeply grieved at your grief."

"Truly, sir," she said, "I believe it is not you who killed my husband, for the man who did that deed is badly wounded, and he is never likely to recover, I can promise him that."

"What was your husband's name?" said Sir Lancelot.

"Sir," she said, "his name was Sir Gilbert the Bastard, one of the best knights in the world, and I do not know the name of the man who killed him."

"Now God send you better comfort," said Sir Lancelot.

And so he left and went into the forest again, and there he met a damsel who knew him well, and she said aloud, "Well met, my lord! And now I beg you, on your knighthood, help my brother, who is badly wounded and never stops bleeding. For today he fought with Sir Gilbert the Bastard and killed him in fair fight, and there my brother was badly wounded. And there is a lady, a sorceress, who lives in a castle near here, and today she told me my brother's wounds would never be healed until I could find a knight who would go into the Chapel Perilous. And there he would find a sword, and a bloody cloth that the wounded knight was wrapped in, and a piece of that cloth and the sword would heal my brother's wounds, provided his wounds were touched with the sword and the cloth."

"This is a marvellous thing," said Sir Lancelot, "but what is your brother's name?"

"Sir," she said, "his name is Sir Meliot de Logres."

"I am sorry to hear it," said Sir Lancelot, "for he is a fellow of the Round Table, and I will do all in my power to help him."

"Then, sir," she said, "follow this highway straight on, and it will bring you to the Chapel Perilous. And I will wait here until God sends you back here again. And unless you succeed, I know no knight alive who can achieve that adventure."
