Chapter 15: How Sir Lancelot came into the Chapel Perilous and took from a dead body there a piece of its cloth and a sword

Right away Sir Lancelot left, and when he came to the Chapel Perilous he dismounted, and tied his horse to a little gate. And as soon as he was inside the churchyard he saw on the front of the chapel many fine rich shields turned upside down, and many of those shields Sir Lancelot had seen knights carry before. With that he saw standing near him some thirty great knights, taller by a yard than any man he had ever seen, and all of them grinned and gnashed their teeth at Sir Lancelot. And when he saw their faces he was badly afraid, and so he put his shield in front of him, and took his sword in his hand, ready for battle. And they were all armed in black armour, ready, with their shields and their swords drawn. And when Sir Lancelot went to pass through them, they scattered on every side of him, and gave him the way. And with that he grew bold, and went into the chapel, and then he saw no light but a dim lamp burning, and then he caught sight of a corpse covered with a silk cloth. Then Sir Lancelot stooped down, and cut away a piece of that cloth, and then the ground under him shook as if the earth had quaked a little, and at that he was afraid. And then he saw a fine sword lying by the dead knight, and he took it in his hand and hurried out of the chapel.

As soon as he was in the chapel yard all the knights spoke to him in a grim voice, and said, "Knight, Sir Lancelot, put that sword down or else you will die."

"Whether I live or die," said Sir Lancelot, "you won't get it back with big words. So fight for it, if you want it."

Then right away he passed through them, and beyond the chapel yard a fair damsel met him, and said, "Sir Lancelot, leave that sword behind you, or you will die for it."

"I will not leave it," said Sir Lancelot, "for any pleading."

"No," she said. "If you left that sword, you would never see Queen Guinevere again."

"Then I would be a fool if I left this sword," said Lancelot.

"Now, noble knight," said the damsel, "I beg you to kiss me, just once."

"No," said Sir Lancelot, "God forbid."

"Well, sir," she said, "if you had kissed me, the days of your life would have been over. But now, alas," she said, "I have lost all my labour, for I made this chapel for your sake, and for Sir Gawain's. And once I had Sir Gawain in here, and at that time he fought with that knight who lies dead there in the chapel, Sir Gilbert the Bastard; and at that time he struck the left hand off Sir Gilbert the Bastard. And, Sir Lancelot, now I tell you, I have loved you these seven years, but no woman may have your love except Queen Guinevere. But since I could not have the joy of your body alive, I had no other joy left in this world but to have your body dead. Then I would have embalmed it and tended it, and so kept it all the days of my life, and every day I would have embraced you and kissed you, in spite of Queen Guinevere."

"You speak plainly," said Sir Lancelot. "Jesus keep me from your cunning arts."

And with that he took his horse and so left her. And as the book says, when Sir Lancelot had gone she took such grief that she died within a fortnight, and her name was Hellawes the sorceress, Lady of the Castle Nigramous.

At once Sir Lancelot met the damsel, Sir Meliot's sister. And when she saw him she clapped her hands, and wept for joy. And then they rode to a castle near by where Sir Meliot lay. And as soon as Sir Lancelot saw him he knew him, but he was exceedingly pale, the colour of earth, from bleeding. When Sir Meliot saw Sir Lancelot he went down on his knees and cried aloud, "O lord Sir Lancelot, help me!"

At once Sir Lancelot leapt to him and touched his wounds with Sir Gilbert's sword. And then he wiped his wounds with a piece of the bloody cloth that Sir Gilbert was wrapped in, and at once he was a more whole man than he had ever been in his life. And then there was great joy between them, and they gave Sir Lancelot all the welcome they could. And so in the morning Sir Lancelot took his leave, and told Sir Meliot to hurry to the court of my lord Arthur, "for it is getting near the Feast of Pentecost, and there, by the grace of God, you shall find me."

And with that they parted.
