Chapter 16: How Sir Lancelot, at a lady's request, recovered a falcon, and how he was tricked by it

And so Sir Lancelot rode through many strange countries, over marshes and valleys, until by chance he came to a fine castle. And as he passed beyond the castle he thought he heard two bells ring. And then he caught sight of a falcon flying over his head towards a high elm, with long leashes about her feet. And as she flew to the elm to take her perch, the leashes wound themselves around a bough. And when she tried to take flight she hung fast by the legs. And Sir Lancelot saw how she hung, and looked at the beautiful peregrine falcon, and he was sorry for her.

Meanwhile a lady came out of the castle and cried aloud, "O Lancelot, Lancelot, as you are the flower of all knights, help me get my hawk back! For if my hawk is lost my lord will destroy me. For I had charge of the hawk and she slipped away from me, and if my lord my husband learns of it, he is so hot-tempered that he will kill me."

"What is your lord's name?" said Sir Lancelot.

"Sir," she said, "his name is Sir Phelot, a knight who serves the King of North Wales."

"Well, fair lady, since you know my name, and ask me on my knighthood to help you, I will do what I can to get your hawk. And yet God knows I am a poor climber, and the tree is exceedingly high, and there are few boughs to help me."

And with that Sir Lancelot dismounted, and tied his horse to the same tree, and asked the lady to take off his armour. And so when his armour was off, he took off all his clothes down to his shirt and breeches, and with might and main he climbed up to the falcon, and tied the leashes to a big rotten branch, and threw the hawk down, and the branch with her.

At once the lady caught the hawk in her hand. And with that Sir Phelot, her husband, suddenly came out of the trees, fully armed and with his naked sword in his hand, and said, "Well, knight Lancelot, now I have found you just as I wanted you." And he stood at the trunk of the tree to kill him.

"Ah, lady," said Sir Lancelot, "why have you betrayed me?"

"She has done only what I ordered her to," said Sir Phelot, "and so there's no help for it: your hour has come, and you must die."

"That would be a shame to you," said Sir Lancelot, "you, an armed knight, killing a naked man by treachery."

"You'll get no other mercy," said Sir Phelot, "so save yourself if you can."

"Truly," said Sir Lancelot, "this will be your shame. But since you will do nothing else, take my armour with you, and hang my sword on a bough where I can get it, and then do your best to kill me if you can."

"No, no," said Sir Phelot, "for I know you better than you think. So you get no weapon, if I can keep you from it."

"Alas," said Sir Lancelot, "that ever a knight should die without a weapon!"

And with that he looked above him and below him, and over his head he saw a big leafless bough, and with that he broke it off at the trunk. And then he came lower and watched where his own horse stood, and suddenly he leapt down on the far side of the horse, away from the knight. And then Sir Phelot swung at him fiercely, meaning to kill him. But Sir Lancelot turned the stroke aside with the bough, and with it he struck him on the side of the head, so that he fell down to the ground in a faint. So then Sir Lancelot took his sword out of his hand, and struck his head from his body.

Then the lady cried, "Alas! Why have you killed my husband?"

"I am not the cause of it," said Sir Lancelot, "for you would have killed me by treachery and falsehood, and now it has fallen on you both."

And then she fainted as if she would die. And with that Sir Lancelot got all his armour together as well as he could, and put it on, for fear more men would come, since he was afraid because the knight's castle was so near. And so, as soon as he could, he took his horse and left, and thanked God that he had come safely through that adventure.
