Chapter 17: How Sir Lancelot overtook a knight who was chasing his wife to kill her, and what he said to him

So Sir Lancelot rode many wild ways, through borderlands and many wild ways. And as he rode in a valley he saw a knight chasing a lady with a naked sword, to kill her. And by chance, just as this knight was about to kill this lady, she called on Sir Lancelot and begged him to rescue her. When Sir Lancelot saw that wickedness, he took his horse and rode between them, saying, "Knight, shame on you, why would you kill this lady? You bring shame on yourself and on all knights."

"What business have you between me and my wife?" said the knight. "I'll kill her, whether you like it or not."

"That you shall not," said Sir Lancelot, "for sooner than that, we two will fight."

"Sir Lancelot," said the knight, "you are not doing right, for this lady has betrayed me."

"It is not so," said the lady. "Truly he wrongs me. Because I love and cherish my first cousin, he is jealous of him and me; and as I shall answer to God, there was never any sin between us. But, sir," said the lady, "as you are called the most honourable knight in the world, I beg you by true knighthood, keep me and save me. For whatever you say, he will kill me, for he has no mercy."

"Have no fear," said Lancelot. "It shall not be in his power."

"Sir," said the knight, "in your sight I will be ruled as you wish."

And so Sir Lancelot rode on one side and she on the other. He had only ridden a little while when the knight told Sir Lancelot to turn and look behind him, and said, "Sir, there are men-at-arms riding after us over there."

And so Sir Lancelot turned, suspecting no treachery, and with that the knight was on the same side as the lady, and suddenly he struck off his lady's head.

And when Sir Lancelot saw what he had done, he cried out and called him, "Traitor, you have shamed me for ever!"

And at once Sir Lancelot dismounted from his horse, and pulled out his sword to kill him. And with that the knight threw himself flat on the ground, and gripped Sir Lancelot by the thighs, and begged for mercy.

"Shame on you," said Sir Lancelot. "You shameful knight, you can have no mercy. So get up and fight me."

"No," said the knight, "I will never get up until you grant me mercy."

"Now I'll make you a fair offer," said Lancelot. "I will take off my armour down to my shirt, and I will have nothing on me but my shirt, and my sword in my hand. And if you can kill me, you go free for ever."

"No, sir," said Pedivere, "that I will never do."

"Well," said Sir Lancelot, "take this lady and the head, and carry it on you; and here you shall swear on my sword to carry it always on your back, and never to rest until you come to Queen Guinevere."

"Sir," he said, "I will do that, on my life."

"Now," said Lancelot, "tell me, what is your name?"

"Sir, my name is Pedivere."

"In a shameful hour you were born," said Lancelot.

So Pedivere left with the dead lady and the head, and found the queen with King Arthur at Winchester, and there he told the whole truth.

"Sir knight," said the queen, "this is a horrible deed and a shameful one, and a great reproach to Sir Lancelot; and yet his honour is known in many different lands. But this I will give you as penance; make whatever shift you can: you shall carry this lady with you on horseback to the Pope of Rome, and receive your penance from him for your foul deeds. And you shall never rest two nights in the same place; and if you go to any bed, the dead body shall lie with you."

There he swore this oath, and so left. And as the French book tells it, when he came to Rome the Pope told him to go back to Queen Guinevere, and his lady was buried in Rome by the Pope's command. And after this Sir Pedivere turned to great goodness, and was a holy man and a hermit.
