Chapter 18: How Sir Lancelot came to King Arthur's court, and how all his noble feats and deeds were recounted there

Now we turn to Sir Lancelot du Lake, who came home two days before the Feast of Pentecost; and the king and all the court were exceedingly glad of his coming. And when Sir Gawain, Sir Uwain, Sir Sagramour and Sir Ector de Maris saw Sir Lancelot in Kay's armour, then they knew for certain it was he who had struck them all down with one spear. Then there was laughing and smiling among them. And every now and then all the knights whom Sir Turquine had held prisoner came home, and they all honoured Sir Lancelot and praised him.

When Sir Gaheris heard them speak, he said, "I saw the whole battle from beginning to end." And there he told King Arthur exactly how it had gone, and how Sir Turquine was the strongest knight he had ever seen except Sir Lancelot; and there were many knights to bear him witness, nearly sixty. Then Sir Kay told the king how Sir Lancelot had rescued him when he would have been killed, "and how he made the knights yield to me, and not to him." And there they were, all three, and bore witness to it.

"And by Jesus," said Sir Kay, "because Sir Lancelot took my armour and left me his, I rode in perfect peace, and no man would fight me."

Then at once the three knights who had fought with Sir Lancelot at the long bridge came in. And there they yielded themselves to Sir Kay, and Sir Kay refused them, and said he had never fought with them.

"But I will set your hearts at ease," said Sir Kay. "That is Sir Lancelot over there, who overcame you."

When they knew that, they were glad. And then Sir Meliot de Logres came home, and told the king how Sir Lancelot had saved him from death. And all his deeds were made known: how four queens, sorceresses, had held him in prison, and how he was freed by King Bagdemagus's daughter. Also all the great deeds of arms that Sir Lancelot did between the two kings were told, that is to say the King of North Wales and King Bagdemagus. Sir Gahalantine told the whole truth of it, and Sir Mador de la Porte and Sir Mordred, for they were at that same tournament. Then the lady came in who had known Sir Lancelot when he wounded Sir Belleus at the tent. And there, at Sir Lancelot's request, Sir Belleus was made a knight of the Round Table. And so at that time Sir Lancelot had the greatest name of any knight in the world, and he was the most honoured by high and low.

Here ends the noble tale of Sir Lancelot du Lake, which is the sixth book.

Here follows the tale of Sir Gareth of Orkney, who was called Beaumains by Sir Kay, and is the seventh book.
