Chapter 1: How Beaumains came to King Arthur's court and asked three favours of King Arthur

When Arthur held his Round Table at its fullest, it happened that he commanded the high feast of Pentecost to be held at a city and a castle which in those days was called Kynke Kenadonne, on the sands that bordered on Wales. Now the king always had a custom that at the feast of Pentecost especially, above all the other feasts in the year, he would not go to his meal that day until he had heard of or seen some great marvel. And because of that custom all kinds of strange adventures came before Arthur at that feast more than at any other. And so Sir Gawain, a little before noon on the day of Pentecost, saw from a window three men on horseback, and a dwarf on foot. And the three men dismounted, and the dwarf held their horses, and one of the three men was taller than the other two by a foot and a half. Then Sir Gawain went to the king and said, "Sir, go to your meal, for strange adventures are close at hand."

So Arthur went to his meal with many other kings. And all the knights of the Round Table were there, except only those who were prisoners or had been killed in some encounter. For at the high feast they were always to make up the whole number of a hundred and fifty, for then the Round Table was complete.

Just then there came into the hall two men, well equipped and richly dressed, and on their shoulders there leaned the handsomest and the finest young man they had ever seen. He was big and tall, and broad in the shoulders, and fine of face, and he had the fairest and the largest hands that anyone ever saw; but he behaved as though he could not walk or hold himself up unless he leaned on their shoulders. As soon as Arthur saw him there was silence, and room was made, and so they went with him up to the high dais without saying a word. Then this tall young man drew himself back, and easily stood up straight, and said, "King Arthur, God bless you and all your fair fellowship, and especially the fellowship of the Round Table. And this is why I have come here: to beg you and ask you to give me three gifts. And they shall not be unreasonably asked, but such as you may grant me honourably and with dignity, and at no great hurt or loss to you. The first gift I will ask now, and the other two I will ask a year from today, wherever you hold your high feast."

"Now ask," said Arthur, "and you shall have what you ask."

"Now, sir, this is my request for this feast: that you will give me food and drink enough for this twelvemonth, and on that day I will ask my other two gifts."

"My fair son," said Arthur, "ask for something better, I advise you, for this is only a simple request. For my heart goes out to you greatly, and tells me you come of honourable men; and my judgement is badly wrong if you do not prove a man of very great honour."

"Sir," he said, "be that as it may, I have asked what I will ask."

"Well," said the king, "you shall have food and drink enough. I never refused that to anyone, neither my friend nor my foe. But what is your name? I would like to know."

"I cannot tell you," he said.

"That is a marvel," said the king, "that you do not know your own name, and you the handsomest young man I ever saw."

Then the king handed him over to Sir Kay the steward, and ordered him to give him every kind of food and drink of the best, and to see that he had every kind of provision, as though he were a lord's son.

"There will be little need," said Sir Kay, "to go to such expense on him. For I dare swear he is a peasant born, and will never amount to anything; for if he had come of gentlefolk he would have asked you for a horse and armour, but he asks for what suits what he is. And since he has no name, I will give him one, and it shall be Beaumains, that is to say Fair-hands. And I will take him into the kitchen, and there he shall have fat broth every day, so that by the end of the twelvemonth he will be as fat as a pig fattened for pork."

With that the two men left, and left him to Sir Kay, who scorned him and mocked him.
