Chapter 2: How Sir Lancelot and Sir Gawain were angry because Sir Kay mocked Beaumains, and of a damsel who asked for a knight to fight for a lady

At this Sir Gawain was angry, and Sir Lancelot especially told Sir Kay to stop his mocking, "for I dare bet my head he will prove a man of great honour."

"Let it be," said Sir Kay. "It cannot be, by any reasoning, for he has asked for what suits what he is."

"Beware," said Sir Lancelot. "You gave the good knight Bruin le Noire, Sir Dinadan's brother, a name in the same way, and called him La Cote Male Taile, the Badly Cut Coat, and that turned to your annoyance afterwards."

"As for that," said Sir Kay, "this one will never prove anything of the kind. For Sir Bruin always wanted honour, and this one wants bread and drink and broth. On my life, he was brought up in some abbey, and however it was, they ran short of food and drink, and so he has come here for his keep."

And so Sir Kay told them to find him a place and sit him down to eat. So Beaumains went to the hall door, and sat down among the boys and lads, and there he ate steadily. And then after the meal Sir Lancelot told him to come to his room, and there he would have food and drink enough. And Sir Gawain did the same. But he refused them all; he would do nothing but what Sir Kay commanded him, whatever was offered. But as for Sir Gawain, he had reason to offer him lodging, food and drink, for that offer came from his blood, for he was closer kin to him than he knew. But what Sir Lancelot did was out of his great nobility and courtesy.

So he was put into the kitchen, and slept at night as the kitchen boys did. And so he endured all that twelvemonth, and never displeased man or child, but was always meek and mild. But whenever there was any jousting of knights, he would watch it if he could. And Sir Lancelot would always give him gold to spend, and clothes, and so would Sir Gawain. And wherever there were any contests of strength, he would be there, and no one could throw the bar or the stone within two yards of him. Then Sir Kay would say, "How do you like my kitchen boy?"

So time went on until the feast of Whitsun. And that year the king held it at Caerleon, in the most royal manner that could be, as he did every year. But the king would eat nothing on Whitsunday until he had heard of some adventure. Then a squire came to the king and said, "Sir, you may go to your meal, for here comes a damsel with some strange adventure."

Then the king was glad, and sat down. At that very moment a damsel came into the hall and greeted the king, and begged him for help.

"For whom?" said the king. "What is the adventure?"

"Sir," she said, "I serve a lady of great honour and renown, and she is besieged by a tyrant, so that she cannot get out of her castle. And because the noblest knights in the world are said to be here, I have come to you to beg you for help."

"What is your lady called, and where does she live, and who is she, and what is the name of the man who has besieged her?"

"Sir king," she said, "as for my lady's name, you shall not learn it from me at this time. But I tell you she is a lady of great honour and of great lands. And as for the tyrant who besieges her and lays waste her lands, he is called the Red Knight of the Red Launds."

"I don't know him," said the king.

"Sir," said Sir Gawain, "I know him well, for he is one of the most dangerous knights in the world. Men say he has the strength of seven men, and I once escaped from him with my life, and only barely."

"Fair damsel," said the king, "there are knights here who would do all in their power to rescue your lady. But because you will not tell her name, or where she lives, none of my knights who are here now shall go with you with my consent."

"Then I must say more," said the damsel.
