Chapter 4: How Beaumains set out, and how he won a spear and a shield from Sir Kay, and how he jousted with Sir Lancelot

But many went after him to see how well he was mounted, and his horse decked in cloth of gold; but he had neither shield nor spear. Then Sir Kay said openly in the hall, "I will ride after my kitchen boy, to find out whether he will recognise me as his better."

"Stay at home all the same," said Sir Lancelot and Sir Gawain.

So Sir Kay made himself ready and took his horse and his spear, and rode after him. And just as Beaumains caught up with the damsel, along came Sir Kay and said, "Beaumains! What, sir, don't you know me?"

Then he turned his horse, and saw it was Sir Kay, who had done him all the insults you have heard about before.

"Yes," said Beaumains, "I know you for an ill-bred knight of the court, and so beware of me."

With that Sir Kay put his spear in the rest and charged straight at him. And Beaumains came at him just as fast with his sword in his hand, and so he knocked aside his spear with his sword, and with a thrust ran him through the side, so that Sir Kay fell down as if he were dead. And Beaumains dismounted and took Sir Kay's shield and his spear, and leapt onto his own horse and rode on his way.

Sir Lancelot saw all of this, and so did the damsel. And then Beaumains told his dwarf to jump up on Sir Kay's horse, and so he did. By then Sir Lancelot had come up, and Beaumains offered to joust with him. And each of them made ready, and they came together so fiercely that each bore the other down to the earth, and they were badly bruised. Then Sir Lancelot got up and helped him clear of his horse. And then Beaumains threw his shield away from him, and offered to fight with Sir Lancelot on foot. And so they rushed together like boars, pressing and slashing and thrusting, for the space of an hour. And Sir Lancelot found him so strong that he marvelled at his strength, for he fought more like a giant than a knight, and his fighting was tireless and exceedingly dangerous. For Sir Lancelot had so much to do with him that he was afraid he would be shamed, and said, "Beaumains, don't fight so hard. Your quarrel and mine is not so great that we cannot leave off."

"Truly, that is true," said Beaumains. "But it does me good to feel your strength. And yet, my lord, I have not shown you my utmost."
