Chapter 5: How Beaumains told Sir Lancelot his name, and how he was knighted by Sir Lancelot, and afterwards caught up with the damsel

"In God's name," said Sir Lancelot, "I promise you, on my life, I had all I could do to save myself from you without shame. And so you need have no fear of any knight on earth."

"Do you really think that I could hold my own for any length of time as a proven knight?" said Beaumains.

"Yes," said Lancelot. "Do as you have done, and I will vouch for you."

"Then I beg you," said Beaumains, "give me the order of knighthood."

"Then you must tell me your name," said Lancelot, "and what family you were born of."

"Sir, I will, as long as you will not give me away," said Beaumains.

"No," said Sir Lancelot, "and I promise you that on my life, until it is openly known."

"Then, sir," he said, "my name is Gareth, and I am brother to Sir Gawain, by father and by mother."

"Ah, sir," said Sir Lancelot, "I am all the gladder of you. For I always thought you must be of great blood, and that you had not come to the court for food or for drink."

And then Sir Lancelot gave him the order of knighthood. And then Sir Gareth begged him to leave and let him go on alone.

So Sir Lancelot left him and came to Sir Kay, and had him carried home on his shield; and so he was healed, though he barely escaped with his life. And everyone scorned Sir Kay, and Sir Gawain and Sir Lancelot especially said it was not his place to rebuke any young man, for he knew very little what birth he came of, or why he had come to this court. And so we leave Sir Kay and turn to Beaumains.

When he had caught up with the damsel, at once she said, "What are you doing here? You stink of the kitchen. Your clothes are filthy with the grease and tallow you get in King Arthur's kitchen. Do you think," she said, "that I think any better of you for that knight you killed back there? No, truly, for you killed him by a fluke, and like a coward. So turn back, you filthy kitchen page. I know you well, for Sir Kay named you Beaumains. What are you but a lout, and a turner of spits, and a washer of ladles?"

"Damsel," said Beaumains, "say what you like to me, I will not leave you, whatever you say. For I have undertaken to King Arthur to achieve your adventure, and so I will finish it to the end, or die in the attempt."

"Shame on you, kitchen boy! Will you finish my adventure? You'll soon meet someone you wouldn't look in the face once for all the broth you ever swallowed."

"I will try," said Beaumains.

So as they rode in the wood, there came a man running away as fast as ever he could.

"Where are you going?" said Beaumains.

"O lord," he said, "help me! For close by here, in a little valley, there are six thieves who have taken my lord and tied him up, and I am afraid they will kill him."

"Take me there," said Beaumains.

And so they rode together until they came to where the knight lay bound. And then he rode at them, and struck one dead, and then another, and at the third stroke he killed the third thief; and then the other three fled. And he rode after them and caught them up. And then those three thieves turned round and attacked Beaumains hard, but at last he killed them, and came back and untied the knight. And the knight thanked him, and begged him to ride with him to his castle, a little way off, and he would reward him honourably for his good deeds.

"Sir," said Beaumains, "I will have no reward. I was made a knight this day by the noble Sir Lancelot, and so I will have no reward but God's. And besides, I must follow this damsel."

And when he came near her she told him to ride further off from her, "for you stink of the kitchen. Do you think I am pleased with you? For all this deed you have done was just luck. But you will see a sight that will make you turn back, and quickly too."

Then the same knight who had been rescued from the thieves rode after the damsel, and begged her to lodge with him that night. And because it was nearly night, the damsel rode with him to his castle, and there they had a warm welcome. And at supper the knight sat Sir Beaumains facing the damsel.

"Shame, shame," she said. "Sir knight, it is discourteous of you to seat a kitchen page in front of me. It would suit him better to be sticking a pig than to sit in front of a damsel of high birth."

Then the knight was ashamed at her words, and took Beaumains up and sat him at a side table, and sat himself facing him. And so all that night they had good cheer and a pleasant rest.
