Chapter 6: How Beaumains fought and slew two knights at a river crossing

And in the morning the damsel and he took their leave and thanked the knight, and so they left, and rode on their way until they came to a great forest. And there was a great river there, with only one crossing, and two knights were waiting on the far side to stop them crossing.

"What do you say?" said the damsel. "Will you take on those knights over there, or turn back?"

"No," said Sir Beaumains, "I will not turn back if there were six more of them."

And with that he rushed into the water, and in the middle of the water each of them broke his spear on the other right down to the hand. And then they drew their swords and struck fiercely at each other. And at last Sir Beaumains struck the other knight on the helmet so that his head was stunned, and with that he fell down into the water, and there he was drowned. And then Beaumains spurred his horse up onto the land, where the other knight fell upon him and broke his spear; and so they drew their swords and fought together a long time. At last Sir Beaumains split his helmet and his head down to the shoulders. And so he rode to the damsel and told her to ride on her way.

"Alas," she said, "that a kitchen page should ever have the luck to destroy two such brave knights! You think you have done bravely. That is not so. For as for the first knight, his horse stumbled, and he was drowned there in the water, and it was never by your strength or by your might. And as for the last knight, you came up behind him by bad luck, and by bad luck you killed him."

"Damsel," said Beaumains, "you may say what you like. But whoever I have to fight with, I trust to God to deal with him before he leaves. And so I care nothing for what you say, as long as I can win your lady."

"Shame, shame, you foul kitchen boy! You will see knights who will put a stop to your boasting."

"Fair damsel, speak kindly to me, and then I have no other care. For whatever knights they are, I don't care, and I am not afraid of them."

"Besides," she said, "I am saying it for your own good. You can still turn back with your honour. For if you follow me you are as good as dead, for I can see that all you do is done by chance, and not by the strength of your hands."

"Well, damsel, you may say what you like, but wherever you go I will follow you."

So this Beaumains rode with that lady until evensong time, and all the while she scolded him, and would not stop. And they came to a black clearing; and there was a black hawthorn, and on it hung a black banner, and on the other side there hung a black shield, and beside it stood a black spear, great and long, and a great black horse covered with silk, and a black stone close by.
