Chapter 7: How Beaumains fought with the Knight of the Black Launds, and fought on until the knight fell down and died

There sat a knight all armed in black armour, and his name was the Knight of the Black Launds. Then the damsel, when she saw that knight, told Beaumains to flee down the valley, for the knight's horse was not saddled.

"Many thanks," said Beaumains, "for you always want me to be a coward."

With that the Black Knight, when she came near him, spoke and said, "Damsel, have you brought this knight of King Arthur's to be your champion?"

"No, fair knight," she said, "this is only a kitchen boy who was fed in King Arthur's kitchen out of charity."

"Why does he come," said the knight, "dressed like that? It is a shame that he keeps you company."

"Sir, I cannot get rid of him," she said, "for he rides with me against my will. I wish to God you would rid me of him, or kill him if you can, for he is an ill-starred lout, and he has done ill-starred things today. By mere luck I saw him kill two knights at the river crossing; and other deeds he did before that, quite marvellous, and all by luck."

"It amazes me," said the Black Knight, "that any man of honour will fight with him."

"They don't know him," said the damsel, "and because he rides with me, they think he is some man of honourable birth."

"That may be," said the Black Knight. "Even so, though you say he is no man of honour, he is a very likely-looking fellow, and very like to be a strong man. But this much I will grant you," said the Black Knight. "I will put him down on his own two feet, and he will leave his horse and his armour with me, for it would be a shame to me to do him any more harm."

When Sir Beaumains heard him say this, he said, "Sir knight, you are very free with my horse and my armour. I tell you they cost you nothing. And whether you like it or not, I will cross this clearing in spite of you. And you'll get neither horse nor armour of mine, unless you win them with your hands. So let's see what you can do."

"Is that what you say?" said the Black Knight. "Now give up your lady, for it never suits a kitchen page to ride with such a lady."

"You lie," said Beaumains. "I am a gentleman born, and of higher lineage than you, and I will prove it on your body."

Then in great anger they drew apart on their horses, and came together like thunder. And the Black Knight's spear broke, and Beaumains thrust him through both his sides, and with that his own spear broke, and the broken shaft was left in his side. But nevertheless the Black Knight drew his sword, and struck many fierce strokes of great might, and hurt Beaumains very badly. But at last, within an hour and a half, the Black Knight fell down off his horse in a faint, and there he died. And when Beaumains saw how well he was horsed and armed, he dismounted and armed himself in his armour, and so took his horse and rode after the damsel.

When she saw him come near, she said, "Away, kitchen boy, out of the wind, for the smell of your filthy clothes sickens me. Alas," she said, "that such a lout should ever by mischance kill so good a knight as you have done! But all this is your blind luck. But close by here is one who will pay you everything you have coming. And so I still advise you: flee."

"It may happen to me," said Beaumains, "to be beaten or killed. But I warn you, fair damsel, I will not flee away, nor leave your company, for all that you can say. For you keep saying that they will kill me or beat me, but however it happens, I escape, and they lie on the ground. And so you might as well hold your tongue, rather than spend all day rebuking me like this. For I will not go away until I see the very end of this journey, or else I will be killed or soundly beaten. So ride on your way, for follow you I will, whatever happens."
