Chapter 8: How the brother of the knight who was slain met Beaumains, and fought with Beaumains until he surrendered

As they rode on together, they saw a knight come riding hard past them, all in green, both his horse and his armour. And when he came near the damsel, he asked her, "Is that my brother the Black Knight you have brought with you?"

"No, no," she said, "this ill-starred kitchen boy has killed your brother by mischance."

"Alas," said the Green Knight, "that is a great pity, that so noble a knight as he was should be killed so unluckily, and above all by a lout's hand, as you say he is. Ah, traitor!" said the Green Knight. "You will die for killing my brother. He was a very noble knight, and his name was Sir Perard."

"I defy you," said Beaumains, "for I tell you I killed him like a knight, and not shamefully."

With that the Green Knight rode to a horn that was green, and it hung on a thorn tree, and there he blew three deadly notes. And two damsels came and armed him quickly. And then he took a great horse, and a green shield, and a green spear. And then they ran together with all their might, and broke their spears right down to their hands. And then they drew their swords, and dealt many heavy strokes, and each of them wounded the other very badly. And at last, as they crossed, Beaumains drove his horse into the side of the Green Knight's horse, so that it fell to the earth. And then the Green Knight got quickly clear of his horse, and squared up on foot. Beaumains saw that, and with that he dismounted, and they rushed together like two mighty champions for a long while, and they both bled badly. With that the damsel came up and said, "My lord the Green Knight, for shame, why do you stand fighting so long with the kitchen boy? Alas, it is a shame that you were ever made a knight, to see such a lad match such a knight, as if the weed should overgrow the corn."

At that the Green Knight was ashamed, and with that he struck a great stroke with all his might, and split his shield right through. When Beaumains saw his shield split in two, he was somewhat ashamed of that stroke and of her words; and then he gave him such a blow on the helmet that he fell on his knees. And then all at once Beaumains pulled him face down on the ground. And then the Green Knight begged him for mercy, and yielded himself to Sir Beaumains, and begged him not to kill him.

"It's all in vain," said Beaumains, "for you shall die, unless this damsel who came with me asks me to save your life."

And with that he unlaced his helmet as if he meant to kill him.

"Shame on you, false kitchen page! I will never ask you to save his life, for I will never put myself so far in your power."

"Then he shall die," said Beaumains.

"Don't you dare kill him, you filthy knave," said the damsel.

"Alas," said the Green Knight, "do not let me die, when a fair word may save me. Fair knight," said the Green Knight, "save my life, and I will forgive you the death of my brother, and become your man for ever, and thirty knights who hold their lands from me shall do you service for ever."

"In the devil's name," said the damsel, "that such a filthy kitchen boy should have you and thirty knights' service!"

"Sir knight," said Beaumains, "none of this does you any good, unless my damsel speaks to me for your life."

And with that he made as if to kill him.

"Leave him be, you filthy knave," said the damsel. "Don't kill him, for if you do you'll be sorry for it."

"Damsel," said Beaumains, "your command is a pleasure to me, and at your command his life shall be saved, and not otherwise." Then he said, "Sir knight with the green arms, I set you free at this damsel's request, for I will not anger her. I will do everything she commands me."

And then the Green Knight knelt down, and did him homage with his sword.

Then the damsel said, "I am sorry, Green Knight, for your hurt, and for your brother's death, the Black Knight. For I had great need of your help, for I am badly afraid to pass through this forest."

"No, don't be afraid," said the Green Knight, "for you shall lodge with me tonight, and tomorrow I will help you through this forest."

So they took their horses and rode to his manor, which was close by.
