Chapter 9: How the damsel rebuked Beaumains again, and would not let him sit at her table, but called him kitchen boy

And all the while she rebuked Beaumains, and would not let him sit at her table; but the Green Knight took him and sat him at a side table.

"It seems a marvel to me," said the Green Knight to the damsel, "why you rebuke this noble knight as you do. For I warn you, damsel, he is a very noble knight, and I know of no knight able to match him. And so you do great wrong to rebuke him, for he will do you very good service. For whatever he makes himself out to be, you will find in the end that he comes of noble blood and of a king's lineage."

"Shame, shame," said the damsel. "It is shameful of you to speak such honour of him."

"Truly," said the Green Knight, "it would be shameful of me to speak any dishonour of him, for he has proved himself a better knight than I am. And yet I have met many knights in my day, and never before now have I found any knight his match."

And so that night they went to rest. And all that night the Green Knight had thirty knights secretly keep watch over Beaumains, to guard him against any treachery.

And so in the morning they all got up, and heard their mass and broke their fast. And then they took their horses and rode on their way, and the Green Knight escorted them through the forest. And there the Green Knight said, "My lord Beaumains, I and these thirty knights will always be at your summons, both early and late, at your call, and wherever you wish to send us."

"That is well said," said Beaumains. "When I call on you, you must yield yourself to King Arthur, and all your knights."

"If you so command us, we shall be ready at all times," said the Green Knight.

"Shame, shame on you, in the devil's name," said the damsel, "that any good knights should be obedient to a kitchen boy!"

So then the Green Knight and the damsel parted. And then she said to Beaumains, "Why are you following me, you kitchen boy? Throw away your shield and your spear, and run away. I advise you while there is still time, or very soon you'll be saying 'alas'. For if you were as strong as ever Wade was, the hero of the old songs, or Lancelot, or Tristram, or the good knight Sir Lamorak, you will not get through a pass here that is called the Pass Perilous."

"Damsel," said Beaumains, "whoever is afraid, let him run away. For it would be a shame to turn back, since I have ridden so far with you."

"Well," said the damsel, "you'll soon turn back, whether you want to or not."
