Chapter 10: How the third brother, called the Red Knight, jousted and fought against Beaumains, and how Beaumains overcame him

So within a while they saw a tower as white as any snow, with defensive openings all along its battlements, and with a double moat. And over the tower gate there hung some fifty shields of various colours, and below that tower there was a fair meadow. And in it were many knights and squires to be seen, and stands and tents; for there was to be a great tournament there the next morning. And the lord of the tower was in his castle and looked out of a window, and saw a damsel, a dwarf, and a knight armed at all points.

"So help me God," said the lord, "I will joust with that knight, for I see that he is a knight-errant."

And so he armed himself and mounted in haste. And when he was on horseback with his shield and his spear, it was all red, both his horse and his armour, and everything that belonged to him. And when he came near him he thought it was his brother the Black Knight; and then he cried aloud, "Brother, what are you doing in these borders?"

"No, no," said the damsel, "it is not he. This is only a kitchen boy who was brought up on charity in King Arthur's court."

"Nevertheless," said the Red Knight, "I will have words with him before he leaves."

"Ah," said the damsel, "this lout has killed your brother, and Sir Kay named him Beaumains, and this horse and this armour were your brother's, the Black Knight's. I also saw your brother the Green Knight beaten at his hands. Now you can be revenged on him, for I can never be rid of him."

With this the two knights drew apart, and they came together with all their might, and both their horses fell to the ground. And they got clear of their horses, and put their shields before them and drew their swords, and each gave the other steadfast strokes, now here, now there, slashing, circling, thrusting and charging like two boars, for the space of two hours. And then she cried out loud to the Red Knight, "Alas, you noble Red Knight, think what honour has followed you! Never let a kitchen boy hold out against you so long as he is doing."

Then the Red Knight grew angry and doubled his strokes, and wounded Beaumains wonderfully badly, so that the blood ran down to the ground, and it was a wonder to see that hard battle. Yet at last Sir Beaumains struck him to the ground, and as he was about to kill the Red Knight, he begged for mercy, saying, "Noble knight, do not kill me, and I will yield myself to you with fifty knights who are at my command. And I forgive you all the insult you have done me, and the death of my brother the Black Knight."

"All this is no use," said Beaumains, "unless my damsel asks me to save your life."

And with that he made as if to strike off his head.

"Stop, you Beaumains, don't kill him," said the damsel, "for he is a noble knight; and on peril of your head, don't you dare do anything but save him."

Then Beaumains told the Red Knight, "Stand up, and thank the damsel for your life now."

Then the Red Knight begged him to see his castle, and to stay there all night. So the damsel agreed to it, and there they had a merry welcome. But all the while the damsel spoke many foul words to Beaumains, at which the Red Knight marvelled greatly; and all that night the Red Knight had sixty knights watch over Beaumains, so that he should suffer no shame or dishonour. And in the morning they heard mass and dined, and the Red Knight came before Beaumains with his sixty knights, and there he offered him his homage and fealty for all time, he and his knights to do him service.

"I thank you," said Beaumains, "but this you must grant me: when I call on you, you will come before my lord King Arthur, and yield yourselves to him to be his knights."

"Sir," said the Red Knight, "I will be ready, and my company too, at your summons."

So Sir Beaumains left with the damsel, and the whole way she rode beside him scolding him in the foulest manner.
