Chapter 11: How Sir Beaumains endured great scorn from the damsel, and bore it patiently

"Damsel," said Beaumains, "you are discourteous to scold me as you do, for it seems to me I have done you good service. And all the time you threaten me that I will be beaten by the knights we meet, but for all your boasting they always end up lying in the dust or in the mud. And so I beg you, scold me no more; and when you see me beaten, or yielding and begging for my life, then you may bid me leave you in disgrace. But first I tell you this: I will not leave you, for I would be worse than a fool if I left you while I am winning honour."

"Well," she said, "very soon you'll meet a knight who will pay you all your wages, for he is the most honoured man in the world, except King Arthur."

"So much the better," said Beaumains. "The more honour he has, the more honour it will be to me to fight him."

Then at once they became aware of a city ahead of them, rich and fair. And between them and the city, a mile and a half off, there was a fair meadow that looked newly mown, and in it were many tents, fair to see.

"Look," said the damsel, "over there is a lord who owns that city, and his custom is, when the weather is fine, to camp in this meadow to joust and fight in tournaments. And there are always five hundred knights and gentlemen of arms around him, and there are all the kinds of games that any gentleman could devise."

"I would gladly see that fine lord," said Beaumains.

"You'll see him soon enough," said the damsel. And as she rode nearer she spotted the tent where he was. "Look," she said, "do you see that tent over there, that is all of the colour of Inde, a deep blue? And everything there is around it, men and women, and the horses in their trappings, the shields and spears, are all of the colour of Inde. And his name is Sir Persant of Inde, the lordliest knight you ever laid eyes on."

"That may well be," said Beaumains, "but however bold a knight he is, I will stay in this field until I see him under his shield."

"Ah, fool," she said, "you had better run while you can."

"Why?" said Beaumains. "If he is the kind of knight you make him out to be, he will not set on me with all his men, or with his five hundred knights. For if no more than one comes at a time, I will not fail him as long as my life lasts."

"Fie, fie," said the damsel, "that a stinking lout should ever make such a boast!"

"Damsel," he said, "you are to blame for scolding me so, for I would rather fight five battles than be scolded like this. Let him come, and then let him do his worst."

"Sir," she said, "I wonder what you are, and what family you come from. You speak boldly, and you have acted boldly, that I have seen. So I beg you, save yourself if you can, for your horse and you have had great hardship, and I am afraid we are staying too long away from the siege. For it is only seven miles from here, and we have passed all the perilous passages except this one only; and here I am badly afraid that you will come to some harm. So I wish you were away from here, so that you would not be bruised or hurt by this strong knight. But I tell you this: Sir Persant of Inde is nothing in might or strength compared to the knight who laid the siege around my lady."

"As for that," said Sir Beaumains, "let it be as it may. For since I have come so near this knight, I will test his might before I leave him, or else I will be shamed if I withdraw from him now. And so, damsel, have no doubt: by the grace of God I will deal with this knight in such a way that within two hours after noon I will be done with him. And then we will come to the siege by daylight."

"Oh Jesus," said the damsel, "I marvel what kind of man you are, for it can only be that you are of noble blood. For no woman ever treated a knight as foully and shamefully as I have treated you, and you have always borne it courteously, and that never came from anything but noble blood."

"Damsel," said Beaumains, "a knight is worth little who cannot bear with a damsel. For whatever you said to me, I took no notice of your words; the more you said, the more you angered me, and I took out my anger on the men I fought. And so all the abuse you heaped on me helped me in my battles, and made me think to show and prove at the end what I was. For perhaps, though I took my food in King Arthur's kitchen, I might have had food enough in other places; but I did all that to prove and test my friends, and that will be known another day. And whether I am a gentleman born or not, I tell you, fair damsel, I have done you a gentleman's service, and perhaps I will do you better service yet before I leave you."

"Alas," she said, "fair Beaumains, forgive me all that I have said or done against you."

"With all my heart," he said, "I forgive you, for you did nothing but what you should have done, for all your evil words pleased me. And damsel," said Beaumains, "since it pleases you to speak so kindly to me, believe me, it gladdens my heart greatly, and now it seems to me there is no knight living whom I am not able enough for."
