Chapter 12: How Beaumains fought Sir Persant of Inde, and made him surrender

With this Sir Persant of Inde had spotted them as they waited in the field, and in knightly fashion he sent to ask whether he came in war or in peace.

"Tell your lord," said Beaumains, "I don't care which, but let it be as he pleases himself."

So the messenger went back to Sir Persant and gave him the whole answer.

"Well then, I will fight him to the uttermost," he said. And so he made himself ready and rode against him. And Beaumains saw him and made himself ready, and there they met with all the speed their horses could run, and each broke his spear in three pieces, and their horses crashed together so hard that both horses fell dead on the ground. And swiftly they got clear of their horses and put their shields before them, and drew their swords, and gave many great strokes, so that sometimes they crashed together and fell flat on the ground. So they fought for two hours and more, until their shields and their hauberks were all hacked to pieces, and they were wounded in many places. So at last Sir Beaumains struck him through the side of the body, and then he drew back here and there, and kept up his fight in knightly fashion for a long time. And at last, loath as he was to do it, Beaumains struck Sir Persant on the top of the helm, so that he fell flat on the ground; and then he leapt on him across his body and unlaced his helm to kill him.

Then Sir Persant yielded and begged him for mercy. With that the damsel came and begged him to save his life.

"Gladly," he said, "for it would be a pity for this noble knight to die."

"Many thanks," said Persant, "noble knight and damsel. For now I know for certain it was you who killed my brother the Black Knight at the black thorn. He was a very noble knight; his name was Sir Percard. I am also sure that you are the one who beat my other brother the Green Knight; his name was Sir Pertolepe. You also beat my brother the Red Knight, Sir Perimones. And now, since you have beaten these, I will do this to please you: you shall have homage and fealty from me, and a hundred knights always at your command, to go and ride wherever you command us."

And so they went to Sir Persant's tent and drank wine and ate spiced sweets, and afterwards Sir Persant had him rest on a bed until supper time, and after supper to bed again. When Beaumains was in bed, Sir Persant had a lady, a fair daughter eighteen years old, and he called her to him and charged and commanded her, on his blessing, to go to the knight's bed and lie down by his side. "And don't be cold to him, but be warm with him, and take him in your arms and kiss him, and see that this is done, I charge you, as you want to keep my love and my good will."

So Sir Persant's daughter did as her father told her, and so she went to Sir Beaumains' bed, and undressed in secret, and lay down by him. And then he woke and saw her, and asked her who she was.

"Sir," she said, "I am Sir Persant's daughter, and I have come here by my father's command."

"Are you a maiden or a wife?" he said.

"Sir," she said, "I am a pure maiden."

"God forbid," he said, "that I should dishonour you and do Sir Persant such a shame. So, fair damsel, get out of this bed, or else I will."

"Sir," she said, "I did not come to you of my own will, but as I was commanded."

"Alas," said Sir Beaumains, "I would be a shameful knight if I did your father any dishonour." And so he kissed her, and so she left and came to Sir Persant her father, and told him everything of how she had fared.

"Truly," said Sir Persant, "whoever he is, he is of noble blood."

And so we leave them there till the morning.
