Chapter 13: Of the friendly talk between Sir Persant and Beaumains, and how he told him that his name was Sir Gareth

And so in the morning the damsel and Sir Beaumains heard mass and had breakfast, and so took their leave.

"Fair damsel," said Persant, "where are you leading this knight?"

"Sir," she said, "this knight is going to the siege that is besieging my sister in the Castle Dangerous."

"Ah, ah," said Persant, "that is the Knight of the Red Launds, the most dangerous knight I know of now living, and a man without mercy, and men say that he has the strength of seven men. God save you from that knight," he said to Beaumains, "for he does that lady a great wrong, and that is a great pity, for she is one of the fairest ladies in the world. And it seems to me that your damsel is her sister. Isn't your name Linet?" he said.

"Yes, sir," she said, "and my lady my sister's name is Dame Lionesse."

"Now I will tell you," said Sir Persant. "This Red Knight of the Red Launds has lain at the siege a long time, almost two years now, and many times he could have had her if he had wanted to. But he draws out the time for this purpose: to have Sir Lancelot du Lake fight him, or Sir Tristram, or Sir Lamorak de Galis, or Sir Gawain. And that is the reason he stays so long at the siege."

"Now, my lord Sir Persant of Inde," said the damsel Linet, "I ask you to make this gentleman a knight before ever he fights the Red Knight."

"I will with all my heart," said Sir Persant, "if it pleases him to take the order of knighthood from so simple a man as I am."

"Sir," said Beaumains, "I thank you for your good will, but I am better provided for, for the noble knight Sir Lancelot certainly made me a knight."

"Ah," said Sir Persant, "you could not have been made a knight by a more renowned knight. For of all knights he may be called the chief of knighthood. And all the world says that knighthood is clearly divided among three knights, that is, Lancelot du Lake, Sir Tristram de Liones, and Sir Lamorak de Galis: these are the ones who hold the renown now. There are many other knights, such as Sir Palomides the Saracen and Sir Safere his brother; also Sir Bleoberis and Sir Blamore de Ganis his brother; also Sir Bors de Ganis and Sir Ector de Maris and Sir Percival de Galis. These and many more are noble knights, but there are none who surpass the three I named. And so God speed you well," said Sir Persant, "for if you can match the Red Knight you will be called the fourth knight of the world."

"Sir," said Beaumains, "I would gladly be of good fame and good knighthood. And I tell you that I come of good men, for I dare say my father was a noble man. And on condition that you keep it secret, you and this damsel, I will tell you what family I come from."

"We will not give you away," they both said, "until you command us to, by the faith we owe to God."

"Truly then," he said, "my name is Gareth of Orkney, and King Lot was my father, and my mother is King Arthur's sister; her name is Dame Morgause. And Sir Gawain is my brother, and Sir Agravain and Sir Gaheris, and I am the youngest of them all. And still neither King Arthur nor Sir Gawain knows who I am."
