Chapter 14: How the besieged lady had word from her sister that she was bringing a knight to fight for her, and of the battles he had won

So the book says that the lady who was besieged had word from the dwarf that her sister was coming, and a knight with her, and how he had passed all the perilous passages.

"What kind of man is he?" said the lady.

"He is a noble knight, truly, madam," said the dwarf, "and only a young man, but he is as promising a man as you ever saw."

"Who is he?" said the lady. "And what family does he come from, and who made him a knight?"

"Madam," said the dwarf, "he is the son of the King of Orkney, but I will not tell you his name at this time. But you may be sure that he was made a knight by Sir Lancelot, for he would be made a knight by no one else; and Sir Kay named him Beaumains."

"How did he escape," said the lady, "from the brothers of Persant?"

"Madam," he said, "as a noble knight should. First he killed two brothers at a crossing of a river."

"Ah!" she said. "They were good knights, but they were murderers. One was called Gherard le Breuse, and the other knight was called Sir Arnold le Breuse."

"Then, madam, he encountered the Black Knight, and killed him in open battle, and so he took his horse and his armour and fought the Green Knight and beat him in open battle. And he served the Red Knight in the same way, and after that he served the Blue Knight in the same way and beat him in open battle."

"Then," said the lady, "he has overcome Sir Persant of Inde, one of the noblest knights in the world."

And the dwarf said, "He has beaten all four brothers and killed the Black Knight, and he did more before that: he overthrew Sir Kay and left him half dead on the ground. He also fought a great battle with Sir Lancelot, and there they parted even; and then Sir Lancelot made him a knight."

"Dwarf," said the lady, "I am glad of this news. So go to a hermitage of mine near here, and take with you some of my wine in two silver flagons, each holding two gallons, and also two batches of loaves, with fat venison baked in pastry, and dainty birds. And here I give you a cup of gold, which is rich and precious; and take all this to my hermitage, and put it in the hermit's hands. And after that go to my sister and greet her well, and commend me to that noble knight, and beg him to eat and drink and build up his strength. And tell him I thank him for his courtesy and goodness, that he would take on such labour for me, who never did him any kindness or courtesy. Also beg him to be of good heart and courage, for he will meet a very noble knight, but one who has neither goodness, courtesy, nor gentleness; for he cares for nothing but murder, and that is the reason I cannot praise him or love him."

So this dwarf left, and came to Sir Persant's, where he found the damsel Linet and Sir Beaumains, and there he told them everything as you have heard. And then they took their leave, but Sir Persant took a small ambling horse and escorted them on their way, and then commended them to God. And so within a little while they came to that hermitage, and there they drank the wine, and ate the venison and the baked birds. And so when they had eaten well, the dwarf went back again with his vessels to the castle; and there the Red Knight of the Red Launds met him, and asked him where he came from, and where he had been.

"Sir," said the dwarf, "I have been with the sister of my lady of this castle, and she has been at King Arthur's court, and has brought a knight back with her."

"Then I count her labour as wasted," said the Red Knight, "for even if she had brought Sir Lancelot with her, or Sir Tristram, Sir Lamorak, or Sir Gawain, I would think myself good enough for them all."

"That may well be," said the dwarf, "but this knight has passed all the perilous passages, and killed the Black Knight and two others besides, and beaten the Green Knight, the Red Knight, and the Blue Knight."

"Then he is one of those four I named just now."

"He is none of those," said the dwarf, "but he is a king's son."

"What is his name?" said the Red Knight of the Red Launds.

"That I will not tell you," said the dwarf, "but Sir Kay named him Beaumains in scorn."

"I don't care," said the knight, "what knight he is, for I will soon be done with him. And if I ever get the better of him, he will die a shameful death, as many others have."

"That would be a pity," said the dwarf, "and it is a marvel that you make such shameful war on noble knights."
