Chapter 15: How the damsel and Beaumains came to the siege, and came to a sycamore tree, where Beaumains blew a horn, and then the Knight of the Red Launds came to fight him

Now we leave the knight and the dwarf, and speak of Beaumains, who lay all night in the hermitage; and in the morning he and the damsel Linet heard their mass and had breakfast. And then they took their horses and rode right through a fair forest; and then they came to a plain, and saw many pavilions and tents there, and a fair castle, and there was much smoke and a great noise. And when they came near the siege, Sir Beaumains saw, as he rode, very finely armed knights hanging by the neck from great trees, with their shields about their necks and their swords, and gilt spurs on their heels; and so there hung some forty knights there, shamefully, in very rich armour.

Then Sir Beaumains' face fell, and he said, "What does this mean?"

"Fair sir," said the damsel, "don't let your face fall at this sight, for you must take courage, or else you are utterly lost. For all these knights came here to this siege to rescue my sister Dame Lionesse, and when the Red Knight of the Red Launds had overcome them, he put them to this shameful death without mercy or pity. And he will serve you the same way unless you acquit yourself better."

"Now Jesus defend me," said Beaumains, "from such a vile death and such disgrace in arms. For rather than be dealt with like that, I would rather be killed like a man in open battle."

"You would be better so," said the damsel. "For don't trust him; there is no courtesy in him, but everything goes to death or shameful murder. And that is a pity, for he is a very handsome man, well built, and a very noble knight in prowess, and a lord of great lands and possessions."

"Truly," said Beaumains, "he may well be a good knight, but he keeps shameful customs, and it is a marvel that he has lasted so long without any of the noble knights of my lord Arthur's court having dealt with him."

And then they rode to the moats, and saw that the castle was double moated, with very warlike walls; and many great lords were lodged near the walls, and there was a great noise of minstrels. And the sea beat against the walls on one side, where there were many ships, and the noise of the sailors crying "heave-ho". And also, close by, there was a sycamore tree, and on it hung a horn, the biggest they had ever seen, made of an elephant's tusk. And this Knight of the Red Launds had hung it there so that if any knight-errant came, he must blow that horn, and then he would make himself ready and come to him to do battle.

"But, sir, I beg you," said the damsel Linet, "do not blow the horn until it is high noon, for now it is about prime, and his might is growing now, so that, as men say, he has the strength of seven men."

"Ah, fie for shame, fair damsel, never say such a thing to me again. For if he were as good a knight as ever lived, I will never fail him at his greatest might. For either I will win honour honourably, or die like a knight in the field."

And with that he spurred his horse straight to the sycamore tree, and blew the horn so eagerly that the whole siege and the castle rang with it. And then knights leapt out of their tents and pavilions, and those inside the castle looked over the walls and out of the windows.

Then the Red Knight of the Red Launds armed himself in haste, and two barons fastened his spurs on his heels, and everything was blood red, his armour, spear and shield. And an earl buckled his helm on his head, and then they brought him a red spear and a red warhorse, and so he rode into a little valley below the castle, so that everyone in the castle and at the siege could watch the battle.
