Chapter 16: How the two knights met, and of their talk, and how they began their battle

"Sir," said the damsel Linet to Sir Beaumains, "see that you are glad and light of heart, for over there is your deadly enemy, and at that window over there is my lady, my sister, Dame Lionesse."

"Where?" said Beaumains.

"Over there," said the damsel, and pointed with her finger.

"That is true," said Beaumains. "From far off she seems the fairest lady I ever looked on. And truly," he said, "I ask for no better cause to fight in than this one now, for truly she shall be my lady, and for her I will fight."

And all the while he looked up at the window with a glad face, and the Lady Lionesse curtsied to him down to the ground, holding up both her hands.

With that the Red Knight of the Red Launds called to Sir Beaumains, "Stop your looking, sir knight, and look at me, I advise you. For I warn you plainly, she is my lady, and for her I have fought many hard battles."

"If you have done so," said Beaumains, "it seems to me it was only wasted labour, for she loves no one of your company, and for you to love one who does not love you is nothing but great folly. For if I understood that she was not glad of my coming, I would think twice before I fought for her. But I understand from your besieging of this castle that she could well do without your company. And so know this, you Red Knight of the Red Launds: I love her, and will rescue her, or else die."

"Is that what you say?" said the Red Knight. "It seems to me you ought in reason to take warning from those knights you saw hanging on those trees over there."

"Fie for shame," said Beaumains, "that you should ever say or do such evil, for in that you shame yourself and knighthood. And you can be sure that no lady who knows your wicked customs will love you. And now you think the sight of these hanged knights should frighten me. No, truly, not so: that shameful sight gives me more courage and boldness against you than I would have had against you if you were a well-conducted knight."

"Get ready," said the Red Knight of the Red Launds, "and talk to me no longer."

Then Sir Beaumains told the damsel to move away from him; and then they put their spears in their rests, and came together with all the might they both had, and each struck the other in the middle of the shield, so that the breast straps, girths and cruppers of their horses burst, and both of them fell to the ground with the reins of their bridles in their hands. And so they lay a long while, badly stunned, so that everyone in the castle and at the siege thought their necks were broken. And then many a stranger and others said the strange knight was a big man and a noble jouster, "for before now we never saw any knight match the Red Knight of the Red Launds." So they said, both inside the castle and outside. Then swiftly they got clear of their horses and put their shields before them, and drew their swords and ran together like two fierce lions, and each gave the other such blows on the helm that they both reeled back two strides. And then they both recovered, and hewed great pieces off each other's armour and shields, so that a great part fell into the fields.
