Chapter 17: How after long fighting Beaumains overcame the knight and would have slain him, but at the lords' request spared his life and made him surrender to the lady

And so they fought until it was past noon, and they would never stop, until at last they were both out of breath. And then they stood swaying and staggering, panting, blowing and bleeding, so that most of those who watched them wept for pity. So when they had rested a while they went into battle again, circling, rushing and thrusting like two boars. And at times they took a run at each other like two rams, and crashed together so that sometimes they fell flat on the ground; and at times they were so dazed that each took the other's sword instead of his own.

So they held out until the hour of evensong, so that none of those who watched them could tell which of them was likely to win the battle. And their armour was so hacked to pieces that men could see their naked sides; and in other places they were naked too, but they always defended the naked places. And the Red Knight was a cunning knight in war, and his cunning fighting taught Sir Beaumains to be wise; but he paid for it very dearly before he saw through his way of fighting.

And so by agreement between them they granted each other a rest; and so they sat down on two molehills there beside the place of the fight, and each of them unlaced his helm and took the cool wind. For each of them had his page close by him, to come when they called to unlace their armour and to put it on again at their command. And then, when Sir Beaumains' helm was off, he looked up at the window, and there he saw the fair lady Dame Lionesse, and she gave him such a look that his heart grew light and merry. And with that he told the Red Knight of the Red Launds to make ready, "and let us fight the battle to the uttermost."

"Gladly," said the knight. And then they laced up their helms, and their pages withdrew, and they stepped together and fought vigorously. But the Red Knight of the Red Launds watched his chance, and with a stroke across struck him on the hand, so that his sword fell out of his hand; and then he gave him another blow on the helm, so that he fell flat on the ground, and the Red Knight fell on top of him, to hold him down.

Then the maiden Linet cried aloud, "Oh, Sir Beaumains, where has your courage gone? Alas, my lady my sister is watching you, and she sobs and weeps, and that makes my heart heavy."

When Sir Beaumains heard her say this, he started up with great might and got to his feet, and swiftly he leapt to his sword and gripped it in his hand, and quickened his pace towards the Red Knight, and there they fought a new battle together. But Sir Beaumains then doubled his strokes, and struck so thick and fast that he struck the sword out of his hand, and then he struck him on the helm so that he fell to the ground. And Sir Beaumains fell on him, and unlaced his helm to kill him; and then he yielded and begged for mercy, and said in a loud voice, "Oh noble knight, I yield myself to your mercy."

Then Sir Beaumains thought of the knights he had had hanged so shamefully, and then he said, "I cannot save your life with honour, because of the shameful deaths you have made so many very good knights die."

"Sir," said the Red Knight of the Red Launds, "hold your hand and you will know the reasons why I put them to so shameful a death."

"Speak on," said Sir Beaumains.

"Sir, I once loved a lady, a fair damsel, and she had her brother killed; and she said it was Sir Lancelot du Lake, or else Sir Gawain. And she begged me, as I loved her with all my heart, to make her a promise on the faith of my knighthood to labour in arms every day until I met one of them; and that all whom I could overcome I should put to a vile death. And this is the reason I have put all these knights to death, and so I gave her my word to do every kind of shame to King Arthur's knights, and to take vengeance on all these knights. And, sir, now I will tell you that every day my strength increases until noon, and all that time I have the strength of seven men."
