Chapter 18: How the knight surrendered, and how Beaumains made him go to King Arthur's court and beg Sir Lancelot's mercy

Then many earls and barons and noble knights came and begged that knight to save his life, "and take him as your prisoner." And they all fell on their knees, and begged him for mercy, and that he would save his life.

"And, sir," they all said, "it would be more honourable of you to take his homage and fealty, and let him hold his lands from you, than to kill him. You will gain no advantage by his death, and his misdeeds that are done cannot be undone; and so he will make amends to everyone concerned, and we will all become your men and do you homage and fealty."

"Fair lords," said Beaumains, "you may be sure I am very loath to kill this knight; nevertheless he has done exceedingly evil and shameful things. But since all he did was at a lady's request, I blame him the less. And so for your sake I will release him, so that he will have his life on this condition: that he goes into the castle and yields himself there to the lady, and if she will forgive him and let him go, I am content, provided that he makes her amends for all the wrong he has done against her and her lands. And also, when that is done, that you go to the court of King Arthur, and there ask Sir Lancelot's pardon, and Sir Gawain's, for the ill will you have had against them."

"Sir," said the Red Knight of the Red Launds, "I will do all this as you command, and you shall have sure guarantees and pledges."

And so then, when the guarantee was given, he did his homage and fealty, and all those earls and barons with him.

And then the maiden Linet came to Sir Beaumains, and took off his armour and examined his wounds, and stopped his bleeding, and she did the same for the Red Knight of the Red Launds. And there they stayed ten days in their tents; and the Red Knight had his lords and servants do everything they could to please Sir Beaumains. And so within a while the Red Knight of the Red Launds went to the castle and put himself at her mercy. And so she received him on sufficient security, so that all her injuries were fully made good, everything she could complain of. And then he left for the court of King Arthur, and there, before everyone, the Red Knight of the Red Launds put himself at the mercy of Sir Lancelot and Sir Gawain, and there he told openly how he had been overcome and by whom, and he also told of all the battles from the beginning to the end.

"Jesus have mercy," said King Arthur and Sir Gawain, "we wonder greatly what blood he comes of, for he is a noble knight."

"Don't wonder at it," said Sir Lancelot, "for you may be quite sure that he comes of very noble blood. And as for his might and boldness, there are only a few now living who are as mighty as he is, and as noble in prowess."

"It seems from what you say," said King Arthur, "that you know his name, and where he comes from, and what blood he is of."

"I believe I do," said Lancelot, "or else I would not have given him the order of knighthood. But he gave me such a charge at that time that I should never give him away until he asked me to, or else until it was made known openly by someone else."
