Chapter 19: How Beaumains came to the lady, and when he reached the castle the gates were shut against him, and of what the lady said to him

Now we turn to Sir Beaumains, who asked Linet that he might see her sister, his lady.

"Sir," she said, "I would gladly have you see her."

Then Sir Beaumains armed himself completely, and took his horse and his spear, and rode straight to the castle. And when he came to the gate he found many armed men there, who pulled up the drawbridge and shut the gate tight.

Then he wondered why they would not let him in. And then he looked up at the window; and there he saw the fair Lionesse, who called down from above, "Go on your way, Sir Beaumains, for you shall not have my love wholly yet, not until you are counted one of the number of the worthy knights. And so go and labour to win honour for these twelve months, and then you will hear news."

"Alas, fair lady," said Beaumains, "I have not deserved that you should show me this coldness. I had expected that I would have a warm welcome from you, and as far as I was able I have earned your thanks, and I am quite sure I have bought your love with part of the best blood in my body."

"Fair courteous knight," said Dame Lionesse, "do not be displeased or over-hasty. For believe me, your great toil and your true love shall not be lost, for I take account of your great toil and labour, your worth and your goodness, as I ought to do. And so go on your way, and see that you keep up your heart, for everything will be for your honour and for the best. And by God, a twelvemonth will soon be over. And trust me, fair knight, I shall be true to you, and never betray you, but until my death I shall love you and no one else."

And with that she turned away from the window, and Sir Beaumains rode off away from the castle, grieving greatly. And so he rode here and there and did not know where he was riding, until it was dark night. And then he happened to come to a poor man's house, and there he was given lodging all that night.

But Sir Beaumains had no rest, but tossed and writhed for love of the lady of the castle. And so the next morning he took his horse and rode until the middle of the morning, and then he came to a broad river, and beside it was a great lodge, and there he dismounted to sleep, and laid his head on his shield, and handed his horse over to the dwarf, and ordered him to keep watch all night.

Now we turn to the lady of that same castle, who thought much about Beaumains. And then she called to her Sir Gringamore, her brother, and begged him in every way, as he loved her with all his heart, to ride after Sir Beaumains. "And keep watching him all the time until you find him sleeping, for I am sure that in his low spirits he will dismount somewhere and lie down to sleep. And so keep your watch on him, and as secretly as you can, take his dwarf, and go off with him as fast as you possibly can before Sir Beaumains wakes. For my sister Linet tells me that the dwarf can tell what family he comes from, and what his real name is. And meanwhile my sister and I will ride to your castle to wait for you to bring the dwarf with you. And then, when you have brought him to your castle, I will question him myself. Until I know what his real name is, and what family he comes from, I shall never be merry at heart."

"Sister," said Sir Gringamore, "all this shall be done as you wish."

And so he rode all the next day and the night until he found Sir Beaumains lying by a river, with his head on his shield, to sleep. And then, when he saw Sir Beaumains fast asleep, he came creeping quietly up behind the dwarf, and snatched him up tight under his arm, and so he rode away with him as fast as ever he could to his own castle. And this Sir Gringamore's arms were all black, as was his right. But all the time, as he rode with the dwarf toward his castle, the dwarf cried out to his lord and begged him for help. And with that Sir Beaumains woke, and leapt up quickly, and saw Sir Gringamore riding off with the dwarf, and so Sir Gringamore rode out of his sight.
