Chapter 20: How Sir Beaumains rode after his dwarf to rescue him, and came into the castle where he was held

Then Sir Beaumains put on his helm at once, and buckled on his shield, and took his horse, and rode after him as hard as ever he could ride, through marshes and fields and great valleys, so that many times he and his horse plunged in over their heads in deep bogs. For he did not know the way, but took the shortest way in that frenzy, so that many times he was close to dying. And at last he happened to come to a fine green road, and there he met a poor man of the country, whom he greeted, and asked him whether he had not met a knight on a black horse and in all-black armour, with a little dwarf sitting behind him looking downcast.

"Sir," said the poor man, "Sir Gringamore the knight came by me here, with just such a dwarf as you describe, grieving. And so I advise you not to follow him, for he is one of the most dangerous knights in the world, and his castle is close by here, only two miles off. So we advise you not to ride after Sir Gringamore, unless you bear him good will."

So we leave Sir Beaumains riding toward the castle, and speak of Sir Gringamore and the dwarf. As soon as the dwarf had come to the castle, Dame Lionesse and Dame Linet her sister asked the dwarf where his master was born, and what lineage he came from.

"And unless you tell me," said Dame Lionesse, "you shall never get out of this castle, but stay here a prisoner forever."

"As for that," said the dwarf, "I am not much afraid to tell his name and what family he comes from. Believe me, he is a king's son, and his mother is sister to King Arthur, and he is brother to the good knight Sir Gawain, and his name is Sir Gareth of Orkney. And now that I have told you his real name, I beg you, fair lady, let me go back to my lord, for he will never leave this country until he has me back. And if he is angry he will do a great deal of harm before he is stopped, and bring ruin on you in this country."

"As for that threat," said Sir Gringamore, "be that as it may, we will go to dinner."

And so they washed and went to their meal, and made merry and were at their ease, and because the Lady Lionesse of the castle was there, they rejoiced greatly.

"Truly, madam," said Linet to her sister, "he may well be a king's son, for he has many good qualities. For he is courteous and mild, and the most patient man I ever met. For I dare say there was never a gentlewoman who reviled a man in so foul a way as I have abused him; and every time he gave me gracious and gentle answers back."

And as they sat talking like this, Sir Gareth came in at the gate with an angry face and his sword drawn in his hand, and shouted so that the whole castle could hear it, "You traitor, Sir Gringamore, give me back my dwarf, or by the faith I owe to the order of knighthood, I'll do you all the harm I can!"

Then Sir Gringamore looked out of a window and said, "Sir Gareth of Orkney, stop your boasting. You're not getting your dwarf back."

"You coward knight," said Sir Gareth, "bring him with you, and come and fight me, and win him and keep him."

"So I will," said Sir Gringamore, "if I feel like it. But for all your big words, you're not getting him."

"Ah, fair brother," said Dame Lionesse, "I wish he had his dwarf back, for I would not want him angry. For now that the dwarf has told me all I wanted, I care no more about him. And also, brother, Sir Gareth has done a great deal for me, and freed me from the Red Knight of the Red Launds, and so, brother, I owe him my service before all knights living. And believe me, I love him above all others, and I would very gladly speak with him. But on no account would I want him to know who I am, but to think I was some other lady, a stranger."

"Well," said Sir Gringamore, "since I know your wishes now, I will do as he wants."

And right then he went down to Sir Gareth, and said, "Sir, I beg your pardon, and all the wrong I have done I will make good as you wish. And so I beg you to dismount, and accept such hospitality as I can give you in this castle."

"Shall I have my dwarf?" said Sir Gareth.

"Yes, sir, and all the pleasure I can give you. For as soon as your dwarf told me who you were, and what blood you come from, and what noble deeds you have done in these borderlands, I repented of what I had done."

And then Sir Gareth dismounted, and his dwarf came and took his horse.

"Oh, my good fellow," said Sir Gareth, "I've been through many adventures for your sake."

And so Sir Gringamore took him by the hand and led him into the hall where his own wife was.
