Chapter 21: How Sir Gareth, also called Beaumains, came into his lady's presence, and how they became acquainted, and of their love

And then Dame Lionesse came out dressed like a princess, and she gave him an exceedingly warm welcome, and he her in return; and they talked graciously together and looked lovingly at each other. And many times Sir Gareth thought, "Jesus, if only the lady of the Castle Perilous were as beautiful as she is!" There were all kinds of games and entertainments, dancing and singing. And the more Sir Gareth looked at that lady, the more he loved her; and he so burned with love that he was beside himself and lost his reason. And as night came on they went in to supper, and Sir Gareth could not eat, for his love was so hot that he did not know where he was.

Sir Gringamore noticed all these looks, and then after supper he called his sister Dame Lionesse into a room, and said, "Fair sister, I have watched well the looks between you and this knight. And sister, I want you to know that he is a very noble knight, and if you can make him stay here I will give him every pleasure I can. For even if you were better than you are, you would be well bestowed on him."

"Fair brother," said Dame Lionesse, "I understand well that the knight is good, and that he comes from a noble house. Even so, I will test him further, though I am more beholden to him than to any man on earth. For he has gone through great labour for my love, and passed through many a dangerous passage."

Just then Sir Gringamore went to Sir Gareth, and said, "Sir, be of good cheer, for you shall have no reason to be otherwise. For this lady, my sister, is yours at all times, saving her honour. For believe me, she loves you as well as you love her, and better, if better may be."

"If I knew that," said Sir Gareth, "there would not be a happier man alive than I."

"Upon my honour," said Sir Gringamore, "trust my promise. And as long as it pleases you, you shall stay with me, and this lady shall be with us day and night to give you all the pleasure she can."

"Gladly," said Sir Gareth, "for I have promised to stay near this country for this twelvemonth. And I am quite sure King Arthur and other noble knights will find me wherever I am within this twelvemonth. For I shall be looked for and found, if I am alive."

And then the noble knight Sir Gareth went to Dame Lionesse, whom he now loved very much, and kissed her many times, and each of them rejoiced greatly in the other. And there she promised him her love for certain, to love him and no one else all the days of her life. Then this lady, Dame Lionesse, with her brother's consent, told Sir Gareth the whole truth of who she was, and how she was the same lady he had fought for, and how she was lady of the Castle Perilous. And there she told him how she had had her brother take away his dwarf, for this reason: "to know for certain what your name was, and what family you came from."
