Chapter 22: How at night an armed knight came and fought Sir Gareth, and how Gareth, badly wounded in the thigh, struck off the knight's head

And then she had Linet brought before him, the damsel who had ridden with him along so many desolate ways. Then Sir Gareth was gladder than he had been before. And then they plighted their troth to each other, to love, and never to fail while their lives lasted. And they both so burned with love that they agreed to satisfy their desire in secret. And there Dame Lionesse advised Sir Gareth to sleep nowhere else but in the hall. And there she promised him to come to his bed a little before midnight.

This plan was not kept so secret that it was not found out; for they were both young, and tender in years, and had never practised such arts before. And so the damsel Linet was a little displeased, and she thought her sister Dame Lionesse was a little over-hasty, that she could not wait for the time of her marriage; and to save their honour, she meant to cool their hot desire. And so by her subtle arts she arranged that neither of them should have their will of the other, as for their pleasures, until they were married. And so it went on. After supper the hall was cleared, so that every lord and lady should go to their rest. But Sir Gareth said plainly he would go no farther than the hall, for such places, he said, were fitting for a knight-errant to take his rest in. And so great couches were set out, and feather beds on them, and there he lay down to sleep. And within a while Dame Lionesse came, wrapped in a cloak furred with ermine, and lay down beside Sir Gareth. And with that he began to kiss her. And then he looked in front of him, and there he noticed and saw an armed knight coming, with many lights about him; and this knight had a long battle-axe in his hand, and looked grimly as if to strike him. When Sir Gareth saw him coming in that way, he leapt out of his bed, and got his sword in his hand, and leapt straight at that knight. And when the knight saw Sir Gareth coming at him so fiercely, he struck him with a thrust through the thick of the thigh, so that the wound was a hand's breadth wide and had cut through many veins and sinews. And with that Sir Gareth struck him on the helm such a blow that he fell flat on his face; and then he leapt on him and unlaced his helm, and struck his head off his body. And then he bled so fast that he could not stand, but laid himself down on his bed, and there he fainted and lay as if he were dead.

Then Dame Lionesse cried out, so that her brother Sir Gringamore heard, and came down. And when he saw Sir Gareth so shamefully wounded he was very much displeased, and said, "I am ashamed that this noble knight is honoured like this. Sister," said Sir Gringamore, "how can this be, that you are here, and this noble knight wounded?"

"Brother," she said, "I cannot tell you, for it was not done by me, nor with my consent. For he is my lord and I am his, and he is to be my husband. And so, my brother, I want you to know that I am not ashamed to be with him, nor to give him all the pleasure I can."

"Sister," said Sir Gringamore, "and I want you to know it, and Sir Gareth too, that this ill-fated deed was never done by me, nor with my consent."

And there they staunched his bleeding as well as they could, and Sir Gringamore and Dame Lionesse grieved greatly.

And right away Dame Linet came, and picked up the head in the sight of them all, and anointed it with an ointment where it had been struck off; and in the same way she did the other part, where the head had been attached, and then she set them together, and it stuck as fast as it ever had. And the knight got up quickly, and the damsel Linet put him in her room. Sir Gringamore and Dame Lionesse saw all this, and so did Sir Gareth; and he saw well that it was the damsel Linet, who had ridden with him through the perilous passages.

"Ah, damsel," said Sir Gareth, "I never thought you would have done what you have done."

"My lord Gareth," said Linet, "everything I have done I will stand by, and everything I have done shall be for your honour and good name, and for all of us."

And so within a while Sir Gareth was nearly healed, and grew lively and cheerful, and sang, danced and played games; and he and Dame Lionesse burned so hot with love that they made an agreement that on the tenth night after, she should come to his bed. And because he had been wounded before, he laid his armour and his sword close beside his bed.
