Chapter 23: How the same knight came back the next night and was beheaded again, and how at the feast of Pentecost all the knights Sir Gareth had overcome came and surrendered to King Arthur

Just as she had promised, she came; and she was no sooner in his bed than she saw an armed knight coming toward the bed. With that she warned Sir Gareth, and quickly, through the good help of Dame Lionesse, he was armed; and they crashed together with great anger and malice all about the hall. And there was a great light, as if there were twenty torches both in front and behind, so that Sir Gareth strained himself until his old wound burst open bleeding again. But he was hot and full of courage and paid no attention, but with his great strength he struck down that knight, and pulled off his helm, and struck off his head. Then he hacked the head into a hundred pieces. And when he had done that he picked up all those pieces, and threw them out of a window into the ditches of the castle. And by the time this was done he was so faint from bleeding that he could scarcely stand. And when he was almost out of his armour he fell in a deathly faint on the floor; and then Dame Lionesse cried out so that Sir Gringamore heard. And when he came and found Sir Gareth in that state he grieved greatly; and there he brought Sir Gareth round, and gave him a drink that revived him wonderfully well. But the grief that Dame Lionesse showed there no tongue can tell, for she carried on as if she would have died.

Just then this damsel Linet came before them all, and she had fetched all the lumps of the head that Sir Gareth had thrown out of the window, and there she anointed them as she had done before, and set them together again.

"Well, damsel Linet," said Sir Gareth, "I have not deserved all this insult you are doing me."

"Sir knight," she said, "I have done nothing that I will not stand by, and everything I have done shall be to your honour, and for all of us."

And then Sir Gareth's bleeding was staunched. But the doctors said that no man alive could heal him completely of his wound unless the one who had caused that stroke by enchantment healed him.

So we leave Sir Gareth there with Sir Gringamore and his sisters, and turn to King Arthur, who held his feast at the next feast of Pentecost. And there came the Green Knight with fifty knights, and they all surrendered to King Arthur. And so there came the Red Knight, his brother, and surrendered to King Arthur, and sixty knights with him. Also there came the Blue Knight, their brother, with a hundred knights, and they surrendered to King Arthur. And the Green Knight's name was Pertolepe, and the Red Knight's name was Perimones, and the Blue Knight's name was Sir Persant of Inde. These three brothers told King Arthur how they had been overcome by a knight that a damsel had with her, whom she called Beaumains.

"Jesus," said the king, "I wonder what knight he is, and what lineage he comes from. He was with me a twelvemonth, and he was kept poorly and shamefully, and Sir Kay named him Beaumains in scorn."

So, just as the king stood talking like this with these three brothers, Sir Lancelot du Lake came and told the king that a fine lord had come, with six hundred knights with him.

Then the king went out of Caerleon, for the feast was there, and this lord came to him, and greeted the king courteously.

"What do you want," said King Arthur, "and what is your errand?"

"Sir," he said, "I am called the Red Knight of the Red Launds, but my name is Sir Ironside. And sir, believe me, I am sent here to you by a knight who is called Beaumains, for he won me in open battle, hand to hand, and no knight but he has ever had the better of me these thirty years. And he commanded me to surrender myself to you, to do with as you will."

"You are welcome," said the king, "for you have long been a great enemy to me and my court, and now I trust to God I shall treat you so that you will be my friend."

"Sir, both I and these five hundred knights shall always be at your summons to do you service, as far as lies in our power."

"Jesus have mercy," said King Arthur, "I am much beholden to that knight who has exerted himself so to do honour to me and my court. And as for you, Ironside, who are called the Red Knight of the Red Launds, you are said to be a dangerous knight. And if you will hold your lands from me, I will honour you and make you a knight of the Round Table; but then you must be a murderer no longer."

"Sir, as for that, I have promised Sir Beaumains never again to keep such customs. For all the shameful customs I kept, I kept at the request of a lady I loved. And so I must go to Sir Lancelot and to Sir Gawain, and ask their forgiveness for the ill will I had toward them; for all those I put to death were put to death only for the love of Sir Lancelot and of Sir Gawain."

"They are here now," said the king, "in front of you. Now you may say to them what you will."

And then he knelt down to Sir Lancelot and to Sir Gawain, and begged them to forgive him for the enmity he had ever had against them.
