Chapter 25: How the Queen of Orkney came to this feast of Pentecost, and Sir Gawain and his brothers came to ask her blessing

So then the king and they went to their meal, and were served in the best way. And as they sat at the meal, the Queen of Orkney came in, with a great number of ladies and knights. And then Sir Gawain, Sir Agravain and Gaheris got up, and went to her and greeted her on their knees, and asked her blessing; for they had not seen her in fifteen years. Then she spoke out loud to her brother King Arthur: "What have you done with my young son Sir Gareth? He was here among you a twelvemonth, and you made a kitchen boy of him, which is a shame to you all. Alas, what have you done with my dear son, who was my joy and delight?"

"Oh, dear mother," said Sir Gawain, "I didn't know him."

"Nor I," said the king, "and I regret it now. But thanks be to God, he has proved as honourable a knight as any now living of his years, and I shall never be glad until I can find him."

"Ah, brother," said the queen to King Arthur, and to Sir Gawain, and to all her sons, "you brought great shame on yourselves when you kept my son among you in the kitchen and fed him like a poor hog."

"Fair sister," said King Arthur, "you may be quite sure I didn't know him, and no more did Sir Gawain, nor his brothers. But since it is so," said the king, "that he has gone away from us all like this, we must work out a way to find him. Also, sister, it seems to me you might have let me know of his coming, and then, if I had not treated him well, you might have blamed me. For when he came to this court he came leaning on two men's shoulders, as though he could not walk. And then he asked me for three gifts; and one he asked that same day, which was that I would give him enough food for that twelvemonth. And the other two gifts he asked that day a twelvemonth later, and those were that he might have the adventure of the damsel Linet, and the third, that Sir Lancelot should make him a knight when he asked him. And so I granted him all he wanted, and many in this court wondered that he asked for his keep for a twelvemonth. And from that, many of us judged that he did not come of a noble house."

"Sir," said the Queen of Orkney to King Arthur her brother, "believe me, I sent him to you very well armed and horsed, and handsomely turned out, and with plenty of gold and silver to spend."

"That may be," said the king, "but we saw none of it, except that on the same day he left us, knights told me that a dwarf suddenly came here, and brought him armour and a good horse, very well and richly equipped. And we all wondered where those riches came from, so that we all judged he came of honourable people."

"Brother," said the queen, "I believe all you say, for ever since he was grown he has been wonderfully clever, and he was always faithful and true to his promise. But I wonder," she said, "that Sir Kay mocked him and scorned him, and gave him that name Beaumains. Yet Sir Kay," said the queen, "named him more truly than he thought, for I dare say, if he is alive, he is as fair-handed a man, and as well made, as any man living."

"Sister," said Arthur, "let this talk be. By the grace of God he shall be found, if he is within these seven kingdoms. And let all this pass, and be merry, for he has proved himself a man of honour, and that is my joy."
