Chapter 26: How King Arthur sent for the Lady Lionesse, and how she had a tournament proclaimed at her castle, where many knights came

Then Sir Gawain and his brothers said to Arthur, "Sir, if you will give us leave, we will go and look for our brother."

"No," said Sir Lancelot, "you won't need to do that." And so said Sir Baudwin of Britain. "For on our advice the king shall send a messenger to Dame Lionesse, and ask her to come to the court in all the haste she can, and have no doubt, she will come. And then she can give you the best advice on where you will find him."

"That is well said," said the king.

So then courteous letters were written, and the messenger sent off, and he travelled night and day until he came to the Castle Perilous. And then the lady, Dame Lionesse, was sent for where she was, with Sir Gringamore her brother and Sir Gareth. And when she understood this message, she told him to ride on his way to King Arthur, and she would come after in all fitting haste. Then, when she came to Sir Gringamore and to Sir Gareth, she told them all how King Arthur had sent for her.

"That is because of me," said Sir Gareth.

"Now advise me," said Dame Lionesse, "what I shall say, and how I shall conduct myself."

"My lady and my love," said Sir Gareth, "I beg you, on no account let it be known where I am. But I know well my mother is there, and all my brothers, and they will take it on themselves to look for me; I know very well they will. But this, madam, is what I would have you say, and advise the king, when he questions you about me. Then you may say that this is your advice: that, if it pleases his good grace, you will have it proclaimed, for the feast of the Assumption of our Lady, that whatever knight proves himself best there shall have you and all your land. And if it so happens that he is a married man, then his wife shall have the prize, and a circlet of gold set with stones of magic power, to the value of a thousand pounds, and a white gyrfalcon."

So Dame Lionesse set off and came to King Arthur, where she was nobly received, and there she was closely questioned by the king and by the Queen of Orkney. And she answered that she could not tell where Sir Gareth was. But this much she said to Arthur: "Sir, I will have a tournament proclaimed, to be held before my castle at the Assumption of our Lady, and the proclamation shall be this: that you, my lord Arthur, shall be there, and your knights, and I will see to it that my knights shall be against yours. And then I am sure you will hear of Sir Gareth."

"That is well thought out," said King Arthur; and so she left. And the king and she made great preparations for that tournament.

When Dame Lionesse had come to the Isle of Avalon, which was the same isle where her brother Sir Gringamore lived, then she told them all what she had done, and what promise she had made to King Arthur.

"Alas," said Sir Gareth, "I have been so unluckily wounded since I came into this castle, that I won't be able to perform like a knight at that tournament; for I have never been fully healed since I was hurt."

"Cheer up," said the damsel Linet, "for I undertake to make you whole within these fifteen days, and as vigorous as you ever were."

And then she laid an ointment and a salve on him, as she saw fit, so that he was never so fresh nor so vigorous. Then the damsel Linet said, "Send to Sir Persant of Inde, and summon him and his knights to be here with you, as they have promised. Also, send to Sir Ironside, who is the Red Knight of the Red Launds, and order him to be ready with you with his whole company of knights, and then you will be able to match King Arthur and his knights."

So this was done, and all the knights were sent for to the Castle Perilous. And then the Red Knight answered, and said to Dame Lionesse and to Sir Gareth, "Madam, and my lord Sir Gareth, you should know that I have been at King Arthur's court, and Sir Persant of Inde and his brothers too, and there we have done our homage as you commanded us."

Also Sir Ironside said, "I have undertaken, with Sir Persant of Inde and his brothers, to take sides against my lord Sir Lancelot and the knights of that court. And this I have done for the love of my lady Dame Lionesse, and of you, my lord Sir Gareth."

"You have done well," said Sir Gareth. "But believe me, you will be very hard matched against the noblest knights in the world. And so we must provide ourselves with good knights, wherever we can get them."

"That is well said," said Sir Persant, "and honourably."

And so the proclamation was made in England, Wales and Scotland, Ireland, Cornwall, and in all the Out Isles, and in Brittany and in many countries: that at the feast of the Assumption of our Lady next coming, men should come to the Castle Perilous beside the Isle of Avalon; and there all the knights who came should have the choice whether they wished to be on the one side, with the knights of the castle, or on the other side, with King Arthur. And it was two months to the day before the tournament was to be. And so many good knights came who were free of any lord, and for the most part they held against King Arthur and his knights of the Round Table, and came in on the side of those of the castle. For Sir Epinogrus was the first, and he was the son of the King of Northumberland; and Sir Palomides the Saracen was another, and Sir Safere his brother, and Sir Segwarides his brother, but they were christened; and Sir Malegrine another; and Sir Brian de les Isles, a noble knight; and Sir Grummore Grummursum, a good knight of Scotland; and Sir Carados of the Dolorous Tower, a noble knight; and Sir Turquine his brother; and Sir Arnold and Sir Gauter, two brothers, good knights of Cornwall. There came Sir Tristram de Liones, and with him Sir Dinas the Seneschal, and Sir Sadok; but this Sir Tristram was not a knight of the Round Table at that time, but he was one of the best knights in the world. And so all these noble knights joined the lady of the castle, and the Red Knight of the Red Launds; but as for Sir Gareth, he would take on himself no more than any other ordinary knight.
