Chapter 27: How King Arthur went to the tournament with his knights, and how the lady received him with honour, and how the knights met in combat

And then there came with King Arthur Sir Gawain, Agravain and Gaheris, his brothers. And then his nephews Sir Uwain le Blanchemains, and Sir Aglovale, Sir Tor, Sir Percival de Galis, and Sir Lamorak de Galis. Then came Sir Lancelot du Lake with his brothers, nephews and cousins, such as Sir Lionel, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Bors de Ganis, and Sir Galihodin, Sir Galihud, and many more of Sir Lancelot's blood; and Sir Dinadan, Sir La Cote Male Taile, his brother, a good knight, and Sir Sagramore, a good knight; and the greater part of the Round Table. Also there came with King Arthur these knights: the King of Ireland, King Agwisance, and the King of Scotland, King Carados, and King Uriens of the land of Gore, and King Bagdemagus and his son Sir Meliagaunce, and Sir Galahalt the noble prince. All these kings, princes and earls, barons and other noble knights, such as Sir Brandiles, Sir Uwain les Avoutres, and Sir Kay, Sir Bedivere, Sir Meliot de Logres, Sir Petipase of Winchelsea, Sir Godelake: all these came with King Arthur, and more than can be listed.

Now we leave these kings and knights, and let us speak of the great preparations that were made inside the castle and around the castle for both sides. The Lady Dame Lionesse made great preparations on her side for her noble knights, with every kind of lodging and food, coming by land and by water, so that nothing was lacking for her side, nor for the other; but there was plenty to be had for gold and silver for King Arthur and his knights. And then King Arthur's harbingers came, the officers sent ahead to find lodging for him and his kings, dukes, earls, barons and knights. And then Sir Gareth begged Dame Lionesse and the Red Knight of the Red Launds, and Sir Persant and his brother, and Sir Gringamore, that on no account should any of them tell his name, and that they should make no more of him than of the least knight there. "For," he said, "I will not be known by anyone, great or small, neither at the beginning nor at the end."

Then Dame Lionesse said to Sir Gareth, "Sir, I will lend you a ring, but I would beg you, as you love me with all your heart, to let me have it back when the tournament is over, for that ring makes me much more beautiful than I am by nature. And the power of my ring is this: what is green it will turn to red, and what is red it will turn in likeness to green, and what is blue it will turn to the likeness of white, and what is white it will turn in likeness to blue, and so it will do with every kind of colour. Also, whoever wears my ring shall lose no blood. And for great love I will give you this ring."

"Many thanks, my own lady," said Sir Gareth, "for this ring suits me exceedingly well, for it will change every likeness I am in, and that will make sure I am not known."

Then Sir Gringamore gave Sir Gareth a bay warhorse that was an exceedingly good horse; and he also gave him good, sound armour, and a noble sword that Sir Gringamore's father had once won from a heathen tyrant. And so every knight made himself ready for that tournament. And King Arthur had come two days before the Assumption of our Lady. And there was every kind of royal show, with all the minstrelsy that could be found. Also Queen Guinevere came, and the Queen of Orkney, Sir Gareth's mother.

And on the day of the Assumption, when mass and matins were done, the heralds with trumpets were commanded to sound to the field. And so Sir Epinogrus, the son of the King of Northumberland, came out from the castle, and Sir Sagramore le Desirous met him, and each of them broke his spear right to his hand. And then Sir Palomides came in out of the castle, and Gawain met him, and each of them struck the other so hard that both the good knights and their horses fell to the earth. And then knights of each side rescued their knights. And then Sir Safere and Sir Segwarides came in, brothers to Sir Palomides; and there Sir Agravain met Sir Safere, and Sir Gaheris met Sir Segwarides. So Sir Safere struck down Agravain, Sir Gawain's brother; and so did Sir Segwarides, Sir Safere's brother. And Sir Malegrine, a knight of the castle, met Sir Uwain le Blanchemains, and there Sir Uwain gave Sir Malegrine such a fall that he almost broke his neck.
