Chapter 28: How the knights bore themselves in the battle

Then Sir Brian de les Isles and Grummore Grummursum, knights of the castle, met Sir Aglovale and Sir Tor, and Sir Tor struck Sir Grummore Grummursum down to the ground. Then Sir Carados of the Dolorous Tower and Sir Turquine, knights of the castle, came in; and against them came Sir Percival de Galis and Sir Lamorak de Galis, who were two brothers. And there Sir Percival met Sir Carados, and each of them broke his spear right up to his hand; and then Sir Turquine met Sir Lamorak, and each of them struck the other down to the ground, horse and all, and each side rescued its man and got them on horseback again. And Sir Arnold and Sir Gauter, knights of the castle, met Sir Brandiles and Sir Kay, and these four knights came together mightily, and broke their spears right up to their hands. Then Sir Tristram, Sir Sadok and Sir Dinas, knights of the castle, came in, and there Sir Tristram met Sir Bedivere, and there Sir Bedivere was struck to the ground, both horse and man. And Sir Sadok met Sir Petipase, and there Sir Sadok was unhorsed. And there Uwain les Avoutres struck down Sir Dinas, the Seneschal. Then Sir Persant of Inde, a knight of the castle, came in, and against him came Sir Lancelot du Lake, and there he struck Sir Persant to the ground, horse and man. Then Sir Pertolepe came from the castle, and against him came Sir Lionel, and there Sir Pertolepe, the Green Knight, struck down Sir Lionel, Sir Lancelot's brother. All this was noted by noble heralds, who bore himself best, and their names.

And then Sir Perimones, the Red Knight, Sir Persant's brother, who was a knight of the castle, came into the field, and he met Sir Ector de Maris, and each struck the other so hard that both their horses and they themselves fell to the ground. And then the Red Knight of the Red Launds and Sir Gareth came in from the castle, and against them came Sir Bors de Ganis and Sir Bleoberis; and there the Red Knight and Sir Bors struck each other so hard that their spears burst, and their horses fell grovelling to the ground. Then Sir Bleoberis broke his spear on Sir Gareth, but from that stroke Sir Bleoberis fell to the ground. When Sir Galihodin saw that, he told Sir Gareth to defend himself, and Sir Gareth struck him to the ground. Then Sir Galihud got a spear to avenge his brother, and Sir Gareth served him the same way, and Sir Dinadan and his brother La Cote Male Taile, and Sir Sagramore le Desirous, and Sir Dodinas le Savage. All these he bore down with one spear.

When King Agwisance of Ireland saw Sir Gareth go on like this, he wondered who he could be, who one time seemed green, and another time, when he came back again, seemed blue. And so at every course that he rode to and fro he changed his colour, so that neither king nor knight could readily recognise him. Then Sir Agwisance, the King of Ireland, met Sir Gareth, and there Sir Gareth struck him from his horse, saddle and all. And then King Carados of Scotland came, and Sir Gareth struck him down, horse and man. And he served King Uriens of the land of Gore the same way. And then Sir Bagdemagus came in, and Sir Gareth struck him to the ground, horse and man. And Bagdemagus's son, Meliagaunce, broke a spear on Sir Gareth mightily and like a true knight. And then Sir Galahalt, the noble prince, called out loud, "Knight with the many colours, you have jousted well! Now make yourself ready, so that I can joust with you."

Sir Gareth heard him, and he got a great spear, and so they met, and there the prince broke his spear; but Sir Gareth struck him on the left side of the helm, so that he reeled this way and that, and he would have fallen if his men had not caught him.

"God help me," said King Arthur, "that same knight with the many colours is a good knight."

So the king called Sir Lancelot to him, and asked him to joust with that knight.

"Sir," said Lancelot, "I can well find it in my heart to leave him alone this time, for he has had labour enough today. And when a good knight does so well on a given day, it is no good knight's part to rob him of his honour, especially when he sees a knight has done such great labour. For perhaps," said Sir Lancelot, "his quarrel lies here today, and perhaps he is the best loved by this lady of all who are here; for I can see well that he strains and drives himself to do great deeds. And therefore," said Sir Lancelot, "as far as I am concerned, he shall have the honour today. Even if it lay in my power to take it from him, I would not."
