Chapter 29: More of the same tournament

Then, when this was done, swords were drawn, and then a hard tournament began. And there Sir Lamorak did marvellous deeds of arms; and between Sir Lamorak and Sir Ironside, who was the Red Knight of the Red Launds, there was a strong fight; and between Sir Palomides and Bleoberis there was a strong fight; and Sir Gawain and Sir Tristram met, and there Sir Gawain had the worst of it, for Sir Tristram pulled Sir Gawain from his horse, and there he was a long while on foot, and trampled. Then Sir Lancelot came in, and he struck Sir Turquine, and Sir Turquine him; and then his brother Sir Carados came, and both at once they attacked him, and he, as the noblest knight in the world, fought both of them honourably, so that all men wondered at the nobility of Sir Lancelot. And then Sir Gareth came in, and saw that it was Sir Lancelot who was fighting the two dangerous knights. And then Sir Gareth came up on his good horse and drove them apart, and he would not strike a single stroke at Sir Lancelot. Sir Lancelot noticed that, and judged that it must be the good knight Sir Gareth. And then Sir Gareth rode here and there, and struck on the right hand and on the left, and all the people could easily see where he rode. And by chance he met his brother Sir Gawain, and there he got the better of Sir Gawain, for he knocked off his helm; and he served five or six knights of the Round Table the same way, so that all men said he took the most pains, and did his duty best.

For when Sir Tristram watched how he first jousted and afterwards fought so well with a sword, he rode to Sir Ironside and to Sir Persant of Inde, and asked them, by their faith, "What sort of knight is that knight over there, who appears in so many different colours? Truly, it seems to me," said Tristram, "that he puts himself to great pains, for he never stops."

"Don't you know who he is?" said Sir Ironside.

"No," said Sir Tristram.

"Then you shall know that this is the one who loves the lady of the castle, and she loves him in return; and this is the one who beat me when I besieged the lady of this castle, and this is the one who beat Sir Persant of Inde and his three brothers."

"What is his name," said Sir Tristram, "and what blood does he come of?"

"At King Arthur's court he was called Beaumains, but his true name is Sir Gareth of Orkney, Sir Gawain's brother."

"On my life," said Sir Tristram, "he is a good knight, and a great man of arms, and if he is young he will prove a very noble knight."

"He is only a boy," they all said, "and he was made a knight by Sir Lancelot."

"Then he is all the better for it," said Tristram.

And then Sir Tristram, Sir Ironside, Sir Persant and his brother rode together to help Sir Gareth; and then many strong strokes were given.

And then Sir Gareth rode out to one side to mend his helm; and then his dwarf said, "Give me your ring, so that you don't lose it while you drink."

And so, when he had drunk, he put on his helm, and eagerly took his horse and rode into the field, and left his ring with his dwarf; and the dwarf was glad the ring was off him, for then he knew very well that he would be recognised. And then, when Sir Gareth was in the field, all the people saw him well and plainly, that he was in yellow colours; and there he tore off helms and pulled down knights, so that King Arthur wondered what knight he was, for the king saw by his hair that it was the same knight.
