Chapter 30: How Sir Gareth was spotted by the heralds, and how he slipped away from the field

But before, he had been in so many colours, and now he was in only one colour, and that was yellow.

"Now go," said King Arthur to several heralds, "and ride around him, and find out what sort of knight he is, for I have asked many knights today who are on his side, and they all say they don't know him."

And so a herald rode as near Gareth as he could, and there he saw written around his helm in gold: "This helm is Sir Gareth of Orkney's."

Then the herald shouted like a madman, and many heralds with him, "This is Sir Gareth of Orkney in the yellow arms!" At this all of Arthur's kings and knights looked at him and watched him; and then they all pressed forward to see him, and all the while the heralds shouted, "This is Sir Gareth of Orkney, King Lot's son!"

And when Sir Gareth saw that he had been found out, he doubled his strokes, and struck down Sir Sagramore, and his brother Sir Gawain.

"Oh, brother," said Sir Gawain, "I thought you would not have struck me."

So when he heard him say that, he pushed his way here and there, and so with great difficulty he got out of the thick of the crowd, and there he met his dwarf.

"Oh, boy," said Sir Gareth, "you've played me a foul trick today, keeping my ring. Give it back to me at once, so that I can hide myself with it."

And so he gave it to him. And then none of them knew what had become of him; but Sir Gawain had more or less seen where Sir Gareth rode, and he rode after him with all his might. Sir Gareth noticed that, and rode swiftly into the forest, so that Sir Gawain did not know what had become of him. And when Sir Gareth knew that Sir Gawain had gone by, he asked the dwarf for his best advice.

"Sir," said the dwarf, "it seems to me it would be best, now that you have escaped from being spied on, that you send my lady Dame Lionesse her ring."

"That's good advice," said Sir Gareth. "Now take it here and carry it to her, and say that I commend myself to her good grace, and tell her I will come when I can, and I beg her to be true and faithful to me as I will be to her."

"Sir," said the dwarf, "it shall be done as you command."

And so he rode on his way, and did his errand to the lady. Then she said, "Where is my knight, Sir Gareth?"

"Madam," said the dwarf, "he told me to say that he would not be long away from you."

And so the dwarf came back swiftly to Sir Gareth, who would very gladly have had a lodging, for he needed rest. And then there came thunder and rain, as if heaven and earth were coming together. And Sir Gareth was more than a little weary, for all that day he had had very little rest, neither his horse nor he. So this Sir Gareth rode on in that forest until night came. And all the while it lightened and thundered, as if it had gone mad. At last by chance he came to a castle, and there he heard the watchmen on the walls.
