Chapter 31: How Sir Gareth came to a castle where he was well lodged, and jousted with a knight and slew him

Then Sir Gareth rode up to the gate-tower of the castle, and asked the porter politely to let him into the castle. The porter answered him rudely, and said, "You'll get no lodging here."

"Fair sir, don't say that, for I am a knight of King Arthur's; and I beg the lord or the lady of this castle to give me shelter for the love of King Arthur."

Then the porter went to the duchess, and told her that there was a knight of King Arthur's who wanted shelter.

"Let him in," said the duchess, "for I want to see that knight, and for King Arthur's sake he shall not be without shelter."

Then she went up into a tower over the gate, with a great blaze of torches. When Sir Gareth saw that torchlight he called out loud, "Whether you are lord or lady, giant or champion, I care nothing for that, so long as I may have shelter tonight. And if it happens that I must fight, don't spare me tomorrow morning when I have rested, for both I and my horse are weary."

"Sir knight," said the lady, "you speak like a knight, and boldly. But you may be sure that the lord of this castle does not love King Arthur, nor anyone of his court, for my lord has always been against him. And therefore you would do better not to come into this castle; for if you come in tonight, you must come in on these terms: that wherever you meet my lord, by path or by road, you must yield yourself to him as his prisoner."

"Madam," said Sir Gareth, "who is your lord, and what is his name?"

"Sir, my lord's name is the Duke de la Rowse."

"Well, madam," said Sir Gareth, "I promise you that wherever I meet your lord I will yield myself to him and to his good grace, on the understanding that he will do me no harm. And if I find that he means to, I will free myself if I can, with my spear and my sword."

"You speak well," said the duchess.

And then she had the drawbridge let down, and so he rode into the hall, and there he dismounted, and his horse was led into a stable. And in the hall he took off his armour, and said, "Madam, I will not stir out of this hall tonight; and when it is daylight, whoever wants to fight me will find me ready."

Then he was seated at supper, and had many good dishes. Then Sir Gareth had a fine appetite, and he ate his food like a knight, and eagerly. There were many fair ladies near him, and some said they had never seen a finer-looking man, nor one who ate so well. Then they gave him an exceedingly warm welcome, and soon, when he had had his supper, his bed was made up there; so he rested all night.

And in the morning he heard mass, and broke his fast, and took his leave of the duchess and of them all, and thanked her graciously for his lodging and for his good welcome. And then she asked him his name.

"Madam," he said, "truly my name is Gareth of Orkney, and some men call me Beaumains."

Then she knew well that it was the same knight who had fought for Dame Lionesse. So Sir Gareth left, and rode up onto a mountain, and there a knight met him, whose name was Sir Bendelaine, and he said to Sir Gareth, "You won't pass this way. Either you joust with me, or you're my prisoner."

"Then I will joust," said Sir Gareth.

And so they let their horses run, and there Sir Gareth struck him clean through the body; and Sir Bendelaine rode on to his castle near by, and there he died. So Sir Gareth, wanting to rest, came riding up to Bendelaine's castle. Then his knights and servants saw that it was he who had killed their lord. Then they armed twenty good men, and came out and attacked Sir Gareth; and he had no spear, only his sword, and he set his shield in front of him; and there they broke their spears on him, and they attacked him exceedingly hard. But all the while Sir Gareth defended himself like a knight.
