Chapter 32: How Sir Gareth fought a knight who held thirty ladies in his castle, and how he slew him

So when they saw that they could not overcome him, they rode away from him, and decided among themselves to kill his horse; and so they came in on Sir Gareth, and with spears they killed his horse, and then they attacked him hard. But when he was on foot, there was not one he fought whom he did not give such a blow that he never recovered. So he killed them one by one until there were only four, and then they fled; and Sir Gareth took a good horse that was one of theirs, and rode on his way.

Then he rode at a great pace until he came to a castle, and there he heard a great mourning of ladies and gentlewomen. So a page came by him.

"What is this noise," said Sir Gareth, "that I hear inside this castle?"

"Sir knight," said the page, "there are thirty ladies inside this castle, and all of them are widows; for there is a knight who lies in wait every day outside this castle, and his name is the Brown Knight without Pity, and he is the most dangerous knight alive now. And therefore, sir," said the page, "I advise you to flee."

"No," said Sir Gareth, "I will not flee, though you are afraid of him."

And then the page saw the Brown Knight coming. "Look," said the page, "there he comes."

"Let me deal with him," said Sir Gareth.

And when each caught sight of the other they let their horses run, and the Brown Knight broke his spear, and Sir Gareth struck him clean through the body, so that he threw him to the ground stone dead. So Sir Gareth rode into the castle, and asked the ladies if he might rest there.

"Alas," said the ladies, "you cannot be lodged here."

"Give him a good welcome," said the page, "for this knight has killed your enemy."

Then they all gave him as good a welcome as lay in their power. But you may be sure they gave him a good welcome only as they could, for they could do no better, for they were poor.

And so in the morning he went to mass, and there he saw the thirty ladies kneeling, and lying grovelling on various tombs, grieving greatly and sorrowing. Then Sir Gareth knew well that their lords lay in the tombs.

"Fair ladies," said Sir Gareth, "you must be at King Arthur's court at the next feast of Pentecost, and say that I, Sir Gareth, sent you there."

"We shall do this," said the ladies.

So he left, and by chance he came to a mountain, and there he found a fine-looking knight who called to him, "Stop, sir knight, and joust with me."

"Who are you?" said Sir Gareth.

"My name," he said, "is the Duke de la Rowse."

"Ah, sir, you are the same knight in whose castle I once lodged; and there I promised your lady that I would yield myself to you."

"Ah," said the duke, "so you're that proud knight who offers to fight my knights? Then make yourself ready, for I will fight you."

So they let their horses run, and there Sir Gareth struck the duke down from his horse. But the duke swiftly got clear of his horse, and set his shield and drew his sword, and told Sir Gareth to dismount and fight with him. So he did dismount, and they fought a great fight together for more than an hour, and each wounded the other very badly. At last Sir Gareth got the duke to the ground, and would have killed him, and then he yielded to him.

"Then you must go," said Sir Gareth, "to Sir Arthur my lord at the next feast, and say that I, Sir Gareth of Orkney, sent you to him."

"It shall be done," said the duke, "and I will do homage and fealty to you, with a hundred knights with me; and all the days of my life I will do you service wherever you command me."
