Chapter 33: How Sir Gareth and Sir Gawain fought each other, and how they recognised each other through the damsel Linet

So the duke left, and Sir Gareth stood there alone; and there he saw an armed knight coming towards him. Then Sir Gareth took the duke's shield, and mounted his horse, and so without waiting they ran together as if it had been thunder. And there that knight wounded Sir Gareth in the side with his spear. And then they dismounted and drew their swords, and gave such great strokes that the blood ran trailing to the ground. And so they fought for two hours.

At last the damsel Linet came, whom some men called the Damsel Savage, and she came riding on an ambling mule; and there she cried out loud, "Sir Gawain, Sir Gawain, stop fighting your brother Sir Gareth!"

And when he heard her say so, he threw away his shield and his sword, and ran to Sir Gareth, and took him in his arms, and then knelt down and begged his pardon.

"Who are you," said Sir Gareth, "who just now were so strong and so mighty, and now so suddenly yield to me?"

"Oh, Gareth, I am your brother Sir Gawain, who has had great sorrow and labour for your sake."

Then Sir Gareth unlaced his helm, and knelt down to him, and begged his pardon. Then they both rose, and embraced each other in their arms, and wept a long while before they could speak, and each of them gave the other the prize of the fight. And there were many kind words between them.

"Alas, my fair brother," said Sir Gawain, "by God, I ought by rights to honour you even if you were not my brother, for you have done honour to King Arthur and all his court, for in this twelvemonth you have sent him more honourable knights than six of the best of the Round Table have done, except Sir Lancelot."

Then the Damsel Savage came up, who was the Lady Linet, who had ridden with Sir Gareth so long, and there she staunched Sir Gareth's wounds and Sir Gawain's.

"Now what will you do?" said the Damsel Savage. "It seems to me it would be well if Arthur knew about you both, for your horses are so bruised that they cannot carry you."

"Now, fair damsel," said Sir Gawain, "I beg you to ride to my lord my uncle, King Arthur, and tell him what has happened to me here, and I expect he will not be long in coming."

Then she took her mule, and swiftly she came to King Arthur, who was only two miles from there. And when she had told him the news, the king had a palfrey brought for him. And when he was on its back he told the lords and ladies to come after, whoever wished; and there was saddling and bridling of queens' horses and princes' horses, and lucky was the one who could be ready soonest.

So when the king came to where they were, he saw Sir Gawain and Sir Gareth sitting on a little hillside, and then the king got down from his horse. And when he came near Sir Gareth he tried to speak but could not; and with that he sank down in a faint for gladness. And so they leapt up and went to their uncle, and begged him of his good grace to take comfort. Believe me, the king rejoiced greatly, and many a pitiful lament he made to Sir Gareth, and all the while he wept like a child. With that his mother came, the Queen of Orkney, Dame Morgause, and when she saw Sir Gareth plainly face to face she could not weep, but suddenly fell down in a faint, and lay there a long while as if she were dead. And then Sir Gareth comforted his mother in such a way that she recovered and grew cheerful. Then the king commanded that all the knights who were under his rule should make their lodging right there, for the love of his nephews. And so it was done, and every kind of provision was supplied, so that nothing was lacking that could be got, tame or wild, for gold or silver. And then, through the care of the Damsel Savage, Sir Gawain and Sir Gareth were healed of their wounds; and there they stayed eight days.

Then King Arthur said to the Damsel Savage, "I wonder that your sister, Dame Lionesse, does not come here to me, and especially that she does not come to visit her knight, my nephew Sir Gareth, who has had so much labour for her love."

"My lord," said the damsel Linet, "of your good grace you must hold her excused, for she does not know that my lord, Sir Gareth, is here."

"Go for her, then," said King Arthur, "so that we can settle what is best to be done, according to the wishes of my nephew."

"Sir," said the damsel, "that shall be done."

And so she rode to her sister. And as swiftly as she could, Dame Lionesse made herself ready; and she came in the morning with her brother Sir Gringamore, and with her forty knights. And so when she had come she had all the welcome that could be given, both from the king and from many other kings and queens.
