Chapter 34: How Sir Gareth acknowledged to King Arthur that he and Dame Lionesse loved each other, and of the arrangements for their wedding

And among all these ladies she was named the fairest, and without equal. Then, when Sir Gareth saw her, there were many fond looks and fond words, so that all men of honour were glad to see them. Then King Arthur came, and many other kings, and Dame Guinevere, and the Queen of Orkney. And there the king asked his nephew, Sir Gareth, whether he would have that lady as his lover, or have her as his wife.

"My lord, you may be sure that I love her above all ladies living."

"Now, fair lady," said King Arthur, "what do you say?"

"Most noble king," said Dame Lionesse, "you may be sure that I would rather have and hold my lord Sir Gareth as my husband than any king or prince who is christened; and if I cannot have him, I promise you I will never have anyone. For, my lord Arthur," said Dame Lionesse, "believe me, he is my first love, and he shall be the last; and if you will allow him his will and free choice, I dare say he will have me."

"That is the truth," said Sir Gareth. "If I do not have you, and hold you as my wife, no lady or gentlewoman will ever gladden me."

"What, nephew," said the king, "is that the way the wind blows? Believe me, I would not for the loss of my crown be the cause of parting your hearts; and you may be sure you cannot love so well that I will not rather increase it than hinder it. And you shall also have my love and my lordship in the fullest way that lies in my power."

And Sir Gareth's mother said the same.

Then provision was made for the day of the marriage; and on the king's advice it was arranged that it should be at the following Michaelmas, at Kink Kenadon by the seaside, for that is a plentiful country. And so it was proclaimed in every place throughout the realm. And then Sir Gareth sent his summons to all those knights and ladies whom he had won in battle before, that they should be at his wedding day at Kink Kenadon by the sands.

And then Dame Lionesse, and the damsel Linet, with Sir Gringamore, rode to their castle; and she gave Sir Gareth a fine and rich ring, and he gave her another. And King Arthur gave her a rich rosary of gold beads; and so she left.

And King Arthur and his fellowship rode towards Kink Kenadon, and Sir Gareth escorted his lady on her way, and so came back to the king again and rode with him.

Lord, what a welcome Sir Lancelot gave Sir Gareth, and he him! For there was never any knight Sir Gareth loved so well as he did Sir Lancelot, and he would nearly always be in Sir Lancelot's company. For after Sir Gareth had seen what Sir Gawain's character was, he withdrew himself from his brother Sir Gawain's fellowship, for he was vengeful, and where he hated he would be avenged by murder; and Sir Gareth hated that.
