Chapter 35: Of the great splendour, and what officers were appointed at the wedding feast, and of the jousts at the feast

So Michaelmas drew near; and Dame Lionesse, the lady of the Castle Perilous, came there, and her sister, Dame Linet, with Sir Gringamore, her brother, with them, for he had the escorting of these ladies. And there they were lodged as King Arthur arranged. And on Michaelmas Day the Bishop of Canterbury performed the wedding between Sir Gareth and the Lady Lionesse with great solemnity. And King Arthur had Gaheris marry the Damsel Savage, who was Dame Linet; and King Arthur had Sir Agravain marry Dame Lionesse's niece, a fair lady, whose name was Dame Laurel.

And so, when this ceremony was done, the Green Knight, Sir Pertolepe, came in with thirty knights, and there he did homage and fealty to Sir Gareth, and these knights were to hold their lands of him for evermore. Sir Pertolepe also said, "I beg you that at this feast I may be your chamberlain."

"Willingly," said Sir Gareth, "since it pleases you to take so humble an office."

Then the Red Knight came in, with sixty knights with him, and did homage and fealty to Sir Gareth, and all those knights were to hold their lands of him for evermore. And then this Sir Perimones asked Sir Gareth to grant that he might be his chief butler at that high feast.

"Gladly," said Sir Gareth, "you shall have this office, and a better one if it were mine to give."

Then Sir Persant of Inde came in, with a hundred knights with him, and there he did homage and fealty, and all his knights were to do him service, and hold their lands of him for ever; and there he asked Sir Gareth to make him his chief sewer at the feast, the officer who sets the dishes on the table and tastes them.

"Gladly," said Sir Gareth, "you shall have it, and a better one if it were mine to give."

Then the Duke de la Rowse came, with a hundred knights with him, and there he did homage and fealty to Sir Gareth, and so they were to hold their lands of him for ever. And he asked Sir Gareth that he might serve him the wine on that day of the feast.

"Gladly," said Sir Gareth, "and a better office if it were mine to give."

Then the Red Knight of the Red Launds came in, who was Sir Ironside, and he brought three hundred knights with him, and there he did homage and fealty, and all these knights were to hold their lands of him for ever. And then he asked Sir Gareth to be his carver.

"Gladly," said Sir Gareth, "if it pleases you."

Then thirty ladies came into the court, and all of them looked like widows, and those thirty ladies brought many fair gentlewomen with them. And all of them knelt down at once before King Arthur and Sir Gareth, and there all those ladies told the king how Sir Gareth had freed them from the Dolorous Tower, and killed the Brown Knight without Pity: "And therefore we, and our heirs for evermore, will do homage to Sir Gareth of Orkney."

So then the kings and queens, princes and earls, barons and many bold knights, went to their meal; and you may well believe there was every kind of food in plenty, every kind of revel and game, with every kind of minstrelsy that was used in those days. There were also great jousts for three days. But the king would not allow Sir Gareth to joust, because of his new bride; for, as the French book says, Dame Lionesse asked the king that no one who was married should joust at that feast.

So on the first day Sir Lamorak de Galis jousted, for he unhorsed thirty knights, and did exceedingly marvellous deeds of arms; and then King Arthur made Sir Persant and his two brothers Knights of the Round Table to their lives' end, and gave them great lands. On the second day Tristram jousted best, and he unhorsed forty knights, and did marvellous deeds of arms there. And there King Arthur made Ironside, who was the Red Knight of the Red Launds, a Knight of the Round Table to his life's end, and gave him great lands. On the third day Sir Lancelot du Lake jousted, and he unhorsed fifty knights, and did many marvellous deeds of arms, so that all men wondered at him. And there King Arthur made the Duke de la Rowse a Knight of the Round Table to his life's end, and gave him great lands to live on. But when these jousts were done, Sir Lamorak and Sir Tristram left suddenly, and would not make themselves known, at which King Arthur and all the court were greatly displeased. And so they held the court forty days with great solemnity. And this Sir Gareth was a noble knight, and a well-governed one, and well-spoken.

Thus ends this tale of Sir Gareth of Orkney, who married Dame Lionesse of the Castle Perilous. And Sir Gaheris also married her sister, Dame Linet, who was called the Damsel Savage. And Sir Agravain married Dame Laurel, a fair lady and a great one; and King Arthur gave great riches and mighty lands with them, so that they might live royally to their lives' end.

Here follows the eighth book, which is the first book of Sir Tristram de Liones, and tells who his father and his mother were, and how he was born and brought up, and how he was made a knight.
