Chapter 1: How Sir Tristram de Liones was born, and how his mother died when he was born, and why she named him Tristram

There was a king called Meliodas, and he was lord and king of the country of Liones, and this Meliodas was as fine a knight as any living at that time. And as fortune had it he married King Mark of Cornwall's sister, and she was called Elizabeth, and she was said to be both good and beautiful. And at that time King Arthur reigned, and he was king of all England, Wales and Scotland, and of many other realms. Yet there were many kings who were lords of many countries, but they all held their lands from King Arthur; for in Wales there were two kings, and in the north there were many kings, and in Cornwall and in the west there were two kings; also in Ireland there were two or three kings, and all of them were under the rule of King Arthur. So was the King of France, and the King of Brittany, and all the lordships as far as Rome.

So when this King Meliodas had been with his wife, within a while she was big with child, and she was a very gentle lady, and she loved her lord well, and he loved her in return, so there was great joy between them. Now there was a lady in that country who had long loved King Meliodas, and by no means could she ever win his love. So one day, as King Meliodas rode hunting, for he was a great huntsman, she had it arranged that by an enchantment she made him chase a hart by himself alone, until he came to an old castle, and there at once he was taken prisoner by the lady who loved him. When Elizabeth, King Meliodas' wife, missed her lord, she was nearly out of her mind, and big with child as she was, she took a gentlewoman with her and ran into the forest to look for her lord. And when she was far into the forest she could go no farther, for her labour came on her fast. And she had many terrible pains; her gentlewoman helped her all she could, and so by a miracle of Our Lady of Heaven she was delivered, with great pain. But she had taken such a chill for lack of help that the deep pull of death took her, so that she must die and leave this world; there was no help for it.

And when this Queen Elizabeth saw that there was no help for it, she grieved greatly, and said to her gentlewoman, "When you see my lord, King Meliodas, commend me to him, and tell him what pains I suffer here for his love, and how I must die here for his sake for lack of good help; and let him know that I am very sorry to leave this world and him, and so beg him to be a friend to my soul. Now let me see my little child, for whom I have had all this sorrow."

And when she saw him she said this: "Ah, my little son, you have murdered your mother, and so I think that you, who are a murderer so young, are very likely to be a valiant man when you are grown. And because I shall die of giving birth to you, I charge you, gentlewoman, to beg my lord, King Meliodas, that when he is christened he have him named Tristram, which is as much as to say a sorrowful birth."

And with that the queen gave up the ghost and died. Then the gentlewoman laid her in the shade of a great tree, and then she wrapped the child as well as she could against the cold. Just then the barons came, following after the queen, and when they saw that she was dead, and took it for certain that the king was dead too, then some of them would have killed the child, because they wanted to be lords of the country of Liones.
