Chapter 2: How Sir Tristram's stepmother prepared poison to poison Sir Tristram

But then, through the fair speech of the gentlewoman and the efforts she made, most of the barons would not agree to it. And then they had the dead queen carried home, and there was much grieving for her.

Then in the meantime Merlin freed King Meliodas from prison, on the morning after his queen died. And so when the king came home most of the barons rejoiced greatly. But the sorrow the king felt for his queen, no tongue could tell. So then the king had her buried richly, and afterwards he had his child christened as his wife had commanded before her death. And then he had him named Tristram, the sorrowful-born child. Then King Meliodas lived seven years without a wife, and all this time Tristram was well brought up. Then it happened that King Meliodas married King Howell of Brittany's daughter, and soon she had children by King Meliodas. Then she was downcast and angry that her children would not inherit the country of Liones, and so this queen planned to poison young Tristram. So she had poison put in a silver cup in the room where Tristram and her children were together, intending that when Tristram was thirsty he should drink that drink. And so it happened one day that the queen's son, while he was in that room, saw the cup with the poison, and he thought it was good drink, and because the child was thirsty he took the cup with the poison and drank deeply; and with that the child suddenly burst and was dead.

When the queen of Meliodas learned of her son's death, you may be sure she was downcast. But still the king knew nothing of her treason. All the same the queen would not give this up, but she had more poison prepared again, and put it in a cup. And as fortune had it King Meliodas, her husband, found the cup with the wine where the poison was, and since he was very thirsty he took the cup to drink from it. And as he was about to drink from it the queen saw him, and then she ran to him and snatched the cup from him. The king wondered why she did so, and remembered how her son had been suddenly killed with poison. And then he took her by the hand and said, "You lying traitress, you will tell me what kind of drink this is, or I will kill you."

And with that he drew his sword, and swore a great oath that he would kill her unless she told him the truth.

"Ah, mercy, my lord," she said, "and I will tell you everything."

And then she told him why she had wanted to kill Tristram: so that her children would inherit his land.

"Well," said King Meliodas, "then you shall have the law."

And so she was condemned to be burned, with the agreement of the barons. And then a great fire was made, and just as she was at the fire to be executed, young Tristram knelt before King Meliodas and begged him to grant him a favour.

"Gladly," said the king.

Then young Tristram said, "Give me the life of your queen, my stepmother."

"That is wrongly asked," said King Meliodas, "for by rights you ought to hate her, since she would have killed you with that poison if she could have had her way; and it is mostly for your sake that I want her to die."

"Sir," said Tristram, "as for that, I beg you of your mercy to forgive her for it. And as for my part, may God forgive her, and I do. And since it pleased your highness to grant me my favour, for the love of God I ask you to keep your promise."

"Since that is how it is," said the king, "I will that you have her life." Then the king said, "I give her to you; go to the fire and take her, and do with her what you will."

So Sir Tristram went to the fire, and by the king's command saved her from death. But after that King Meliodas would never have anything to do with her, at bed or at table. But through young Tristram's good offices he made the king and her reconciled. But then the king would not allow young Tristram to stay any longer at his court.
