Chapter 4: How Sir Marhaus came over from Ireland to demand tribute from Cornwall, or else to fight for it

Then it happened that King Anguish of Ireland sent to King Mark of Cornwall for his tribute, which Cornwall had paid for many years. And all that time King Mark had been seven years behind with the tribute. And King Mark and his barons gave the messenger from Ireland this answer: that they would pay none. And they told the messenger to go to his King Anguish and tell him, "We will pay him no tribute. But tell your lord, if he insists on having tribute from us of Cornwall, to send a trusty knight of his land who will fight for his right, and we will find another to defend our right."

With this answer the messengers left for Ireland. And when King Anguish heard the messengers' answer he was furiously angry. And then he called to him Sir Marhaus, the good knight, who was nobly proven, and a knight of the Round Table. And this Marhaus was the brother of the queen of Ireland. Then the king said this: "Fair brother, Sir Marhaus, I beg you to go into Cornwall for my sake, and fight for our tribute, which by right we ought to have; and whatever you spend, you shall have plenty, more than you will need."

"Sir," said Marhaus, "you may be sure I will not be unwilling to fight for the right of you and your land against the best knight of the Round Table; for I know them, most of them, and what their deeds are. And to advance my deeds and to increase my honour I will very gladly go on this venture for our right."

So in all haste provision was made for Sir Marhaus, and he had everything he needed; and so he left Ireland, and landed in Cornwall right beside the Castle of Tintagil. And when King Mark understood that he had landed there to fight for Ireland, then King Mark was in great sorrow, when he understood that the good and noble knight Sir Marhaus had come. For they knew of no knight who dared fight him. For at that time Sir Marhaus was called one of the most famous and renowned knights in the world. And so Sir Marhaus stayed on the sea, and every day he sent to King Mark to pay the tribute that was seven years behind, or else to find a knight to fight him for the tribute. This kind of message Sir Marhaus sent to King Mark every day.

Then the men of Cornwall had proclamations made everywhere that whatever knight would fight to save Cornwall from the tribute would be rewarded so that he would be the better for it all his life. Then some of the barons spoke to King Mark and advised him to send to King Arthur's court to look for Sir Lancelot du Lake, who was at that time named the most marvellous knight in all the world. Then there were some other barons who advised the king not to do so, and said that it was labour in vain, because Sir Marhaus was a knight of the Round Table, and so any of them would be unwilling to fight another, unless it were some knight who chose of his own accord to fight disguised and unknown. So the king and all his barons agreed that there was no point in looking for any knight of the Round Table. Meanwhile word and rumour came to King Meliodas of how Sir Marhaus was waiting for a fight close by Tintagil, and how King Mark could find no knight at all to fight for him. When young Tristram heard of this he was angry, and deeply ashamed that no knight in Cornwall dared fight Sir Marhaus of Ireland.
