Chapter 5: How Tristram took on the fight for the tribute of Cornwall, and how he was made a knight

With that Tristram went to his father, King Meliodas, and asked his advice on what was best to do to free Cornwall from the tribute. "For it seems to me," said Sir Tristram, "it would be a shame if Sir Marhaus, the Irish queen's brother, went away without someone having fought him."

"As for that," said King Meliodas, "believe me, son Tristram, Sir Marhaus is called one of the best knights in the world, and a knight of the Round Table; and so I know of no knight in this country who is able to match him."

"Alas," said Sir Tristram, "that I am not made a knight! If Sir Marhaus should leave for Ireland like this, may God never let me have honour: if I were made a knight I would match him. And sir," said Tristram, "I beg you to give me leave to ride to King Mark; and, if you are not displeased, I will be made a knight by King Mark."

"I am content," said King Meliodas, "that you be ruled as your heart rules you."

Then Sir Tristram thanked his father warmly. And then he made himself ready to ride into Cornwall.

In the meanwhile there came a messenger with love letters to Sir Tristram from the daughter of King Faramon of France, and they were very pitiful letters, and in them were written many laments of love; but Sir Tristram took no joy in her letters, and paid them no regard. She also sent him a little hound that was exceedingly beautiful. But when the king's daughter understood that Sir Tristram would not love her, as the book says, she died of sorrow. And then the same squire who brought the letter and the hound came back to Sir Tristram, as you will hear later in the tale.

So this young Sir Tristram rode to his uncle, King Mark of Cornwall. And when he came there he heard it said that no knight would fight Sir Marhaus. Then Sir Tristram went to his uncle and said, "Sir, if you will give me the order of knighthood, I will fight Sir Marhaus."

"Who are you," said the king, "and where have you come from?"

"Sir," said Tristram, "I come from King Meliodas, who married your sister, and I am a gentleman, you may be sure."

King Mark looked at Sir Tristram and saw that he was only a young man in years, but he was exceedingly well made and big.

"Fair sir," said the king, "what is your name, and where were you born?"

"Sir," he answered, "my name is Tristram, and I was born in the country of Liones."

"Well spoken," said the king. "And if you will do this battle I will make you a knight."

"That is why I come to you," said Sir Tristram, "and for no other reason."

So then King Mark made him a knight. And with that, as soon as he had made him a knight, he sent a messenger to Sir Marhaus with letters saying that he had found a young knight ready to take on the battle to the uttermost.

"That may well be," said Sir Marhaus, "but tell King Mark I will not fight any knight unless he is of royal blood, that is to say, either a king's son or a queen's son, born of a prince or a princess."

When King Mark heard that, he sent for Sir Tristram de Liones and told him what Sir Marhaus had answered. Then Sir Tristram said, "Since he says so, let him know that on my father's side and my mother's side I come of blood as noble as his. For, sir, now you shall know that I am King Meliodas' son, born of your own sister, Dame Elizabeth, who died in the forest giving birth to me."

"Oh, Jesus," said King Mark, "you are welcome, fair nephew, to me."

Then in all haste the king had Sir Tristram horsed, and armed him in the best way that could be had or got for gold or silver. And then King Mark sent to Sir Marhaus, and let him know that a better-born man than he was himself would fight him, "and his name is Sir Tristram de Liones, fathered by King Meliodas, and born of King Mark's sister." Then Sir Marhaus was glad and happy that he would fight such a gentleman. And so, by the agreement of King Mark and of Sir Marhaus, they arranged that they would fight on an island near Sir Marhaus' ships; and so Sir Tristram was put into a boat, both his horse and he, and everything that belonged to him, both for himself and for his horse. Sir Tristram lacked nothing. And when King Mark and his barons of Cornwall saw young Sir Tristram set off in such style to fight for the right of Cornwall, there was no man or woman of rank who did not weep to see and understand that so young a knight would put himself in danger for their right.
