Chapter 7: How Sir Tristram fought against Sir Marhaus and won his battle, and how Sir Marhaus fled to his ship

And then Sir Marhaus looked Sir Tristram over, and said this: "Young knight, Sir Tristram, what are you doing here? I am very sorry for your boldness. For believe me, I have been tested, and the best knights of this land have been tested by my hand; and I have also matched myself with the best knights of the world. And so take my advice and go back to your boat."

"Fair knight, and well-proven knight," said Sir Tristram, "you may be sure I cannot abandon you in this quarrel, for it is for your sake I was made a knight. And you may be sure that I am a king's son by birth, fathered on a queen; and I have made such a promise, at my uncle's request and at my own seeking, that I will fight you to the uttermost, and free Cornwall from the old tribute. And believe me also, Sir Marhaus, this is the chief reason you give me the heart to fight you: because you are called one of the most renowned knights in the world, and because of that report and fame you have, you give me the courage to fight you, for I have never yet been tested against a good knight. And since I took the order of knighthood this very day, I am well pleased that I can fight so good a knight as you are. And now believe me, Sir Marhaus, I mean to win honour on your body; and if I am not yet proven, I trust to God that I shall be honourably proven on your body, and free the country of Cornwall for ever from every kind of tribute to Ireland, for ever."

When Sir Marhaus had heard him say what he would, he answered him like this: "Fair knight, since you mean to win honour from me, I tell you that you can lose no honour by me if you can stand three blows from me. For I tell you that for my noble deeds, proven and seen, King Arthur made me a knight of the Round Table."

Then they set their spears in rest, and they met so fiercely that they struck each other down, horse and all. But Sir Marhaus gave Sir Tristram a great wound in the side with his spear. And then they got clear of their horses, and drew their swords, and threw their shields in front of them. And then they laid into each other like men who were wild and full of fight. And when they had struck at each other like this for a long time, then they left off their blows and thrust at each other's breathing holes and visors; and when they saw that this could not help them, then they crashed together like rams, each trying to bear the other down. So they fought on for more than half a day, and each of them was badly wounded, so that the blood ran down fresh from them onto the ground. By then Sir Tristram was fresher than Sir Marhaus, and had better wind, and was bigger. And with a mighty stroke he hit Sir Marhaus on the helmet with such a blow that it went through his helmet, and through the steel cap under it, and through the skull; and the sword stuck so fast in the helmet and in his skull that Sir Tristram pulled three times at his sword before he could pull it out of his head. And there Marhaus fell down on his knees, with the edge of Tristram's sword left in his skull. And suddenly Sir Marhaus got up, stumbling, and threw his sword and his shield away from him, and so ran to his ships and fled; and Sir Tristram kept his shield and his sword.

And when Sir Tristram saw Sir Marhaus pull back, he said, "Ah, Sir Knight of the Round Table, why are you pulling back? You bring great shame on yourself and your kin. I am only a young knight, and was never tested before now, and rather than pull back from you I would sooner be hacked into a hundred pieces."

Sir Marhaus answered not a word, but went his way, groaning badly.

"Well, Sir Knight," said Sir Tristram, "I promise you your sword and your shield shall be mine; and I will wear your shield in every place I ride on my adventures, and in the sight of King Arthur and all the Round Table."
