Chapter 8: How Sir Marhaus, after he reached Ireland, died of the blow Sir Tristram had given him, and how Tristram was wounded

At once Sir Marhaus and his company left for Ireland. And as soon as he came to the king, his brother-in-law, he had his wounds probed. And when his head was probed a piece of Sir Tristram's sword was found in it, and no surgeons could ever get it out of his head, and so he died of Sir Tristram's sword. And that piece of the sword the queen, his sister, kept with her always, for she meant to be avenged if she could.

Now we turn back to Sir Tristram, who was badly wounded, and bled so heavily that, after a little while, when he had taken a chill, he could scarcely move his limbs. And then he sat himself down gently on a little hill, and bled fast. Then Gouvernail, his man, came at once with his boat; and the king and his barons came in procession to meet him. And when he had come to land, King Mark took him in his arms, and the king and Sir Dinas the Seneschal led Sir Tristram into the castle of Tintagil. And then his wounds were probed in the best way, and he was laid in his bed. And when King Mark saw his wounds he wept from his heart, and so did all his lords.

"So help me God," said King Mark, "I would not have my nephew die for all my lands."

So Sir Tristram lay there a month and more, and all the time he was likely to die of the blow that Sir Marhaus first gave him with the spear. For, as the French book says, the spearhead was poisoned, so that Sir Tristram could not be healed. Then King Mark and all his barons were exceedingly downcast, for they thought nothing else but that Sir Tristram would not recover. Then the king had all kinds of doctors and surgeons sent for, both men and women, and there was none who would promise him his life. Then there came a lady who was a very wise lady, and she said plainly to King Mark, and to Sir Tristram, and to all his barons, that he would never be healed unless Sir Tristram went into the same country the poison came from, and in that country he would be healed, or else never. That is what the lady said to the king.

When King Mark understood that, he had a fine ship made ready for Sir Tristram, well stocked with food, and Sir Tristram was put into it, and Gouvernail with him, and Sir Tristram took his harp with him; and so he was put out to sea to sail to Ireland. And so by good fortune he landed in Ireland right beside a castle where the king and the queen were; and as he arrived he sat up in his bed and played a merry song on his harp, such a one as they had never heard in Ireland before that time.

And when the king and the queen were told of such a knight who was such a harper, the king at once sent for him, and had his wounds probed, and then asked him his name. Then he answered, "I am from the country of Liones, and my name is Tramtrist, and I was wounded like this in a battle when I fought for a lady's right."

"So help me God," said King Anguish, "you shall have all the help in this land that you can have here. But I tell you, in Cornwall I had as great a loss as ever a king had, for there I lost the best knight in the world. His name was Marhaus, a very noble knight, and a knight of the Round Table."

And there he told Sir Tristram why Sir Marhaus had been killed. Sir Tristram put on a face as if he were sorry, and he knew better than the king how it had happened.
