Chapter 9: How Sir Tristram was first put in the care of Isolde the Fair to be healed of his wound

Then the king, out of great favour, had Tramtrist put in his daughter's charge and keeping, because she was a fine surgeon. And when she had probed him she found poison at the bottom of his wound, and so she healed him in a while. And because of that Tramtrist fell deeply in love with Isolde the Fair, for she was at that time the most beautiful maiden and lady in the world. And there Tramtrist taught her to play the harp, and she began to take a great fancy to him. And at that time Sir Palomides, the Saracen, was in that country, and much made of by the king and the queen. And every day Sir Palomides came close to Isolde the Fair and offered her many gifts, for he loved her exceedingly. Tramtrist saw all this, and he knew very well that Sir Palomides was a noble knight and a mighty man. And believe me, Sir Tramtrist bore Sir Palomides a great grudge, for Isolde the Fair told Tramtrist that Palomides was willing to be christened for her sake. So there was great rivalry between Tramtrist and Sir Palomides.

Then it happened that King Anguish had great jousts and a great tournament proclaimed for a lady who was called the Lady of the Launds, and she was a close cousin of the king. And whatever man won her should marry her three days later and have all her lands. This proclamation was made in England, Wales and Scotland, and also in France and in Brittany. One day Isolde the Fair came to Sir Tramtrist and told him about this tournament. He answered and said, "Fair lady, I am only a weak knight, and not long ago I would have been dead had it not been for your good ladyship. Now, fair lady, what would you have me do in this matter? You know well, my lady, that I cannot joust."

"Ah, Tramtrist," said Isolde the Fair, "why won't you fight at that tournament? I know well Sir Palomides will be there, and will do all he can; and so, Tramtrist, I beg you to be there, for otherwise Sir Palomides is likely to win the prize."

"Madam," said Tramtrist, "as for that, it may be so, for he is a proven knight, and I am only a young knight and lately made; and in the first battle I fought I had the bad luck to be badly wounded, as you see. But if I knew you would be my good lady, I will be at that tournament, provided you keep my secret and let no creature know that I am going to joust except yourself and those you trust to keep your secret. I will risk my poor person there for your sake, so that perhaps Sir Palomides will know when I come."

"As to that," said Isolde the Fair, "do your best. And as far as I can," said Isolde the Fair, "I will provide you with a horse and armour of my own choosing."

"As you wish, so be it," said Sir Tramtrist. "I will be at your command."

So on the day of the jousts Sir Palomides came with a black shield, and he overthrew many knights, so that all the people marvelled at him. For he got the better of Sir Gawain, Gaheris, Agravain, Bagdemagus, Kay, Dodinas le Savage, Sagramore le Desirous, Gumret le Petit, and Griflet le Fise de Dieu. All these Sir Palomides struck down to the earth on the first day. And then knights of every kind were afraid of Sir Palomides, and many called him the Knight with the Black Shield. So that day Sir Palomides won great honour.

Then King Anguish came to Tramtrist and asked him why he would not joust.

"Sir," he said, "I was hurt only lately, and I don't yet dare to risk myself."

Then there came the same squire who had been sent to Sir Tristram from the King of France's daughter. And when he saw Sir Tristram he fell flat at his feet. Isolde the Fair saw all this, and what courtesy the squire showed to Sir Tristram. And with that Sir Tristram suddenly ran to his squire, whose name was Hebes le Renoumes, and begged him earnestly not to tell his name on any account.

"Sir," said Hebes, "I will not reveal your name unless you command me to."
