Chapter 10: How Sir Tristram won the prize at a tournament in Ireland, and there made Palomides give up wearing armour for a year

Then Sir Tristram asked him what he was doing in those parts.

"Sir," he said, "I came here with Sir Gawain to be made a knight, and, if it pleases you, to be made a knight by your hands."

"Wait for me secretly tomorrow morning, and in the field I will make you a knight."

Then Isolde the Fair had a strong suspicion about Tramtrist, that he was some proven man of honour, and with that she took comfort, and loved him more than she had before. And so in the morning Sir Palomides made himself ready to come into the field, as he had the first day. And there he struck down the King with the Hundred Knights, and the King of Scots. Then Isolde the Fair had fitted out Sir Tristram well, with a white horse and white armour. And just then she had him let out at a secret back gate, and so he came into the field as if he had been a bright angel. And at once Sir Palomides saw him, and with that he set a spear in rest against Sir Tramtrist, and he did the same against him. And there Sir Tristram struck Sir Palomides down to the earth. And then there was a great uproar among the people: some said Sir Palomides had had a fall, some said the Knight with the Black Shield had had a fall. And you may be sure Isolde the Fair was exceedingly glad. And then Sir Gawain and his nine companions marvelled at what knight it could be who had struck down Sir Palomides. Then no one would joust with Tramtrist, but everyone there refused him, great and small. Then Sir Tristram made Hebes a knight, and made him put himself forward, and he did very well that day. So afterwards Sir Hebes stayed with Sir Tristram.

And when Sir Palomides had taken this fall, you may be sure he was deeply ashamed, and as secretly as he could he slipped away out of the field. Sir Tristram saw all this, and he rode swiftly after Sir Palomides and overtook him, and told him to turn, for he wanted to test him better before he left. Then Sir Palomides turned, and each of them slashed at the other with their swords. But at the first stroke Sir Tristram struck Palomides down, and gave him such a blow on the head that he fell to the earth. So then Tristram told him to yield and do as he commanded, or else he would kill him. When Sir Palomides saw the look on his face, he feared his blows so much that he granted everything he asked.

"Well said," said Sir Tristram. "This shall be your charge. First, on pain of your life, that you give up my lady Isolde the Fair, and in no way whatever come near her. Also, that for this twelvemonth and a day you wear no armour and no gear of war. Now promise me this, or you die here."

"Alas," said Palomides, "I am shamed for ever."

Then he swore as Sir Tristram had commanded him. Then, out of resentment and anger, Sir Palomides cut off his armour and threw it away.

And so Sir Tristram turned back to the castle where Isolde the Fair was. And on the way he met a damsel who was asking after Sir Lancelot, who had honourably won the Dolorous Gard; and this damsel asked Sir Tristram who he was. For she had been told that it was he who had struck down Sir Palomides, by whom the ten knights of King Arthur's had been struck down. Then the damsel begged Sir Tristram to tell her who he was, and whether he was Sir Lancelot du Lake, for she thought there was no knight in the world who could do such deeds of arms unless it were Lancelot.

"Fair damsel," said Sir Tristram, "believe me, I am not Sir Lancelot, for I was never of such prowess. But it is all in God's hands, and He may make me as good a knight as the good knight Sir Lancelot."

"Now, noble knight," she said, "put up your visor."

And when she saw his face she thought she had never seen a better man's face, nor a finer-looking knight. And then, when the damsel knew for certain that he was not Sir Lancelot, she took her leave and went away from him. And then Sir Tristram rode secretly to the back gate, where Isolde the Fair was waiting for him, and there she gave him a warm welcome, and thanked God for his good success. So soon after, within a little while, the king and the queen learned that it was Tramtrist who had struck down Sir Palomides; then he was made much more of than he had been before.
