Chapter 11: How the queen discovered by his sword that Sir Tristram had slain her brother Sir Marhaus, and what danger he was in

So Sir Tramtrist stayed there a long time, well cared for by the king and the queen, and above all by Isolde the Fair. Then one day the queen and Isolde the Fair prepared a bath for Sir Tramtrist. And while he was in his bath the queen and Isolde, her daughter, wandered up and down the room; and meanwhile Gouvernail and Hebes waited on Tramtrist, and the queen looked at his sword where it lay on his bed. And then, by ill luck, the queen drew out his sword and looked at it a long while, and both of them thought it an exceedingly fine sword; but a foot and a half from the point a great piece had been broken out of the edge. And when the queen saw that gap in the sword, she remembered a piece of a sword that had been found in the skull of Sir Marhaus, the good knight who was her brother.

"Alas," she said then to her daughter, Isolde the Fair, "this is the same traitor knight who killed my brother, your uncle."

When Isolde heard her say so she was badly shaken, for she loved Tramtrist exceedingly well, and she knew full well how cruel her mother the queen could be.

At once the queen went to her own room, and searched her chest, and there she took out the piece of the sword that had been pulled out of Sir Marhaus' head after he was dead. And then she ran with that piece of iron to the sword that lay on the bed. And when she put that piece of steel and iron to the sword, it fitted as exactly as it could have done when it was newly broken. And then the queen gripped that sword fiercely in her hand, and with all her might she ran straight at Tramtrist where he sat in his bath, and there she would have run him through if Sir Hebes had not caught her in his arms and pulled the sword from her; otherwise she would have thrust him through.

Then, when she was stopped from her evil intent, she ran to King Anguish, her husband, and said on her knees, "O my lord, here in your house you have the traitor knight who killed my brother and your servant, that noble knight, Sir Marhaus."

"Who is that," said King Anguish, "and where is he?"

"Sir," she said, "it is Sir Tramtrist, the same knight my daughter healed."

"Alas," said the king, "that makes me very sorry, for he is as noble a knight as I ever saw in the field. But I charge you," said the king to the queen, "not to meddle with that knight; leave him to me."

Then the king went into the room to Sir Tramtrist, but by then he had gone to his own room, and the king found him fully armed and ready to mount his horse. When the king saw him all armed and ready to ride, the king said, "No, Tramtrist, it will do you no good to match yourself against me. But this much I will do, for my honour and for the love I bear you: since you are within my court, it would be no honour to me to kill you. So on this condition I will give you leave to depart from this court in safety: that you tell me who your father was, and what your name is, and whether you killed Sir Marhaus, my brother."
