Chapter 12: How Sir Tristram took leave of the king and Isolde the Fair and left Ireland to come to Cornwall

"Sir," said Tristram, "now I will tell you the whole truth. My father's name is Sir Meliodas, King of Liones, and my mother was called Elizabeth, who was sister to King Mark of Cornwall; and my mother died giving birth to me in the forest, and because of that she commanded, before she died, that when I was christened they should christen me Tristram. And because I did not want to be known in this country I turned my name around and had myself called Tramtrist. And I fought over the tribute of Cornwall for my uncle's sake, and for the right of Cornwall, which you had held for many years. And believe me," said Tristram to the king, "I fought that battle for the love of my uncle, King Mark, and for the love of the country of Cornwall, and to increase my honour; for on the same day that I fought with Sir Marhaus I was made a knight, and never before then had I fought with any knight; and he went away from me alive, and left his shield and his sword behind."

"God help me," said the king, "I cannot deny that you did as a knight should, and it was your part to do it for your cause, and to increase your honour as a knight should. Even so, I cannot keep you in this country and keep my honour, unless I am willing to displease my barons, and my wife and her kin."

"Sir," said Tristram, "I thank you for the good lordship I have had from you here, and for the great kindness my lady, your daughter, has shown me. And so," said Sir Tristram, "it may happen that you will gain more by my life than by my death, for in the lands of England I may be able to do you a service some day, so that you will be glad you ever showed me your good lordship. What is more, I promise you, as I am a true knight, that in every place I will be my lady your daughter's servant and knight, in right and in wrong, and I will never fail her, but do as much as a knight may do. Also I beg your good grace that I may take my leave of my lady, your daughter, and of all the barons and knights."

"Gladly," said the king.

Then Sir Tristram went to Isolde the Fair and took his leave of her. And then he told her everything: who he was, and how he had changed his name because he did not want to be known, and how a lady had told him that he would never be healed until he came into this country where the poison was made, "which brought me close to my death, if your ladyship had not been there."

"O gentle knight," said Isolde the Fair, "I am full of sorrow at your going, for I never saw a man I wished so well." And with that she wept from the heart.

"Madam," said Sir Tristram, "you must understand that my name is Sir Tristram de Liones, begotten by King Meliodas, and born of his queen. And I promise you faithfully that I will be your knight all the days of my life."

"Many thanks," said Isolde the Fair, "and I promise you in return that I will not be married for these seven years except with your consent; and whomever you wish me to marry, him I will have, if he will have me and you consent."

And then Sir Tristram gave her a ring, and she gave him another; and with that he left her, grieving and lamenting greatly. And he went straight to the court among all the barons, and there he took his leave of great and small, and openly he said among them all, "Fair lords, it is so now that I must depart. If there is any man here whom I have offended, or who has any grievance against me, let him make his complaint here before me, before I go, and I will make it right as far as I can. And if there is anyone who wants to do me wrong, or speak wrong or shame of me behind my back, let him say it now or never, and here is my body to prove it on his, body against body."

And they all stood still; there was not one who would say a word. Yet there were some knights there who were of the queen's blood, and of Sir Marhaus' blood, but they would not meddle with him.
