Chapter 13: How Sir Tristram and King Mark wounded each other for the love of a knight's wife

So Sir Tristram departed, and took to the sea, and with a good wind he landed at Tintagil in Cornwall. And when King Mark was well and prospering, news came that Sir Tristram had arrived, healed of his wounds. King Mark was exceedingly glad of it, and so were all the barons. And when he saw his time Sir Tristram rode to his father, King Meliodas, and there he had all the welcome that the king and the queen could give him. And then King Meliodas and his queen generously shared out lands and goods to Sir Tristram.

Then, with the leave of King Meliodas, his father, he went back to the court of King Mark, and there he lived in great joy for a long time, until at last there arose a jealousy and an ill will between King Mark and Sir Tristram, for they both loved one lady. And she was the wife of an earl called Sir Segwarides. And this lady loved Sir Tristram exceedingly well. And he loved her in return, for she was an exceedingly beautiful lady, and Sir Tristram saw that plainly. Then King Mark understood it and was jealous, for King Mark loved her exceedingly well.

So it happened one day that this lady sent a dwarf to Sir Tristram, and bade him, as he loved her, to be with her the following night. "Also she charges you," said the dwarf, "not to come to her unless you are well armed, for her husband is called a good knight."

Sir Tristram answered the dwarf, "Commend me to my lady, and tell her I will not fail, but I will be with her at the time she has set me."

And with this answer the dwarf left. And King Mark saw that the dwarf had been with Sir Tristram on a message from Segwarides' wife. Then King Mark sent for the dwarf, and when he came he made the dwarf by force tell him everything, why and for what reason he had come on a message to Sir Tristram.

"Now," said King Mark, "go where you like, and on pain of death say not a word about what you said to me."

So the dwarf left the king.

And that same night that the meeting was set between Segwarides' wife and Sir Tristram, King Mark armed himself and made himself ready, and took two knights who were in his confidence with him; and so he rode ahead to lie in wait by the road for Sir Tristram. And as Sir Tristram came riding on his way with his spear in his hand, King Mark came charging at him suddenly with his two knights. And all three struck at him with their spears, and King Mark wounded Sir Tristram in the chest very badly. And then Sir Tristram set his spear in rest, and struck his uncle, King Mark, so hard that he hurled him to the earth, and bruised him so that he lay still in a swoon, and it was a long time before he could move himself. And then he ran at the one knight, and then at the other, and struck them to the cold earth, so that they lay still. And with that Sir Tristram rode on, badly wounded, to the lady, and found her waiting for him at a back gate.
