Chapter 14: How Sir Tristram slept with the lady, and how her husband fought with Sir Tristram

And there she welcomed him warmly, and they embraced each other in their arms, and she had his horse stabled in the best way, and then she unarmed him. And so they ate a light supper, and went to bed with great joy and pleasure; and in his passion he paid no heed to the fresh wound that King Mark had given him. And so Sir Tristram bled all over both the upper sheet and the lower, and the pillows, and the head sheet. And after a while someone came ahead who warned her that her husband was close by, within a bowshot. So she made Sir Tristram get up, and he armed himself, and took his horse, and so left. By then Segwarides, her husband, had come, and when he found her bed disordered and torn, and went near and looked at it by candlelight, he saw that a wounded knight had lain there.

"Ah, false traitress," he said then, "why have you betrayed me?" And with that he swung out a sword, and said, "Unless you tell me who has been here, here you die."

"Ah, my lord, mercy," said the lady, and held up her hands, saying, "Do not kill me, and I will tell you everything about who has been here."

"Tell me the whole truth at once," said Segwarides.

At once, out of fear, she said, "Sir Tristram was here with me, and on the way, as he came toward me, he was badly wounded."

"Ah, false traitress," said Segwarides, "where has he gone?"

"Sir," she said, "he has armed and gone on horseback, not half a mile from here yet."

"That's well said," said Segwarides.

Then he armed himself quickly, and got his horse, and rode after Sir Tristram, who was riding straight to Tintagil. And after a while he overtook Sir Tristram, and then he called on him, "Turn, false traitor knight!"

And Sir Tristram at once turned to face him. And with that Segwarides struck Sir Tristram with a spear so that it burst all to pieces; and then he swung out his sword and struck hard at Sir Tristram.

"Sir knight," said Sir Tristram, "I advise you to strike no more. Even so, for the wrongs I have done you, I will hold back from you as long as I can."

"No," said Segwarides, "that shall not be, for either you die or I do."

Then Sir Tristram drew his sword, and drove his horse at him fiercely, and he struck Sir Segwarides through the waist of the body so that he fell to the earth in a swoon. And so Sir Tristram rode away and left him there. And so he rode to Tintagil and took his lodging secretly, for he did not want it known that he was hurt. Sir Segwarides' men rode after their master too, and found him lying in the field badly wounded, and brought him home on his shield, and there he lay a long time before he was healed; but at last he recovered. King Mark, too, would not let it be known that he and Sir Tristram had met that night. And as for Sir Tristram, he did not know that it was King Mark who had met him. And so the king came casually to Sir Tristram, to comfort him as he lay sick in his bed. But as long as King Mark lived he never loved Sir Tristram after that; though there was fair speech, there was no love. And so many weeks and days passed, and all was forgiven and forgotten; for Sir Segwarides did not dare fight with Sir Tristram, because of his noble prowess, and also because he was King Mark's nephew. So he let it pass: for a man with a private hurt is loath to have a public shame.
