Chapter 15: How Sir Bleoberis asked for the fairest lady in King Mark's court and carried her off, and how he was fought

Then it happened one day that the good knight Bleoberis de Ganis, brother to Blamore de Ganis, and a close cousin of the good knight Sir Lancelot du Lake, this Bleoberis came to the court of King Mark, and there he asked King Mark for a favour: to give him whatever gift he would ask for in his court. When the king heard him ask this, he wondered at the request; but because he was a knight of the Round Table, and of great renown, King Mark granted him all he asked.

"Then," said Sir Bleoberis, "I will have the fairest lady in your court that I care to choose."

"I cannot say no," said King Mark. "Now choose as you like."

And so Sir Bleoberis chose Sir Segwarides' wife, and took her by the hand, and so went his way with her; and so he took his horse and had her set up behind his squire, and rode on his way.

When Sir Segwarides heard that his lady had gone with a knight of King Arthur's court, he armed himself and rode after that knight to rescue his lady. So when Bleoberis had gone with this lady, King Mark and all the court were angry that she was taken away. Then there were certain ladies who knew that there was great love between Sir Tristram and her, and also that that lady loved Sir Tristram above all other knights. Then there was one lady who rebuked Sir Tristram in the most horrible way, and called him a coward knight, that he could, to the shame of his knighthood, see a lady so shamefully carried off from his uncle's court. But what she meant was that the two of them had loved each other with all their hearts.

But Sir Tristram answered her like this: "Fair lady, it is not my part to meddle in such matters while her lord and husband is here. And if it had been that her lord was not here in this court, then for the honour of this court perhaps I would have been her champion. And if it turns out that Sir Segwarides does not fare well, it may happen that I will have words with that good knight before he leaves this country."

Then within a while one of Sir Segwarides' squires came, and told the court that Sir Segwarides was badly beaten and wounded almost to death: as he tried to rescue his lady, Sir Bleoberis had overthrown him and badly wounded him. Then King Mark was downcast at this, and all the court. When Sir Tristram heard of it he was ashamed and badly grieved; and then he was soon armed and on horseback, and Gouvernail, his servant, carried his shield and spear. And as Sir Tristram rode hard he met Sir Andred, his cousin, who by King Mark's command had been sent to bring in, if it lay in his power, two knights of Arthur's court who were riding through the country looking for adventures. When Sir Tristram saw Sir Andred he asked him what news.

"God help me," said Sir Andred, "it was never worse with me. For here, by King Mark's command, I was sent to fetch two knights of King Arthur's court, and one of them beat me and wounded me, and cared nothing for my message."

"Fair cousin," said Sir Tristram, "ride on your way, and if I can meet them it may happen that I will avenge you."

So Sir Andred rode into Cornwall, and Sir Tristram rode after the two knights, one of whom was called Sagramore le Desirous, and the other Dodinas le Savage.
