Chapter 16: How Sir Tristram fought with two knights of the Round Table

Then within a while Sir Tristram saw them ahead of him, two fine-looking knights.

"Sir," said Gouvernail to his master, "sir, I would advise you not to fight with them, for they are two proven knights of Arthur's court."

"As for that," said Sir Tristram, "have no fear: I will fight with them, to increase my honour, for it is many a day since I did any deeds of arms."

"Do as you like," said Gouvernail.

And with that Sir Tristram at once asked them where they came from, and where they were going, and what they were doing in those borders. Sir Sagramore looked at Sir Tristram, and scorned his words, and asked him in return, "Fair knight, are you a knight of Cornwall?"

"Why do you ask?" said Sir Tristram.

"Because it is seldom seen," said Sir Sagramore, "that you Cornish knights are valiant men-at-arms. For within these two hours one of your Cornish knights met us, and he talked big, and at once, with little strength, he was laid on the ground. And I believe," said Sir Sagramore, "you will get the same welcome he got."

"Fair lords," said Sir Tristram, "it may happen that I can hold out better than he did. And whether you like it or not, I will fight with you, because it was my cousin you beat. So do your best here, and believe me, unless you acquit yourselves better here on this ground, one knight of Cornwall will beat you both."

When Sir Dodinas le Savage heard him say so he took a spear in his hand, and said, "Sir knight, look out for yourself!"

And then they drew apart and came together as if it had been thunder. And Sir Dodinas' spear burst in pieces, but Sir Tristram struck him with greater force, so that he knocked him clean over his horse's rump, and very nearly broke his neck. When Sir Sagramore saw his companion take such a fall he wondered what knight this might be. And he lowered his spear with all his might, and Sir Tristram did the same against him, and they came together like thunder, and there Sir Tristram struck Sir Sagramore so strong a blow that he bore him and his horse to the earth, and in the fall he broke his thigh.

When this was done Sir Tristram asked them, "Fair knights, will you have any more? Are there no bigger knights in the court of King Arthur? It is a shame on you to speak dishonour of us knights of Cornwall, for it may happen that a Cornish knight can match you."

"That is the truth," said Sir Sagramore, "we have proved that well. But I beg you," said Sir Sagramore, "tell us your real name, by the faith and loyalty you owe to the high order of knighthood."

"You charge me with a great thing," said Sir Tristram, "and since you want to know it, you shall know and understand that my name is Sir Tristram de Liones, King Meliodas' son, and nephew to King Mark."

Then those two knights were glad that they had met Tristram, and so they begged him to stay in their company.

"No," said Sir Tristram, "for I must fight with one of your companions; his name is Sir Bleoberis de Ganis."

"God speed you well," said Sir Sagramore and Dodinas.

Sir Tristram left and rode on his way. And then he saw ahead of him, in a valley, Sir Bleoberis riding with Sir Segwarides' lady, who rode behind his squire on a palfrey.
