Chapter 17: How Sir Tristram fought with Sir Bleoberis for a lady, and how the lady was given the choice of which of them she would go with

Then Sir Tristram rode at more than a walk until he had overtaken him. Then Sir Tristram spoke. "Stop," he said, "knight of Arthur's court! Bring that lady back, or hand her over to me."

"I will do neither," said Bleoberis, "for I fear no Cornish knight so badly that I would care to hand her over."

"Why," said Sir Tristram, "can't a Cornish knight do as well as any other knight? This same day, within these three miles, two knights of your court met me, and before we parted they found one Cornish knight good enough for them both."

"What were their names?" said Bleoberis.

"They told me," said Sir Tristram, "that one of them was called Sir Sagramore le Desirous, and the other Dodinas le Savage."

"Ah," said Sir Bleoberis, "have you met them? God help me, they were two good knights and men of great honour, and if you have beaten them both you must be a good knight indeed. But even if you have beaten them both, you will not frighten me: you will have to beat me before you have this lady."

"Then defend yourself," said Sir Tristram.

So they drew apart and came together like thunder, and each bore the other down, horse and all, to the earth.

Then they got clear of their horses, and laid into each other eagerly and mightily with swords, now circling and sidestepping to the right and to the left for more than two hours. And sometimes they rushed together with such force that they both lay sprawling on the ground. Then Sir Bleoberis de Ganis leapt back, and said, "Now, good and gentle knight, hold your hands a while, and let us talk together."

"Say what you like," said Tristram, "and I will answer you."

"Sir," said Bleoberis, "I would like to know where you are from, and whose son you are, and what your name is."

"God help me," said Sir Tristram, "I am not afraid to tell you my name. Believe me, I am King Meliodas' son, and my mother is King Mark's sister, and my name is Sir Tristram de Liones, and King Mark is my uncle."

"Truly," said Bleoberis, "I am very glad of you, for you are the one who killed Marhaus the knight, hand to hand on an island, over the tribute of Cornwall. You also overcame Sir Palomides, the good knight, at a tournament on an island, where you beat Sir Gawain and his nine companions."

"God help me," said Sir Tristram, "believe me, I am the same knight. Now I have told you my name; tell me yours, and gladly."

"Believe me, my name is Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, and my brother is called Sir Blamore de Ganis, who is reckoned a good knight; and we are the sons of a sister of my lord Sir Lancelot du Lake, whom we count one of the best knights in the world."

"That is the truth," said Sir Tristram. "Sir Lancelot is called peerless in courtesy and in knighthood; and for his sake," said Sir Tristram, "I will not, if I can help it, fight with you any more, for the great love I have for Sir Lancelot du Lake."

"In good faith," said Bleoberis, "as for me, I would be loath to fight with you. But since you have followed me here to have this lady, I will offer you kindness, courtesy and gentleness right here on this ground. This lady shall stand between us both, and whichever of us she wants to go to, let him have her in peace."

"Gladly," said Tristram, "for, as I judge it, she will leave you and come to me."

"You will soon find out," said Bleoberis.
