Chapter 18: How the lady rejected Sir Tristram and stayed with Sir Bleoberis, and how she asked to go back to her husband

So when she was set between the two of them she said these words to Sir Tristram: "Believe me, Sir Tristram de Liones, until lately you were the man in the world I most loved and trusted, and I thought you loved me in return above all ladies. But when you saw this knight lead me away you made no move to rescue me, but let my lord Segwarides ride after me. Until that time I thought you loved me; and so now I will leave you, and never love you again."

And with that she went over to Sir Bleoberis.

When Sir Tristram saw her do so he was furiously angry with that lady, and ashamed to go back to the court.

"Sir Tristram," said Sir Bleoberis, "you are at fault, for I hear from this lady's words that before this day she trusted you above all earthly knights, and, as she says, you have deceived her. So believe me, no man can hold one who wants to go. And rather than have you heartily displeased with me, I would wish you had her, if she would stay with you."

"No," said the lady, "God help me, I will never go with him; for the one I loved most, I thought he loved me. And so, Sir Tristram," she said, "ride back the way you came, for even if you had beaten this knight, as you were likely to, I would never have gone with you. And I will beg this knight, as fairly as I can by his knighthood, that before he leaves this country he will take me to the abbey where my lord Sir Segwarides lies."

"God help me," said Bleoberis, "I'll have you know, good knight Sir Tristram, that because King Mark gave me the choice of a gift in his court, this lady pleased me best. Nevertheless, she is wedded and has a husband, and I have fulfilled my quest; she shall be sent back to her husband, and most especially for your sake, Sir Tristram. And if she would go with you, I would wish you had her."

"I thank you," said Sir Tristram, "but because of her love I shall be careful what kind of lady I love or trust. For if her husband, Sir Segwarides, had been away from the court, I would have been the first to follow you. But since you have refused me," he said to the lady, "as I am a true knight, I shall know her exceedingly well before I love or trust her."

And so they took their leave of one another and parted.

And so Sir Tristram rode to Tintagil, and Sir Bleoberis rode to the abbey where Sir Segwarides lay badly wounded, and there he handed over his lady, and departed as a noble knight. And when Sir Segwarides saw his lady, he was greatly comforted; and then she told him that Sir Tristram had fought a great battle with Sir Bleoberis, and made him bring her back. These words pleased Sir Segwarides very well, that Sir Tristram would do so much; and so that lady told King Mark all about the battle between Sir Tristram and Sir Bleoberis.
