Chapter 19: How King Mark sent Sir Tristram to Ireland for Isolde the Fair, and how by chance he landed in England

Then, when this was done, King Mark was always scheming in his heart how he might destroy Sir Tristram. And then he devised a plan to send Sir Tristram to Ireland for Isolde the Fair. For Sir Tristram had praised her beauty and her goodness so highly that King Mark said he would marry her, and so he asked Sir Tristram to make the journey to Ireland as his messenger. And all this was done with the aim of getting Sir Tristram killed. Nevertheless, Sir Tristram would not refuse the errand for any danger or peril that might befall, for the sake of pleasing his uncle; instead he made himself ready to go in the finest style that could be devised. For Sir Tristram took with him the finest knights he could find at the court; and they were dressed, in the fashion of that time, in the finest manner. So Sir Tristram departed and took to the sea with all his company. And soon, when he was out on the open sea, a storm caught him and his company, and drove them back to the coast of England; and there they came ashore close by Camelot, and were very glad to reach land.

And when they had landed Sir Tristram pitched his tent on the land of Camelot, and there he had his shield hung on the tent. And that same day two of King Arthur's knights came by, one of them Sir Ector de Maris, and the other Sir Morganor. And they touched the shield, and called on him to come out of the tent to joust, if he would joust.

"You shall have your answer," said Sir Tristram, "if you will wait a little while."

So he made himself ready, and first he struck down Sir Ector de Maris, and then he struck down Sir Morganor, all with one spear, and badly bruised them. And as they lay on the ground they asked Sir Tristram who he was, and of what country he was a knight.

"Fair lords," said Sir Tristram, "believe me, I am from Cornwall."

"Alas," said Sir Ector, "now I am ashamed that any Cornish knight should ever overcome me."

And then, out of vexation, Sir Ector took off his armour, and went on foot, and would not ride.
