Chapter 20: How King Anguish of Ireland was summoned to King Arthur's court on a charge of treason

Then it happened that Sir Bleoberis and Sir Blamore de Ganis, who were brothers, had summoned King Anguish of Ireland to come to Arthur's court on pain of losing King Arthur's good grace. And if the King of Ireland did not come in on the day assigned and set, the king would lose his lands. So it happened that on the day assigned, neither King Arthur nor Sir Lancelot could be there to give the judgment, for King Arthur was with Sir Lancelot at the castle of Joyous Gard. And so King Arthur appointed King Carados and the King of Scots to be judges there that day. So when the kings were at Camelot, King Anguish of Ireland had come to learn who his accusers were. Then Sir Blamore de Ganis was there, and accused the King of Ireland of treason, saying that he had killed a cousin of his in his court in Ireland by treason. The king was badly shaken by the accusation, because he had come at King Arthur's summons, and before he came to Camelot he did not know why he had been sent for. And when the king heard Sir Blamore say what he had to say, he understood well that there was no other remedy but to answer him as a knight; for the custom in those days was that if any man was accused of any treason or murder he had to fight body for body, or else find another knight to fight for him. And all kinds of murder in those days were called treason.

So when King Anguish understood the charge against him he was exceedingly downcast, for he knew Sir Blamore de Ganis for a noble knight, and one born of noble knights. Then the King of Ireland was poorly provided with an answer; so the judges gave him until the third day to give his answer. So the king went to his lodging.

Meanwhile a lady came by Sir Tristram's tent, grieving greatly.

"What is the matter with you," said Sir Tristram, "that you grieve so?"

"Ah, fair knight," said the lady, "I am disgraced unless some good knight helps me. For a great lady of high honour sent by me a fair child, and a rich one, to Sir Lancelot du Lake, and near here a knight met me, and threw me down from my palfrey, and took the child away from me."

"Well, my lady," said Sir Tristram, "for the sake of my lord Sir Lancelot I will get that child back for you, or else I will be beaten for it."

And so Sir Tristram took his horse, and asked the lady which way the knight had ridden; and she told him. And he rode after him, and within a while he overtook that knight. And then Sir Tristram called on him to turn and give back the child.
