Chapter 21: How Sir Tristram rescued a child from a knight, and how Gouvernail told him about King Anguish

The knight turned his horse and made ready to fight. And then Sir Tristram struck him such a blow with his sword that he tumbled to the ground. And then he yielded to Sir Tristram.

"Then come along," said Sir Tristram, "and take the child back to the lady."

So he took his horse meekly and rode with Sir Tristram; and on the way Sir Tristram asked him his name.

Then he said, "My name is Breuse Saunce Pité."

So when he had handed the child back to the lady, he said, "Sir, as for this, the child is put right."

Then Sir Tristram let him go again, which he bitterly regretted afterwards, for he was a great enemy to many good knights of King Arthur's court.

Then, when Sir Tristram was in his tent, Gouvernail his man came and told him that King Anguish of Ireland had come there, and was in great distress; and there Gouvernail told Sir Tristram how King Anguish had been summoned and accused of murder.

"God help me," said Sir Tristram, "this is the best news that has come to me these seven years, for now the King of Ireland will need my help. For I dare say there is no knight in this country who is not of Arthur's court who dares do battle with Sir Blamore de Ganis; and to win the love of the King of Ireland I will take the battle on myself. And so, Gouvernail, I charge you, take me to the king."

Then Gouvernail went to King Anguish of Ireland, and greeted him courteously. The king welcomed him and asked him what he wanted.

"Sir," said Gouvernail, "there is a knight close by who wishes to speak with you. He told me to say he would do you service."

"What knight is he?" said the king.

"Sir," he said, "it is Sir Tristram de Liones, who wants to repay you in this country for the good grace you showed him in your lands."

"Come on, fellow," said the king, "come with me at once and take me to Sir Tristram."

So the king took a small riding horse and only a few companions with him, and rode until he came to Sir Tristram's tent. And when Sir Tristram saw the king he ran to him and would have held his stirrup. But the king leapt nimbly from his horse, and each of them embraced the other in his arms.

"My gracious lord," said Sir Tristram, "many thanks for the great kindnesses you showed me in your borders and lands. And at that time I promised to do you service, if ever it lay in my power."

"And, noble knight," said the king to Sir Tristram, "now I have great need of you. I never had such great need of any knight's help."

"How so, my good lord?" said Sir Tristram.

"I will tell you," said the king. "I am summoned and accused, far from my own country, of the death of a knight who was kin to the good knight Sir Lancelot. And for this Sir Blamore de Ganis, brother to Sir Bleoberis, has called on me to fight with him, or else to find a knight to fight in my place. And I know well," said the king, "that those who come of King Ban's blood, such as Sir Lancelot and these others, are exceedingly good knights, and as hard to beat in battle as any men I know of now alive."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "for the good lordship you showed me in Ireland, and for the sake of my lady your daughter, Isolde the Fair, I will take the battle on myself for you, on this condition, that you grant me two things. The first is that you swear to me that you are in the right, and that you never consented to the knight's death."

"Sir," then said Sir Tristram, "the second is that when I have fought this battle, if God gives me the grace to succeed, you will give me a reward, whatever reasonable thing I ask of you."

"God help me," said the king, "you shall have whatever you ask."

"That is well said," said Sir Tristram.
