Chapter 22: How Sir Tristram fought for King Anguish and overcame his opponent, and how his opponent would never surrender

"Now give your answer that your champion is ready, for I would rather die in your cause than be shamed as a recreant."

"I have no doubts about you," said the king, "though if you had to fight with Sir Lancelot du Lake..."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "as for Sir Lancelot, he is called the noblest knight in the world, and you may be sure that the knights of his blood are noble men, and fear shame. And as for Bleoberis, brother to Sir Blamore, I have done battle with him, so on my life it is no shame to call him a good knight."

"It is rumoured," said the king, "that Blamore is the bolder knight."

"Sir, as for that, let it be. He shall never be refused, even if he were the best knight who now carries shield or spear."

So King Anguish went to King Carados and the kings who were acting as judges at that time, and told them that he had found his champion ready. Then, by the command of the kings, Sir Blamore de Ganis and Sir Tristram were sent for to hear the charge. And when they had come before the judges there were many kings and knights who looked at Sir Tristram, and much talk they had of him, because he had killed Sir Marhaus, the good knight, and because he had outjousted Sir Palomides, the good knight. So when they had taken their charge they withdrew to make ready to do battle.

Then Sir Bleoberis said to his brother, Sir Blamore, "Dear brother, remember what kin we come of, and what a man Sir Lancelot du Lake is, neither further nor nearer to us than brothers' children; and there was never any of our kin who was shamed in battle. Brother, suffer death rather than be shamed."

"Brother," said Blamore, "have no doubts of me, for I shall never shame any of my blood. Though I am sure that the knight over there is called as good a knight as any in the world in his day, yet I shall never yield, nor say the shameful word. He may well happen to strike me down with his great might of chivalry, but he shall kill me before I yield as a recreant."

"God speed you," said Sir Bleoberis, "for you will find him the mightiest knight you ever fought with, for I know him, since I have fought with him."

"God speed me," said Sir Blamore de Ganis.

And with that he took his horse at one end of the lists, and Sir Tristram at the other end of the lists, and so they set their spears in rest and came together as if it had been thunder; and there Sir Tristram, through his great might, struck Sir Blamore and his horse to the ground. Then at once Sir Blamore got clear of his horse and pulled out his sword and threw his shield in front of him, and told Sir Tristram to dismount: "For though a horse has failed me, I trust to God the earth will not fail me."

And then Sir Tristram dismounted, and squared up to fight; and there they laid into each other hard, pressing and circling, thrusting and dashing, with many heavy blows, so that the kings and knights wondered greatly that they could stand. For all the while they fought like madmen, so that knights were never seen to fight more fiercely than they did; for Sir Blamore was so hasty that he would take no rest, so that all men wondered that they had breath to stand on their feet; and all the place they fought in was bloody. And at last Sir Tristram struck Sir Blamore such a blow on the helm that he fell down there on his side, and Sir Tristram stood and looked at him.
