Chapter 23: How Sir Blamore begged Tristram to kill him, and how Sir Tristram spared him, and how they came to terms

Then, when Sir Blamore could speak, he said this: "Sir Tristram de Liones, I beg you, as you are a noble knight, and the best knight I ever met, that you kill me outright. For I would not live to be made lord of all the earth, for I would rather die with honour than live with shame. And you must kill me, Sir Tristram, or else you will never win the field, for I will never say the shameful word. And so, if you dare kill me, kill me, I beg you."

When Sir Tristram heard him speak so knightly, he did not know what to do with him. He thought of both sides: of what blood he came, and that for Sir Lancelot's sake he would be loath to kill him; and on the other side, that he had no choice at all but to make him say the shameful word, or else kill him.

Then Sir Tristram leapt back, and went to the kings who were the judges, and there he knelt down before them, and begged them, for their honour, and for King Arthur's and Sir Lancelot's sake, to take this matter into their own hands.

"For, my fair lords," said Sir Tristram, "it would be a shame and a pity for this noble knight who lies over there to be killed. For you hear well that he will not be shamed, and I pray to God that he is never killed nor shamed because of me. And as for the king I am fighting for, I will ask him, as I am his true champion and true knight in this field, to have mercy on this good knight."

"God help me," said King Anguish, "I will, for your sake. Sir Tristram, I will be ruled as you wish, for I know you for my true knight; and so I will heartily pray the kings who are here as judges to take it into their hands."

And the kings who were judges called Sir Bleoberis to them, and asked his advice.

"My lords," said Bleoberis, "though my brother is beaten, and has had the worse of it through might of arms, I dare say that though Sir Tristram has beaten his body he has not beaten his heart, and I thank God he is not shamed this day. And rather than have him shamed, I beg you," said Bleoberis, "let Sir Tristram kill him outright."

"It shall not be so," said the kings, "for the other party, both the king and the champion, have pity on Sir Blamore's knighthood."

"My lords," said Bleoberis, "I am well content to do as you will."

Then the kings called the King of Ireland, and found him gracious and ready to come to terms. And then, by all their advice, Sir Tristram and Sir Bleoberis lifted up Sir Blamore, and the two brothers were reconciled with King Anguish, and kissed and made friends for ever. And then Sir Blamore and Sir Tristram kissed each other, and there they swore their oaths that neither of the two brothers would ever fight with Sir Tristram, and Sir Tristram swore the same oath. And for that noble battle all the blood of Sir Lancelot loved Sir Tristram for ever.

Then King Anguish and Sir Tristram took their leave, and sailed to Ireland with great pomp and joy. So when they were in Ireland the king had it made known throughout the land how, and in what way, Sir Tristram had acted for him. Then the queen and everyone there made as much of him as they could. But no tongue could tell the joy that Isolde the Fair had of Sir Tristram, for of all earthly men she loved him most.
