Chapter 24: How Sir Tristram asked for Isolde the Fair on King Mark's behalf, and how Sir Tristram and Isolde drank the love potion

Then one day King Anguish asked Sir Tristram why he did not ask for his reward, for whatever he had promised him he should have without fail.

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "now it is time. This is all I will ask: that you give me Isolde the Fair, your daughter, not for myself, but for my uncle, King Mark, who shall have her for his wife, for I have promised him so."

"Alas," said the king, "I would rather than all the land I have that you would marry her yourself."

"Sir, if I did, then I would be shamed for ever in this world, and false to my promise. And so," said Sir Tristram, "I pray you keep the promise you made me. For this is my wish, that you give me Isolde the Fair to go with me into Cornwall to be married to King Mark, my uncle."

"As for that," said King Anguish, "you shall have her with you, to do with her as you please. That is to say, if you care to marry her yourself, that is what I would like best; and if you will give her to King Mark, your uncle, that is your choice."

So, to cut a long story short, Isolde the Fair was made ready to go with Sir Tristram, and Dame Bragwaine went with her as her chief lady-in-waiting, with many others.

Then the queen, Isolde's mother, gave a drink to her and to Dame Bragwaine, her daughter's lady-in-waiting, and to Gouvernail, and charged them that on the day King Mark was married, that same day they should give him that drink, so that King Mark should drink to Isolde the Fair, "and then," said the queen, "I promise you each will love the other all the days of their lives."

So this drink was given to Dame Bragwaine and to Gouvernail. And then at once Sir Tristram put to sea, and Isolde the Fair with him. And when they were in their cabin, it so happened that they were thirsty, and they saw a little flask of gold standing beside them, and it seemed by the colour and the taste that it was noble wine. Then Sir Tristram took the flask in his hand, and said, "Madam Isolde, here is the best drink you ever drank, which Dame Bragwaine, your maid, and Gouvernail, my servant, have kept for themselves."

Then they laughed and were merry, and each drank freely to the other, and they thought that no drink they ever drank to each other was so sweet or so good. But by the time that drink was in their bodies, they loved each other so well that their love never parted, for good or for ill. And so it happened, the first love between Sir Tristram and Isolde the Fair, which love never parted all the days of their lives.

So then they sailed on until by chance they came near a castle that was called Pluere, and landed there to rest, expecting to find good lodging. But as soon as Sir Tristram was inside the castle they were taken prisoner; for the custom of the castle was this: whoever rode by that castle and brought any lady with him had to fight with the lord, who was called Breunor. And if Breunor won the field, then the stranger knight and his lady were to be put to death, whoever they were; and if the strange knight won the field against Sir Breunor, then he was to die, and his lady too. This custom had been kept for many winters, and so it was called the Castle Pluere, that is to say the Weeping Castle.
