Chapter 25: How Sir Tristram and Isolde were taken prisoner, and how he fought over her beauty and cut off another lady's head

So while Sir Tristram and Isolde the Fair were in prison, it happened that a knight and a lady came to them where they were, to cheer them up.

"I wonder," said Tristram to the knight and the lady, "why the lord of this castle keeps us in prison. It was never the custom of any place of honour that I ever came to, when a knight and a lady asked for lodging and were taken in, to destroy them afterwards, being his guests."

"Sir," said the knight, "this is the old custom of this castle: that when a knight comes here he must fight with our lord, and the one who is weaker must lose his head. And when that is done, if the lady he brings is uglier than our lord's wife, she must lose her head; and if she is proved fairer than our lady, then the lady of this castle shall lose her head."

"God help me," said Sir Tristram, "this is a foul custom and a shameful one. But I have one advantage," said Sir Tristram. "I have a lady who is fair enough; I never saw a fairer in all the days of my life, and I have no fear that she will lose her head for lack of beauty. And rather than lose my own head I will fight for it on a fair field. So, sir knight, I pray you tell your lord that I will be ready tomorrow morning, with my lady, and myself ready to do battle, if I may have my horse and my armour."

"Sir," said that knight, "I promise you your wish shall be well granted." And then he said, "Take your rest, and see that you are up early and make yourself and your lady ready, for you shall lack nothing that you need."

And with that he left. And early the next morning that same knight came to Sir Tristram, and fetched him and his lady out, and brought him his own horse and armour, and told him to make ready for the field, for all the ranks and the common people of that lordship were there ready to watch that battle and that judgement.

Then Sir Breunor, the lord of that castle, came with his lady by the hand, veiled, and asked Sir Tristram where his lady was. "For if your lady is fairer than mine, then with your sword strike off my lady's head; and if my lady is fairer than yours, with my sword I must strike off her head. And if I can beat you, your lady shall still be mine, and you shall lose your head."

"Sir," said Tristram, "this is a foul custom and a horrible one; and rather than have my lady lose her head, I would sooner lose my own."

"No, no," said Sir Breunor, "the ladies shall first be shown side by side, and one of them shall have her judgement."

"No, I will not have it so," said Sir Tristram, "for there is no one here who will give a just judgement. But I have no doubt," said Sir Tristram, "that my lady is fairer than yours, and that I will prove and make good with my hand. And whoever says the contrary, I will prove it on his head."

And with that Sir Tristram showed Isolde the Fair, and turned her three times round, with his naked sword in his hand. And when Sir Breunor saw that, he turned his lady round the same way. But when Sir Breunor looked at Isolde the Fair, he thought he had never seen a fairer lady, and then he feared his lady's head would be off. And so all the people who were there gave judgement that Isolde the Fair was the fairer lady and the better made.

"How now," said Sir Tristram, "it seems to me it would have been a pity for my lady to lose her head. But because you and she have kept this wicked custom for a long time, and many good knights and ladies have been destroyed by the two of you, for that reason it would be no loss to destroy you both."

"God help me," said Sir Breunor, "to tell the truth, your lady is fairer than mine, and I am bitterly sorry for it. And so I hear the people saying quietly, for of all women I never saw one so fair. And so, if you kill my lady, I have no doubt I will kill you and have your lady."

"You shall win her," said Sir Tristram, "as dearly as ever knight won lady. And because of your own judgement, which you would have carried out on my lady if she had been the uglier, and because of the evil custom, give me your lady," said Sir Tristram.

And with that Sir Tristram strode up to him and took his lady from him, and with a backhand stroke he struck off her head clean.

"Well, knight," said Sir Breunor, "now you have done me an insult. Now take your horse. Since I am without a lady, I will win your lady if I can."
