Chapter 27: How Sir Galahalt fought with Sir Tristram, and how Sir Tristram surrendered to him and promised to join Lancelot's fellowship

Then Sir Galahalt came, and the King with the Hundred Knights with him; and this Sir Galahalt offered to fight with Sir Tristram hand to hand. And so they made ready to go into battle on horseback with great spirit. Then Sir Galahalt and Sir Tristram met so hard that each bore the other down, horse and all, to the ground. And then they got clear of their horses like noble knights, and set their shields, and drew their swords in anger and rancour, and they laid into each other with many heavy blows, now striking, now thrusting, circling and sidestepping like noble knights. So they fought for a long time, nearly half a day, and both were badly wounded. At last Sir Tristram grew quick and strong, and doubled his strokes, and drove Sir Galahalt back on the one side and on the other, so that he was likely to have been killed.

With that the King with the Hundred Knights came, and all that company went fiercely at Sir Tristram. When Sir Tristram saw them coming at him, he knew well he could not hold out. Then, as a knight wise in war, he said to Sir Galahalt, the high prince, "Sir, you show me no knighthood in letting all your men fight with me at once; and since you seem to me a noble knight with your own hands, it is a great shame to you."

"God help me," said Sir Galahalt, "there is no other way but that you must yield to me, or else die," said Sir Galahalt to Sir Tristram.

"I will rather yield to you than die, for this is more by the might of your men than of your hands."

And with that Sir Tristram took his own sword by the point, and put the pommel into the hand of Sir Galahalt.

With that the King with the Hundred Knights came up, and began to attack Sir Tristram hard.

"Leave him be," said Sir Galahalt. "Don't you dare touch him, for I have given this knight his life."

"That is your shame," said the King with the Hundred Knights. "Has he not killed your father and your mother?"

"As for that," said Sir Galahalt, "I can hardly blame him much, for my father held him in prison, and forced him to do battle with him. And my father had a custom, and a shameful custom it was, that whatever knight came there to ask for lodging, his lady had to die unless she was fairer than my mother; and if my father overcame that knight, he had to die. This was a shameful custom and practice, that a knight who asked for lodging should have such lodging as that. And because of this custom I would never have anything to do with him."

"God help me," said the king, "this was a shameful custom."

"Truly," said Sir Galahalt, "so it seemed to me; and it seemed to me it would have been a great pity for this knight to have been killed, for I dare say he is the noblest man alive, unless it is Sir Lancelot du Lake. Now, fair knight," said Sir Galahalt, "I ask you to tell me your name, and where you are from, and where you are going."

"Sir," he said, "my name is Sir Tristram de Liones, and I was sent on an errand from King Mark of Cornwall to King Anguish of Ireland, to fetch his daughter to be his wife; and here she is, ready to go with me into Cornwall, and her name is Isolde the Fair."

"And, Sir Tristram," said Sir Galahalt, the high prince, "you are well met in these borders. And if you will promise me to go to Sir Lancelot du Lake, and keep company with him, you shall go where you will, and your fair lady with you; and I promise you that never in all my days shall such customs be kept in this castle as have been kept here."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "now let me tell you, God help me, that I thought you were Sir Lancelot du Lake when I first saw you, and so I feared you the more. And, sir, I promise you," said Sir Tristram, "as soon as I can I will see Sir Lancelot and join his fellowship; for of all the knights in the world, his fellowship is what I most desire."
