Chapter 28: How Sir Lancelot met Sir Carados carrying off Sir Gawain, and of the rescue of Sir Gawain

And then Sir Tristram took his leave when he saw his time, and put to sea. And in the meantime word came to Sir Lancelot and to Sir Tristram that Sir Carados, the mighty king, who was built like a giant, had fought with Sir Gawain, and given him such blows that he fainted in his saddle; and after that he took him by the collar and pulled him out of his saddle, and bound him fast to his saddlebow, and so rode on his way with him towards his castle. And as he rode, by chance Sir Lancelot met with Sir Carados, and at once he recognised Sir Gawain, who lay bound behind him.

"Ah," said Sir Lancelot to Sir Gawain, "how goes it with you?"

"Never so hard," said Sir Gawain, "unless you help me. For, God help me, unless you rescue me I know of no knight who can, except either you or Sir Tristram."

At this Sir Lancelot was grieved by Sir Gawain's words. And then Sir Lancelot said to Sir Carados, "Put down that knight and fight with me."

"You're nothing but a fool," said Sir Carados, "for I'll serve you the same way."

"As for that," said Sir Lancelot, "don't spare me, for I warn you I will not spare you."

And then he bound Sir Gawain hand and foot, and so threw him to the ground. And then he took his spear from his squire, and rode away from Sir Lancelot to take his distance for the charge. And so each met the other, and they broke their spears right down to their hands; and then they pulled out their swords, and crashed together on horseback for more than an hour. And at last Sir Lancelot struck Sir Carados such a blow on the helm that it pierced his skull. So then Sir Lancelot took Sir Carados by the collar and pulled him down under his horse's feet, and then he dismounted and pulled off his helm and struck off his head. And then Sir Lancelot unbound Sir Gawain.

So this same tale was told to Sir Galahalt and to Sir Tristram (here you may hear of the nobleness that follows Sir Lancelot).

"Alas," said Sir Tristram, "if I did not have this errand in hand with this fair lady, truly I would never stop until I had found Sir Lancelot."

Then Sir Tristram and Isolde the Fair went to sea and came into Cornwall, and there all the barons met them.
