Chapter 29: Of the wedding of King Mark and Isolde the Fair, and of Bragwaine her maid, and of Palomides

And at once they were richly married with great pomp. But always, as the French book says, Sir Tristram and Isolde the Fair loved each other still. Then there were great jousts and great tourneying, and many lords and ladies were at that feast, and Sir Tristram was praised most of all. So the feast lasted a long time. And after the feast was done, within a little while after, two ladies who were with Queen Isolde plotted together, out of hatred and envy, to destroy Dame Bragwaine, who was maid and lady-in-waiting to Isolde the Fair. And she was sent into the forest to fetch herbs, and there she was waylaid, and bound feet and hands to a tree, and so she was kept bound for three days. And by chance Sir Palomides found Dame Bragwaine, and there he saved her from death, and brought her to a nunnery close by, to recover.

When Isolde the queen missed her maid, you may be sure she was as downcast as ever any queen was, for of all earthly women she loved her best; the reason was that she had come with her out of her own country. And so one day Queen Isolde walked into the forest to put her thoughts aside, and there she went by herself to a spring and lamented bitterly. And suddenly Palomides came to her, who had heard all her lament, and said, "Madam Isolde, if you will grant me my wish, I will bring Dame Bragwaine to you safe and sound."

And the queen was so glad of his offer that, on the spur of the moment and without thinking, she granted all he asked.

"Well, madam," said Palomides, "I trust to your promise, and if you will wait here half an hour I will bring her to you."

"I will wait for you," said Isolde the Fair.

And Sir Palomides rode off on his way to that nunnery, and quickly came back with Dame Bragwaine. But by her own will she would not have come back, because for love of the queen she had put her life in danger. Nevertheless, half against her will, she went with Sir Palomides to the queen. And when the queen saw her she was exceedingly glad.

"Now, madam," said Palomides, "remember your promise, for I have kept mine."

"Sir Palomides," said the queen, "I do not know what your wish is, but I want you to know that though I promised you freely, I meant no harm, and I warn you I will do no harm."

"Madam," said Sir Palomides, "for now you shall not know my wish. But before my lord your husband you shall know that I will have the wish you have promised me."

And with that the queen left, and rode home to the king, and Sir Palomides rode after her. And when Sir Palomides came before the king, he said, "Sir King, I ask you, as you are a just king, to judge my case rightly."

"Tell me your case," said the king, "and you shall have justice."
