Chapter 30: How Palomides claimed Queen Isolde, and how Lambegus rode after her to rescue her, and of Isolde's escape

"Sir," said Palomides, "I promised your Queen Isolde to bring back Dame Bragwaine, whom she had lost, on this agreement: that she would grant me a wish that I would ask, and she granted it to me without grudging or thinking it over."

"What do you say, my lady?" said the king.

"It is as he says, God help me," said the queen. "To tell you the truth, I promised him what he asked out of the love and joy I had in seeing her."

"Well, madam," said the king, "even if you were hasty in granting him whatever wish he asked, I will have you keep your promise."

"Then," said Palomides, "I want you to know that I will have your queen, to lead her away and keep her wherever I please."

At that the king stood still, and thought of Sir Tristram, and judged that he would rescue her. And then the king answered hastily, "Take her, with whatever adventures may come of it, for I expect you won't enjoy her for long."

"As for that," said Palomides, "I dare well risk the adventure."

And so, to cut a long story short, Sir Palomides took her by the hand and said, "Madam, do not be unwilling to go with me, for I want nothing but your own promise."

"As for that," said the queen, "I am not much afraid to go with you, though you have the advantage of me through my promise; for I have no doubt I shall be honourably rescued from you."

"As for that," said Sir Palomides, "let it be as it may."

So Queen Isolde was set behind Palomides on his horse, and he rode on his way.

At once the king sent for Sir Tristram, but he could not be found anywhere, for he was in the forest hunting; for that was always his custom, when he was not bearing arms, to chase and to hunt in the forests.

"Alas," said the king, "now I am shamed for ever, since by my own consent my lady and my queen will be destroyed."

Then a knight came forward. His name was Lambegus, and he was one of Sir Tristram's knights.

"My lord," said this knight, "since you have trust in my lord, Sir Tristram, you may be sure that for his sake I will ride after your queen and rescue her, or else I shall be beaten."

"Many thanks," said the king. "As I live, Sir Lambegus, I will repay you for it."

And then Sir Lambegus armed himself, and rode after them as fast as he could. And then within a while he overtook Sir Palomides. And then Sir Palomides left the queen.

"Who are you?" said Palomides. "Are you Tristram?"

"No," he said, "I am his servant, and my name is Sir Lambegus."

"I'm sorry for that," said Palomides. "I'd rather you had been Sir Tristram."

"I well believe you," said Lambegus, "but when you meet Sir Tristram you'll have your hands full."

And then they crashed together and burst their spears to pieces, and then they pulled out their swords, and hewed at helms and hauberks. At last Sir Palomides gave Sir Lambegus such a wound that he fell to the ground like a dead knight.

Then he looked round for Isolde the Fair, and by then she was gone, he did not know where. You may be sure Sir Palomides was never so downcast. For the queen had run into the forest, and there she found a spring, and she had thought to drown herself in it. And as good fortune would have it, a knight came to her who had a castle near by; his name was Sir Adtherp. And when he found the queen in that distress he rescued her, and brought her to his castle. And when he knew who she was he armed himself, and took his horse, and said he would be avenged on Palomides. And so he rode on until he met with him, and there Sir Palomides wounded him badly, and by force made him tell him why he had done battle with him, and how he had taken the queen to his castle.

"Now take me there," said Palomides, "or you'll die at my hands."

"Sir," said Sir Adtherp, "I am so wounded I cannot follow, but ride this way and it will bring you to my castle, and the queen is inside it."

Then Sir Palomides rode on until he came to the castle. And at a window Isolde the Fair saw Sir Palomides; then she had the gates shut fast. And when he saw he could not get into the castle, he took off his horse's bridle and saddle, and turned his horse out to graze, and sat himself down at the gate like a man out of his wits, who cared nothing for himself.
