Chapter 31: How Sir Tristram rode after Palomides, found him and fought with him, and how through Isolde the fight was stopped

Now we turn to Sir Tristram. When he came home and learned that Isolde the Fair had gone off with Sir Palomides, believe me, he was angry beyond measure.

"Alas," said Sir Tristram, "this day I am shamed."

Then he called to Gouvernail his man, "Hurry and get me armed and on horseback, for I know well that Lambegus has neither the might nor the strength to stand against Sir Palomides. Alas that I was not there in his place!"

So as soon as he was armed and mounted, Sir Tristram and Gouvernail rode after them into the forest, and within a while he found his knight Lambegus wounded almost to the death. And Sir Tristram carried him to a forester, and charged him to look after him well. And then he rode on, and there he found Sir Adtherp badly wounded, and he told him how the queen would have drowned herself if it had not been for him, and how for her sake and her love he had taken it upon himself to fight Sir Palomides.

"Where is my lady?" said Sir Tristram.

"Sir," said the knight, "she is safe enough inside my castle, if she can keep herself within it."

"Many thanks," said Sir Tristram, "for your great goodness."

And so he rode until he came near that castle. And then Sir Tristram saw Sir Palomides sitting asleep at the gate, with his horse grazing close in front of him.

"Now you go, Gouvernail," said Sir Tristram, "and tell him to wake up and make himself ready."

So Gouvernail rode up to him and said, "Sir Palomides, get up, and put on your armour."

But he was so lost in thought that he did not hear what Gouvernail said. So Gouvernail came back and told Sir Tristram that he was asleep, or else he was mad.

"Go back again," said Sir Tristram, "and tell him to get up, and tell him that I am here, his mortal enemy."

So Gouvernail rode back again and prodded him with the butt of his spear, and said, "Sir Palomides, make yourself ready, for believe me, Sir Tristram is waiting over there, and sends you word that he is your mortal enemy."

And with that Sir Palomides got up quietly, without a word, and went to his horse, and saddled him and bridled him, and lightly he leapt up, and took his spear in his hand. And each of them set his spear in rest and they crashed together fast; and there Tristram struck Sir Palomides down over his horse's tail. Then Sir Palomides quickly put his shield in front of him and drew his sword. And there a hard fight began on both sides, for they both fought for the love of one lady, and all the while she lay on the walls and watched them fight beyond measure. And each of them was wounded exceedingly badly, but Palomides was much the worse wounded. So they fought, circling and sidestepping, for more than two hours, until Isolde the Fair nearly fainted from grief and sorrow.

"Alas," she said, "the one I loved and love still, and the other I do not love; and yet it would be a great pity for me to see Sir Palomides killed. For I know well that by the time this is over Sir Palomides is as good as a dead knight. And because he is not christened I would be loath for him to die a Saracen."

And with that she came down and begged Sir Tristram to fight no more.

"Ah, madam," he said, "what do you mean? Do you want me shamed? You know well that I will be ruled by you."

"I do not want your dishonour," said Isolde the Fair, "but I wish that for my sake you would spare this ill-fated Saracen Palomides."

"Madam," said Sir Tristram, "I will stop fighting for now, for your sake."

Then she said to Sir Palomides, "This shall be your charge: you are to leave this country for as long as I am in it."

"I will obey your command," said Sir Palomides, "though it is sorely against my will."

"Then take your way," said Isolde the Fair, "to the court of King Arthur, and there commend me to Queen Guinevere, and tell her I send her word that there are only four lovers in this land, that is, Sir Lancelot du Lake and Queen Guinevere, and Sir Tristram de Liones and Queen Isolde."
