Chapter 32: How Sir Tristram brought Queen Isolde home, and of the quarrel between King Mark and Sir Tristram

And so Sir Palomides went away, very heavy-hearted. And Sir Tristram took the queen and brought her back to King Mark, and then there was great rejoicing at her homecoming. And who was made much of but Sir Tristram! Then Sir Tristram had his knight Sir Lambegus fetched from the forester's house, and it was a long time before he was healed, but at last he made a good recovery.

So they lived a long while in joy and pleasure. But all the while Sir Andred, who was Sir Tristram's close cousin, lay in wait to watch Sir Tristram and Isolde the Fair, so as to catch them and bring scandal on them. So one day Sir Tristram was talking with Isolde the Fair in a window, and Sir Andred saw it, and told the king. Then King Mark took a sword in his hand and came at Sir Tristram, and called him a false traitor, and would have struck him. But Sir Tristram was close to him, and ran in under his sword, and took it out of his hand.

And then the king cried, "Where are my knights and my men? I order you to kill this traitor!"

But at that time there was not one who would stir at his words. When Sir Tristram saw that there was not one who would stand against him, he shook the sword at the king, and made as though he would have struck him. And then King Mark ran, and Sir Tristram went after him, and struck him five or six blows on the neck with the flat of the sword, so that he made him fall flat on his face. And then Sir Tristram went his way and armed himself, and took his horse and his man, and so he rode into that forest.

And there one day Sir Tristram met two brothers who were knights of King Mark's, and there he struck off the head of the one, and wounded the other to the death; and he made him carry his brother's head in his helmet to the king. And thirty more he wounded there. And when that knight came before the king to give his message, he died there in front of the king and the queen. Then King Mark called his council to him, and asked his barons' advice about what was best to do with Sir Tristram.

"Sir," said the barons, and Sir Dinas the Seneschal in particular, "sir, our advice to you is to send for Sir Tristram, for we want you to know that many men would side with Sir Tristram if he were in a hard spot. And sir," said Sir Dinas, "you must understand that Sir Tristram is called peerless and without equal among Christian knights, and for might and boldness we know of no knight as good, unless it is Sir Lancelot du Lake. And if he leaves your court and goes to King Arthur's court, you may be sure he will win himself such friends there that he will care nothing for your malice. And so, sir, I advise you to take him back into your favour."

"I am content," said the king, "that he be sent for, so that we may be friends."

Then the barons sent for Sir Tristram under a safe-conduct. And so when Sir Tristram came to the king he was made welcome, and nothing was said of what had passed, and there was sport and pleasure. And then the king and the queen went hunting, and Sir Tristram with them.
