Chapter 33: How Sir Lamorak jousted with thirty knights, and how Sir Tristram, at King Mark's request, struck his horse down

The king and the queen pitched their pavilions and their tents in that forest beside a river, and there was hunting and jousting every day, for there were always thirty knights ready to joust against all who came by at that time. And there by chance came Sir Lamorak de Galis and Sir Driant; and there Sir Driant jousted very well, but at last he had a fall. Then Sir Lamorak offered to joust. And when he began, he dealt so with the thirty knights that there was not one of them he did not give a fall, and some of them were badly hurt.

"I wonder," said King Mark, "what knight he is who does such deeds of arms."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "I know him well for as noble a knight as few now living are, and his name is Sir Lamorak de Galis."

"It would be a great shame," said the king, "for him to go away like this, unless some of you can meet him better."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "it seems to me there would be no honour for a noble man in fighting him. Because at this time he has done more than enough for any ordinary knight alive, it seems to me it would be a great shame and a low thing to put him to the test any more at this time, since he and his horse are both weary. For the deeds of arms he has done today, if they are well considered, would be enough for Sir Lancelot du Lake."

"As for that," said King Mark, "I ask you, as you love me and my lady the queen, Isolde the Fair, take your arms and joust with Sir Lamorak de Galis."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "you are telling me to do a thing that is against knighthood. And I can well judge that I shall give him a fall, for it is no great feat, since my horse and I are both fresh, and his horse and he are not. And believe me, he will take it as a great unkindness, for one good knight is always loath to take another at a disadvantage. But because I do not wish to displease you, as you ask me, so I will do, and obey your command."

And so Sir Tristram armed himself and took his horse, and rode out, and there Sir Lamorak met him mightily. And what with the force of his own spear and of Sir Tristram's spear, Sir Lamorak's horse fell to the earth, with him sitting in the saddle. Then as nimbly as he could he got clear of the saddle and his horse, and put his shield in front of him and drew his sword.

And then he called to Sir Tristram, "Get down, knight, if you dare!"

"No," said Sir Tristram, "I will have no more to do with you, for I have done too much to you already, to my dishonour and to your credit."

"As for that," said Sir Lamorak, "I owe you no thanks. Since you have outjousted me on horseback, I demand of you, and I beg you, if you are Sir Tristram, fight with me on foot."

"I will not," said Sir Tristram. "And believe me, my name is Sir Tristram de Liones, and I know well that you are Sir Lamorak de Galis. And what I have done to you was against my will, but I was asked to do it. But as for doing what you ask at this time, I will have no more to do with you, for I am ashamed of what I have done."

"As for the shame," said Sir Lamorak, "on your side or on mine, carry it yourself if you like. For though a mare's son has failed me, a queen's son shall not fail you. And so, if you are the knight men call you, I demand of you, get down and fight with me."

"Sir Lamorak," said Sir Tristram, "I understand that your heart is high, and you have cause for it, to tell you the truth. For it would grieve me if any knight kept himself fresh and then struck down a weary knight; for there was never knight or horse made that could always stand firm or hold out. And so," said Sir Tristram, "I will not fight you, for I am sorry for what I have done."

"As for that," said Sir Lamorak, "I shall pay you back, if ever I see my chance."
