Chapter 34: How Sir Lamorak sent a horn to King Mark to spite Sir Tristram, and how Sir Tristram was driven into a chapel

So he rode away from him with Sir Driant, and on the way they met a knight who had been sent from Morgan le Fay to King Arthur. And this knight had a fine horn mounted with gold, and the horn had this power: that no lady or gentlewoman could drink from that horn unless she was true to her husband; and if she was false she would spill all the drink, and if she was true to her lord she could drink in peace. And it was because of Queen Guinevere, and to spite Sir Lancelot, that this horn was being sent to King Arthur. And Sir Lamorak forced that knight to tell the whole reason why he carried that horn.

"Now you shall carry this horn," said Lamorak, "to King Mark, or else choose to die for it. For I tell you plainly, to spite and shame Sir Tristram you shall carry that horn to King Mark, his uncle, and tell him that I sent it to him to test his lady, and if she is true to him he will find it out."

So the knight went on his way to King Mark, and brought him that rich horn, and said that Sir Lamorak had sent it to him, and told him besides what power the horn had. Then the king made Queen Isolde drink from it, and a hundred ladies, and of all those who drank there were only four ladies who drank clean.

"Alas," said King Mark, "this is a great insult." And he swore a great oath that she should be burned, and the other ladies too.

Then the barons gathered together, and said plainly that they would not have those ladies burned for a horn made by sorcery, which came from as false a sorceress and witch as was then alive. For that horn never did any good, but caused strife and quarrelling, and all her days she had been an enemy to all true lovers. So there were many knights who swore that if ever they met Morgan le Fay, they would show her short courtesy. Sir Tristram too was exceedingly angry that Sir Lamorak had sent that horn to King Mark, for he knew well that it was done to spite him. And so he meant to pay Sir Lamorak back.

Then Sir Tristram took to going to Queen Isolde by day and by night whenever he could, and all the while Sir Andred his cousin watched him night and day so as to catch him with Isolde the Fair. And so one night Sir Andred spied out the hour and the time when Sir Tristram went to his lady. Then Sir Andred got together twelve knights, and at midnight he fell on Sir Tristram secretly and suddenly, and there Sir Tristram was taken naked in bed with Isolde the Fair. And then he was bound hand and foot, and so he was kept until day.

And then, with the consent of King Mark, and of Sir Andred, and of some of the barons, Sir Tristram was led to a chapel that stood on the rocks above the sea, to receive his sentence there; and so he was led there bound, with forty knights. And when Sir Tristram saw that there was no other help for it, but he must die, then he said, "Fair lords, remember what I have done for the country of Cornwall, and what danger I have been in for the good of you all. For when I fought for the tribute of Cornwall with Sir Marhaus, the good knight, I was promised a better reward, when all of you refused to take on the fight. And so, as you are good, well-born knights, do not see me die so shamefully, for it is a shame to all knighthood to see me die like this. For I dare say," said Sir Tristram, "that I never met a knight but I was as good as he, or better."

"Shame on you," said Sir Andred, "you false traitor, with your boasting! For all your bragging you shall die this day."

"O Andred, Andred," said Sir Tristram, "you ought to be my kinsman, and now you are utterly unfriendly to me. But if there were no one here but you and me, you would not put me to death."

"No?" said Sir Andred, and with that he drew his sword, and would have killed him.

When Sir Tristram saw him make such a show, he looked at both his hands, which were bound fast to two knights; and suddenly he pulled them both to him, and wrenched his hands free. And then he leapt at his cousin, Sir Andred, and wrested his sword out of his hands; then he struck Sir Andred so that he fell to the earth. And so Sir Tristram fought until he had killed ten knights. So then Sir Tristram took the chapel and held it mightily. Then there was a great outcry, and the people flocked to Sir Andred, more than a hundred of them. When Sir Tristram saw the people coming at him, he remembered that he was naked, and bolted the chapel door fast, and broke the bars of a window, and so he leapt out and fell on the crags in the sea. And so at that time neither Sir Andred nor any of his companions could get to him, at that time.
