Chapter 35: How Sir Tristram was rescued by his men, and of Queen Isolde, who was put in a lepers' hut, and how Tristram was wounded

So when they had gone, Gouvernail, and Sir Lambegus, and Sir Sentraille de Lushon, who were Sir Tristram's men, went looking for their master. When they heard he had escaped, they were exceedingly glad; and they found him on the rocks, and pulled him up with towels. And then Sir Tristram asked them where Isolde the Fair was, for he thought she had been carried off by Andred's people.

"Sir," said Gouvernail, "she has been put in a lepers' hut."

"Alas," said Sir Tristram, "that is a most unfitting place for such a fair lady, and if I can help it she shall not be there long."

And so he took his men and went to where Isolde the Fair was, and fetched her away, and brought her into a forest to a fine manor house, and Sir Tristram stayed there with her. So the good knight told his men to leave him: "For at this time I cannot help you." So they all went away except Gouvernail.

And so one day Sir Tristram went into the forest to amuse himself, and then it happened that he fell asleep there. And there came a man whose brother Sir Tristram had killed some time before, and when this man found him he shot him through the shoulder with an arrow; and Sir Tristram leapt up and killed that man. And in the meantime King Mark was told how Sir Tristram and Isolde the Fair were in that same manor, and as soon as ever he could he came there with many knights to kill Sir Tristram. And when he got there he found him gone; and there he took Isolde the Fair home with him, and kept her so closely guarded that by no means could she ever get word of Tristram or send to him, nor he to her. And then, when Sir Tristram came back towards the old manor, he found the tracks of many horses, and from that he knew his lady was gone. And then Sir Tristram grieved greatly, and suffered great pain for a long time, for the arrow he had been wounded with was poisoned.

Then Isolde the Fair found a way to tell a lady who was a cousin of Dame Bragwaine, and she came to Sir Tristram, and told him that he could not be healed by any means: "For your lady, Isolde the Fair, cannot help you, and so she bids you hurry to Brittany, to King Howell, and there you will find his daughter, Isolde of the White Hands, and she will help you."

Then Sir Tristram and Gouvernail found themselves a ship, and so they sailed to Brittany. And when King Howell knew that it was Sir Tristram, he was very glad of him.

"Sir," he said, "I have come to this country to have help from your daughter, for I am told that there is no one else who can heal me but she."

And so within a while she healed him.
