Chapter 36: How Sir Tristram served King Howell of Brittany in his war, and killed his enemy on the field

There was an earl called Grip, and this earl made great war on the king, and got the better of the king, and besieged him. And one time Sir Kehydius, who was King Howell's son, was badly wounded, near to death, as he sallied out.

Then Gouvernail went to the king and said, "Sir, I advise you to ask my lord, Sir Tristram, to help you in your need."

"I will do as you advise," said the king.

And so he went to Sir Tristram, and begged him to help him in his wars: "For my son, Sir Kehydius, cannot go into the field."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "I will go to the field and do what I can."

Then Sir Tristram sallied out of the town with such a company as he could get together, and did such deeds that all Brittany talked of him. And then at last, by great might and force, he killed the Earl Grip with his own hands, and he killed more than a hundred knights that day. And then Sir Tristram was received with honour, with a procession.

Then King Howell took him in his arms, and said, "Sir Tristram, I will give up all my kingdom to you."

"God forbid," said Sir Tristram, "for I am bound to serve you for your daughter's sake."

Then, through the great efforts of King Howell and his son Kehydius, and by great offers, great love grew up between Isolde and Sir Tristram, for that lady was both good and beautiful, and a woman of noble blood and good name. And because Sir Tristram had such welcome and riches and every other pleasure he had there, he had almost forsaken Isolde the Fair. And so at one time Sir Tristram agreed to marry Isolde of the White Hands. And at last they were married, and solemnly held their wedding. And so, when they were both in bed, Sir Tristram remembered his old lady, Isolde the Fair. And then such a sudden grief took hold of him that he was utterly dismayed, and he gave her no other welcome than embracing and kissing. As for any other bodily desire, Sir Tristram never thought of it, nor lay with her: so the French book says. It says too that the lady thought there was no pleasure but kissing and embracing.

And in the meantime there was a knight in Brittany whose name was Suppinabiles, and he came over the sea to England, and then he came to the court of King Arthur, and there he met Sir Lancelot du Lake, and told him of Sir Tristram's marriage.

Then Sir Lancelot said, "Shame on him, a knight untrue to his lady, that so noble a knight as Sir Tristram should be found false to his first lady, Isolde the Fair, Queen of Cornwall! But tell him this," said Sir Lancelot, "that of all knights in the world I loved him most, and took most joy in him, and all for his noble deeds. And let him know that the love between him and me is over for ever, and that from this day on I give him warning as his mortal enemy."
