Chapter 37: How Sir Suppinabiles told Sir Tristram how he was slandered at King Arthur's court, and of Sir Lamorak

Then Sir Suppinabiles went back to Brittany, and there he found Sir Tristram, and told him that he had been at King Arthur's court.

Then Sir Tristram said, "Did you hear anything of me?"

"God help me," said Sir Suppinabiles, "I heard Sir Lancelot speak great shame of you there, saying that you are a false knight to your lady; and he told me to let you know that he will be your mortal enemy wherever he may meet you."

"I am sorry for that," said Tristram, "for of all knights, his was the company I loved to be in."

So Sir Tristram lamented greatly, and was ashamed that noble knights should speak ill of him for the sake of his lady. And meanwhile Isolde the Fair wrote a letter to Queen Guinevere, complaining of Sir Tristram's faithlessness, and of how he had married the King of Brittany's daughter. Queen Guinevere sent her another letter, and told her to take heart, for she would have joy after sorrow; for Sir Tristram was known as so noble a knight that ladies would use sorcery to make such noble men marry them. "But in the end," Queen Guinevere said, "it shall be this way: that he will hate her, and love you better than ever he did before."

So we leave Sir Tristram in Brittany, and speak of Sir Lamorak de Galis. As he was sailing, his ship struck a rock and was lost with all aboard, except Sir Lamorak and his squire. And there he swam mightily, and fishermen of the Isle of Servage picked him up; and his squire was drowned. And the seamen had great labour to save Sir Lamorak's life, for all the comfort they could give him.

And the lord of that isle was called Sir Nabon le Noire, a great mighty giant. And this Sir Nabon hated all King Arthur's knights, and would do them no favour of any kind. And these fishermen told Sir Lamorak all Sir Nabon's ways: how no knight of King Arthur's ever came there but he destroyed him. And at the last fight he had, Sir Nanowne le Petite was killed, whom he put to a shameful death to spite King Arthur, for he was torn limb from limb.

"I am sorry for that knight's death," said Sir Lamorak, "for he was my cousin; and if I were as well as ever I was, I would avenge his death."

"Hush," said the fishermen, "and say nothing of that here, for before ever you leave this place Sir Nabon must know that you have been here, or else we would die for your sake."

"So long as I am healed," said Lamorak, "of the sickness I have taken in the sea, I want you to tell him that I am a knight of King Arthur's, for I was never afraid to own my lord."
