Chapter 38: How Sir Tristram and his wife landed in Wales, and how he met Sir Lamorak there

Now we turn to Sir Tristram. One day he took a little boat, with his wife Isolde of the White Hands and Sir Kehydius her brother, to amuse themselves along the coast. And when they were out from the land, a wind drove them in to the coast of Wales, onto this Isle of Servage, where Sir Lamorak was, and there the boat broke up; and there Dame Isolde was hurt. And as best they could they got into the forest, and there by a spring he saw Segwarides and a damsel. And then they greeted each other.

"Sir," said Segwarides, "I know you for Sir Tristram de Liones, the man in the world I have most cause to hate, because you came between me and my wife. But as for that," said Sir Segwarides, "I will never hate a noble knight for the sake of a faithless woman. And so I beg you, be my friend, and I will be yours as far as I can. For believe me, you are in a hard spot in this valley, and we shall each have enough to do to help the other."

And then Sir Segwarides brought Sir Tristram to a lady nearby who had been born in Cornwall, and she told him all the dangers of that valley, and how no knight ever came there but he was taken prisoner or killed.

"Believe me, fair lady," said Sir Tristram, "I killed Sir Marhaus and freed Cornwall from the tribute to Ireland, and I am the one who freed the King of Ireland from Sir Blamore de Ganis, and I am the one who beat Sir Palomides. And you may be sure I am Sir Tristram de Liones, who by the grace of God shall free this woeful Isle of Servage."

So Sir Tristram was well looked after. Then someone told him there was a knight of King Arthur's who had been wrecked on the rocks.

"What is his name?" said Sir Tristram.

"We do not know," said the fishermen, "but he makes no secret that he is a knight of King Arthur's, and he cares nothing for the mighty lord of this isle."

"I beg you," said Sir Tristram, "if you can, bring him here so that I may see him, and if he is any of Arthur's knights I shall know him."

Then the lady asked the fishermen to bring him to her house. So the next day they brought him there in a fisherman's clothes; and as soon as Sir Tristram saw him he smiled at him and knew him well, but he did not know Sir Tristram.

"Fair sir," said Sir Tristram, "it seems to me from your face that you have been ill not long ago, and I also think I ought to know you from before."

"I can well believe," said Sir Lamorak, "that you have seen me and met me."

"Fair sir," said Sir Tristram, "tell me your name."

"I will tell you on one condition," said Sir Lamorak, "that is, that you tell me whether or not you are the lord of this island, the one called Nabon le Noire."

"Truly," said Sir Tristram, "I am not he, nor do I hold land from him. I am his enemy as much as you are, and so I shall be found before I leave this isle."

"Well," said Sir Lamorak, "since you have spoken so freely to me, my name is Sir Lamorak de Galis, son of King Pellinore."

"Truly, I well believe it," said Sir Tristram, "for if you said otherwise I know the contrary."

"Who are you," said Sir Lamorak, "who know me?"

"I am Sir Tristram de Liones."

"Ah, sir, do you not remember the fall you gave me once, and afterwards refused to fight me on foot?"

"That was not for any fear I had of you," said Sir Tristram, "but I was ashamed at that time to have any more to do with you, for it seemed to me you had had enough. But, Sir Lamorak, in return for my kindness you brought shame on many ladies when you sent the horn from Morgan le Fay to King Mark, for you did it to spite me."

"Well," he said, "if it were to do again, I would do it, for I would rather strife and quarrelling fell out in King Mark's court than in Arthur's court, for the honour of the two courts is not alike."

"As to that," said Sir Tristram, "I know it well. But what was done was done to spite me; but all your malice, I thank God, did no great harm. And so," said Sir Tristram, "you shall put aside all your malice, and so will I, and let us try how we may win honour between us on this giant Sir Nabon le Noire, who is lord of this island, and destroy him."

"Sir," said Sir Lamorak, "now I understand your knighthood. What all men say cannot be false: for goodness, nobility and honour you are peerless among all knights, and for your courtesy and your gentleness I showed you discourtesy, and now I am sorry for it."
