Chapter 39: How Sir Tristram fought with Sir Nabon and overcame him, and made Sir Segwarides lord of the island

In the meantime word came that Sir Nabon had had it proclaimed that all the people of that isle were to be at his castle on the fifth day after. And that same day Nabon's son was to be made a knight, and all the knights of that valley and round about were to be there to joust, and all those of the realm of Logres were to be there to joust against those of North Wales. And five hundred knights came there, and the people of the country brought Sir Lamorak there, and Sir Tristram, and Sir Kehydius, and Sir Segwarides, for they dared not do otherwise. And then Sir Nabon lent Sir Lamorak a horse and armour, at Sir Lamorak's request. And Sir Lamorak jousted and did such deeds of arms that Nabon and all the people said there was never a knight they had ever seen do such deeds of arms. For, as the French book says, he outjousted everyone who was there, most of the five hundred knights, so that not one of them kept his saddle against him.

Then Sir Nabon offered to play his own game with him: "For I never saw any knight do so much in one day."

"Gladly," said Sir Lamorak, "I will play as well as I can, but I am weary and badly bruised."

And there each of them took a spear, but Nabon would not meet Sir Lamorak in the joust, but struck his horse in the forehead, and so killed it. And then Sir Lamorak went on foot, and turned his shield and drew his sword, and there a hard fight began on foot. But Sir Lamorak was so badly bruised and so short of breath that he circled and sidestepped somewhat backwards.

"Fair fellow," said Sir Nabon, "hold your hand, and I will show you more courtesy than ever I showed a knight, because I have seen your noble knighthood today. And so stand aside, and I will find out whether any of your companions will fight me."

Then, when Sir Tristram heard that, he stepped forward and said, "Nabon, lend me a horse and sound armour, and I will fight you."

"Well, fellow," said Sir Nabon, "go to that pavilion over there, and arm yourself in the best you find there, and I will play a marvellous game with you."

Then Sir Tristram said, "Mind you play well, or else perhaps I shall teach you a new game."

"That is well said, fellow," said Sir Nabon.

So when Sir Tristram was armed as he liked best, and well shielded and sworded, he squared up to him on foot; for he knew well that Sir Nabon would not wait for a stroke of the spear, and so he would kill all the knights' horses.

"Now, fair fellow, Sir Nabon, let us play."

So then they fought on foot for a long time, circling and sidestepping, striking and thrusting, for a long while without any rest. At last Sir Nabon begged him to tell him his name.

"Sir Nabon, I tell you my name is Sir Tristram de Liones, a knight of Cornwall under King Mark."

"You are welcome," said Sir Nabon, "for of all knights I have most wanted to fight with you or with Sir Lancelot."

So then they went at each other fiercely, and Sir Tristram killed Sir Nabon. And straight away he leapt at his son, and struck off his head; and then all the country said they would hold their lands from Sir Tristram.

"No," said Sir Tristram, "I will not have it so. Here is an honourable knight, Sir Lamorak de Galis, and for my part he shall be lord of this country, for he has done great deeds of arms here."

"No," said Sir Lamorak, "I will not be lord of this country, for I have not deserved it as well as you. And so give it to whoever you like, for I will have none of it."

"Well," said Sir Tristram, "since neither you nor I will have it, let us give it to someone who has not deserved it so well."

"Do as you please," said Segwarides, "for the gift is yours; for I would have none of it, even if I had deserved it."

So it was given to Segwarides, and he thanked them for it; and so he was lord, and governed it honourably. And then Sir Segwarides set all the prisoners free, and put that valley under good government. And so he went back to Cornwall, and told King Mark and Isolde the Fair how Sir Tristram had made him lord of the Isle of Servage, and there he proclaimed through all Cornwall all the adventures of these two knights, so that they were known openly. But Isolde the Fair was full of sorrow when she heard that Sir Tristram was married to Isolde of the White Hands.
