Chapter 40: How Sir Lamorak parted from Sir Tristram, and how he met Sir Frol, and afterwards Sir Lancelot

So we turn to Sir Lamorak, who rode towards Arthur's court; and Sir Tristram's wife and Kehydius took a ship and sailed to Brittany, to King Howell, where he was welcome. And when he heard of these adventures they marvelled at his noble deeds.

Now we turn to Sir Lamorak. When he had parted from Sir Tristram he rode out of the forest until he came to a hermitage. When the hermit saw him, he asked him where he had come from.

"Sir," said Sir Lamorak, "I come from this valley."

"Sir," said the hermit, "that amazes me. For these twenty years I never saw any knight pass through this country but he was either killed or shamefully wounded, or passed as a poor prisoner."

"Those evil customs," said Sir Lamorak, "are done away with, for Sir Tristram has killed your lord, Sir Nabon, and his son."

Then the hermit was glad, and all his brothers, for he said there was never such a tyrant among Christian men. "And so," said the hermit, "we will hold this valley and its liberties from Sir Tristram."

So the next day Sir Lamorak left; and as he rode he saw four knights fighting against one, and that one knight defended himself well, but at last the four knights had him down. And then Sir Lamorak went between them, and asked them why they wanted to kill that one knight, and said it was a shame, four against one.

"You may be sure," said the four knights, "that he is false."

"That is your story," said Sir Lamorak, "and when I have heard him speak as well, I will say as you say." Then Lamorak said, "Ah, knight, can you not clear yourself of being a false knight?"

"Sir," he said, "I can clear myself, both with my word and with my hands, and I will prove it on any one of the best of them, my body against his body."

Then they all spoke at once: "We will not risk our bodies for you. But you may be sure," they said, "that if King Arthur himself were here, it would not be in his power to save this man's life."

"That is too much said," said Sir Lamorak, "but many men say more behind a man's back than they will say to his face. And because of your words, you shall understand that I am one of the least of King Arthur's court. For the honour of my lord, now do your worst, and in spite of you I shall rescue him."

And then all of them rushed at Sir Lamorak at once, but with two strokes Sir Lamorak quickly killed two of them, and then the other two fled. So then Sir Lamorak turned back to that knight, and asked him his name.

"Sir," he said, "my name is Sir Frol of the Out Isles."

Then he rode with Sir Lamorak and kept him company. And as they rode along the way they saw a handsome knight riding towards them, all in white.

"Ah," said Frol, "that knight over there jousted with me not long ago and struck me down, and so I will joust with him."

"You shall not do so," said Sir Lamorak, "if you take my advice, unless you tell me your quarrel, whether you jousted at his request or he at yours."

"No," said Sir Frol, "I jousted with him at my own request."

"Sir," said Lamorak, "then I advise you to have no more to do with him, for it seems to me by his bearing that he must be a noble knight, and no joker; for I think he must be of the Round Table."

"I will not hold back for that," said Sir Frol. And then he shouted, "Sir knight, get ready to joust!"

"There is no need for that," said the White Knight, "for I have no wish to joust with you."

But still they set their spears in rest, and the White Knight overthrew Sir Frol, and then he rode on his way at an easy pace. Then Sir Lamorak rode after him, and begged him to tell him his name: "For it seems to me you must be of the fellowship of the Round Table."

"On one condition," he said, "I will tell you my name: that you will not give my name away, and also that you will tell me yours."

"Then," he said, "my name is Sir Lamorak de Galis."

"And my name is Sir Lancelot du Lake."

Then they put up their swords, and kissed each other warmly, and each rejoiced greatly in the other.

"Sir," said Sir Lamorak, "if it please you, I will do you service."

"God forbid," said Lancelot, "that anyone of such noble blood as you should do me service." Then he said, "Besides, I am on a quest that I must do by myself alone."

"Now God speed you," said Sir Lamorak, and so they parted.

Then Sir Lamorak came to Sir Frol and got him on his horse again.

"What knight is that?" said Sir Frol.

"Sir," he said, "it is not for you to know, and it is no part of my business to tell you."

"Then you are all the more discourteous," said Sir Frol, "and so I will leave you."

"You may do as you please," said Sir Lamorak, "and yet by keeping my company you have saved the fairest flower of your garland." And so they parted.
