Chapter 41: How Sir Lamorak slew Sir Frol, and of the courteous fight with his brother Sir Belliance

Then within two or three days Sir Lamorak found a knight asleep by a spring, and his lady sat beside him and kept watch. Just then Sir Gawain came and took the knight's lady, and set her up behind his squire. So Sir Lamorak rode after Sir Gawain, and said, "Sir Gawain, turn back."

And then Sir Gawain said, "What do you want with me? For I am King Arthur's nephew."

"Sir," he said, "for that reason I will spare you; otherwise that lady would stay with me, or else you would have to joust with me."

Then Sir Gawain turned and rode at the knight the lady belonged to, with his spear; but the knight, by sheer strength, struck Sir Gawain down, and took his lady with him. Sir Lamorak saw all this, and said to himself, "Unless I avenge my companion, he will speak dishonour of me in King Arthur's court."

Then Sir Lamorak turned back and offered to joust with that knight.

"Sir," he said, "I am ready."

And there they came together with all their might, and there Sir Lamorak struck the knight through both sides, so that he fell to the earth dead.

Then that lady rode to that knight's brother, who was called Belliance le Orgulous, who lived close by, and she told him how his brother had been killed.

"Alas," he said, "I will be avenged."

And so he got on his horse, and armed himself, and within a while he overtook Sir Lamorak, and called to him, "Turn and leave that lady, for you and I must play a new game. For you have killed my brother Sir Frol, who was a better knight than ever you were."

"That may well be," said Sir Lamorak, "but today in the field I was found the better."

So they rode at each other, and each unhorsed the other, and they turned their shields and drew their swords, and fought mightily, like proven noble knights, for the space of two hours. So then Sir Belliance begged him to tell him his name.

"Sir," he said, "my name is Sir Lamorak de Galis."

"Ah," said Sir Belliance, "you are the man in the world I hate most, for I killed my sons for your sake, when I saved your life, and now you have killed my brother Sir Frol. Alas, how could I ever be reconciled with you? So defend yourself, for you shall die; there is no other remedy."

"Alas," said Sir Lamorak, "I ought to have known you full well, for you are the man who has done most for me."

And with that Sir Lamorak knelt down, and begged him for mercy.

"Get up," said Sir Belliance, "or else I shall kill you where you kneel."

"There will be no need for that," said Sir Lamorak, "for I will yield to you, not for fear of you, nor for your strength, but your goodness makes me utterly loath to fight you. And so I beg you, for God's sake, and for the honour of knighthood, forgive me all the wrong I have done you."

"Alas," said Belliance, "stop your kneeling, or else I shall kill you without mercy."

Then they went back to the fight, and each wounded the other, so that all the ground where they fought was bloody. And at last Belliance drew back and sat himself down gently on a little hill, for he was so faint from bleeding that he could not stand. Then Sir Lamorak threw his shield onto his back, and asked him how he was.

"Well," said Sir Belliance.

"Ah, sir, yet I shall show you favour in your distress."

"Ah, Sir Belliance, good knight," said Sir Lamorak, "you are a fool, for if I had had you at such an advantage as you had me, I would have killed you. But your gentleness is so good and so generous that I must forgive you my ill will."

And then Sir Lamorak knelt down, and first unlaced the other's visor, and then his own, and then they kissed each other with weeping tears. Then Sir Lamorak led Sir Belliance to an abbey close by, and there Sir Lamorak would not leave Belliance until he was healed. And then they swore together that neither of them would ever fight against the other. So Sir Lamorak left and went to the court of King Arthur.

Here we leave Sir Lamorak and Sir Tristram. And here begins the history of La Cote Male Taile.
