Chapter 1: How a young man came to King Arthur's court, and how Sir Kay mockingly called him La Cote Male Taile

To King Arthur's court there came a young man, big and strongly built, and he was richly dressed; and he asked the king to make him a knight. But his outer coat sat crooked on him, even though it was rich cloth of gold.

"What is your name?" said King Arthur.

"Sir," he said, "my name is Bruin le Noire, and in a short while you shall know that I am of good family."

"That may well be," said Sir Kay the Seneschal, "but in mockery you shall be called La Cote Male Taile, which is to say, the badly cut coat."

"It is a great thing that you ask," said the king. "And why do you wear that rich coat? Tell me, for I can well believe there is some reason for it."

"Sir," he answered, "I had a father, a noble knight, and as he rode hunting one day it happened that he lay down to sleep. And there came a knight who had long been his enemy, and when he saw that he was fast asleep he hacked him all to pieces. And my father was wearing this same coat at the time, and that is what makes this coat sit so badly on me, for the sword strokes are on it just as I found it, and it will never be mended by me. So I wear this coat to keep my father's death in mind until I am avenged. And because you are called the noblest king in the world, I have come to you so that you should make me a knight."

"Sir," said Sir Lamorak and Sir Gaheris, "it would be well done to make him a knight, for he looks well in body and in face, so that he will prove a good man, and a good knight, and a mighty one. For, sir, if you remember, just such a one was Sir Lancelot du Lake when he first came to this court, and very few of us knew where he came from; and now he has proved himself the man of greatest honour in the world, and all your court and all your Round Table is honoured and bettered by Sir Lancelot more than by any knight now living."

"That is true," said the king, "and tomorrow, at your request, I shall make him a knight."

So the next morning a hart was found, and King Arthur rode out there with a company of his knights to kill the hart. And this young man whom Sir Kay had named La Cote Male Taile was left behind with Queen Guinevere. And by sudden chance there was a fearsome lion kept in a strong tower of stone, and it happened that at that very time he broke loose, and came charging at the queen and her knights. And when the queen saw the lion she cried out and fled, and begged her knights to rescue her. And of them all only twelve stood their ground, and all the others fled.

Then La Cote Male Taile said, "Now I see well that not all the coward knights are dead."

And with that he drew his sword and squared up to the lion. And that lion gaped wide and came at him, rearing up, to kill him. And then he struck him in the middle of the head such a mighty stroke that it split his head apart, and he crashed to the ground. Then the queen was told how the young man whom Sir Kay in scorn had named La Cote Male Taile had killed the lion. With that the king came home. And when the queen told him of that adventure, he was well pleased, and said, "I'll stake my head on it, he will prove a noble man and a faithful knight, and true to his word."

Then the king made him a knight on the spot.

"Now, sir," said this young knight, "I ask you and all the knights of your court to call me by no other name but La Cote Male Taile. Since Sir Kay has named me so, so I will be called."

"I agree to that gladly," said the king.
