Chapter 2: How a damsel came to the court and asked for a knight to take on a quest, which La Cote Male Taile undertook

Then that same day a damsel came into the court, and she brought with her a great black shield, with a white hand in the middle of it holding a sword. There was no other device on that shield. When King Arthur saw her he asked her where she came from and what she wanted.

"Sir," she said, "I have ridden long, and many a day, with this shield, by many roads, and this is why I have come to your court. There was a good knight who owned this shield, and this knight had undertaken a great deed of arms, to carry it through to the end. And so it was his misfortune that another strong knight met him by sudden chance, and there they fought a long time, and each wounded the other exceedingly badly; and they were so weary that they left that battle even. So this knight who owned this shield saw no other way but that he must die. And then he commanded me to carry this shield to the court of King Arthur, asking and praying some good knight to take this shield, and to fulfil the quest that he was on."

"Now what do you say to this quest?" said King Arthur. "Is there any of you here who will undertake to bear this shield?"

Then there was not one who would speak a single word. Then Sir Kay took the shield in his hands.

"Sir knight," said the damsel, "what is your name?"

"Believe me," he said, "my name is Sir Kay the Seneschal, known far and wide."

"Sir," said that damsel, "put down that shield, for believe me, it is not for you. The knight who bears this shield must be a better knight than you."

"Damsel," said Sir Kay, "believe me, I took this shield in my hands with your leave, to look at it, not with that intent. But go wherever you like, for I'm not going with you."

Then the damsel stood still for a long while and looked at many of those knights. Then the knight La Cote Male Taile spoke up.

"Fair damsel," he said, "I will take the shield and that adventure upon me, if only I knew which way my journey would lead; for since I was made a knight this day, I would take this adventure upon me."

"What is your name, fair young man?" said the damsel.

"My name," he said, "is La Cote Male Taile."

"Well may you be called that," said the damsel, "the knight with the badly cut coat. But if you are bold enough to take it on yourself to bear that shield and to follow me, believe me, your skin will be as well hacked as your coat."

"As for that," said La Cote Male Taile, "when I am so hacked, I will ask you for no salve to heal me with."

And just then two squires came into the court and brought him great horses, and his armour, and his spears, and at once he was armed and took his leave.

"It is not by my will," said the king, "that you take that hard adventure upon you."

"Sir," he said, "this adventure is mine, and the first that ever I took upon me, and I will follow it, whatever becomes of me."

Then that damsel left, and La Cote Male Taile followed close after her. And within a while he overtook the damsel, and at once she abused him in the foulest way.
