Chapter 3: How La Cote Male Taile overthrew Sir Dagonet, the king's fool, and of the scolding he got from the damsel

Then Sir Kay arranged for Sir Dagonet, King Arthur's fool, to follow after La Cote Male Taile. And there Sir Kay had Sir Dagonet horsed and armed, and told him to follow La Cote Male Taile and offer to joust with him; and so he did. And when he saw La Cote Male Taile, he shouted and told him to make ready to joust. So Sir La Cote Male Taile struck Sir Dagonet over his horse's rump. Then the damsel mocked La Cote Male Taile.

"Shame on you!" she said. "Now you're disgraced in Arthur's court, when they send a fool to fight you, and at your very first joust too."

So she rode on a long way, and scolded. And within a while there came Sir Bleoberis, the good knight, and there he jousted with La Cote Male Taile, and there Sir Bleoberis struck him so hard that horse and all fell to the ground. Then La Cote Male Taile got up quickly, and set his shield, and drew his sword, and would have fought to the uttermost, for he was mad with rage.

"Not so," said Sir Bleoberis de Ganis. "At this time I will not fight on foot."

Then the damsel Maledisant rebuked him in the foulest way, and told him, "Turn back, coward!"

"Ah, damsel," he said, "I beg you for mercy, abuse me no more. My grief is enough without your adding to it. I never count myself the worse knight when a mare's son lets me down, and I don't count myself the worse knight for a fall from Sir Bleoberis either."

So he rode with her like this for two days. And by chance there came Sir Palomides and met him, and he served him in the same way as Bleoberis had done before.

"What are you doing here in my company?" said the damsel Maledisant. "You can't keep your seat against any knight, or stand up to a single blow from him, unless it's Sir Dagonet."

"Ah, fair damsel, I am none the worse for taking a fall from Sir Palomides, and yet I have no great dishonour from it, for neither Bleoberis nor Palomides would fight with me on foot."

"As for that," said the damsel, "believe me, they think it beneath them, and scorn to get off their horses to fight such an ignorant knight as you are."

So in the meantime there came Sir Mordred, Sir Gawain's brother, and so he fell into company with the damsel Maledisant. And then they came before the Castle Orgulous, and there was a custom there that no knight could pass that castle without either jousting or being taken prisoner, or at the least losing his horse and his armour. And two knights came out against them, and Sir Mordred jousted with the first, and that knight of the castle struck Sir Mordred down off his horse. And then La Cote Male Taile jousted with the other, and each of them struck the other down, horse and all, to the ground. And when they got clear of their horses, each of them took the other's horse. And then La Cote Male Taile rode at the knight who had struck down Sir Mordred, and jousted with him. And there Sir La Cote Male Taile hurt and wounded him exceedingly badly, and put him off his horse as if he were dead. So he turned to the one he had met before, and that knight took flight towards the castle, and Sir La Cote Male Taile rode after him into the Castle Orgulous, and there La Cote Male Taile killed him.
