Chapter 4: How La Cote Male Taile fought against a hundred knights, and how he escaped with a lady's help

And at once a hundred knights came around him and attacked him. And when he saw that his horse would be killed, he dismounted and got clear of his horse, and put the bridle under its feet, and so put it out of the gate. And when he had done that, he charged in among them, and set his back against the wall of a lady's chamber, thinking to himself that he would rather die there with honour than put up with the abuse of the damsel Maledisant. And in the meantime, as he stood and fought, the lady whose chamber it was went out quietly by her back gate, and outside the gates she found La Cote Male Taile's horse, and quickly she took him by the bridle and tied him to the back gate. And then she went quietly back to her chamber to watch how that one knight fought against a hundred knights. And when she had watched him a long time, she went to a window behind his back.

"Knight," she said, "you fight marvellously well, but for all that you must die in the end, unless through your mighty prowess you can make your way to that back gate over there, for I have tied your horse there to wait for you. But believe me, you must think of your honour and not think of dying, for you cannot make your way to that back gate unless you act nobly and mightily."

When La Cote Male Taile heard her say this, he gripped his sword in his hands, and put his shield well in front of him, and pushed his way through the thickest of the crowd. And when he came to the back gate he found four knights there ready for him, and with the first two strokes he killed two of the knights, and the others fled. And so he won his horse and rode away from them. And all of it, just as it happened, was told in King Arthur's court, how he killed twelve knights within the Castle Orgulous; and so he rode on his way.

And in the meanwhile the damsel said to Sir Mordred, "I expect my fool of a knight is either killed or taken prisoner."

Then they saw him come riding. And when he had come up to them, he told them all how he had fared, and how he had escaped in spite of them all. "And some of the best of them will tell no tales."

"You're lying," said the damsel, "and I dare prove it. They let you pass as a fool and a disgrace to all knighthood."

"You may prove that," said La Cote Male Taile.

With that she sent a courier of hers, who always rode with her, to learn the truth of this deed. And so he rode there quickly, and asked how, and in what manner, La Cote Male Taile had escaped out of the castle. Then all the knights cursed him, and said that he was a fiend and no man: "For he has killed twelve of our best knights here, and until today we thought that would have been too much for Sir Lancelot du Lake or for Sir Tristram de Liones. And in spite of us all he has gone from us, against our will."

With this answer the courier left, and came to Maledisant his lady, and told her everything, how Sir La Cote Male Taile had fared at the Castle Orgulous. Then she hung her head, and said little.

"By my head," said Sir Mordred to the damsel, "you are much to blame for rebuking him so, for I warn you plainly, he is a good knight, and I have no doubt that he will prove a noble knight. But as yet he cannot sit firm on horseback, for being a good horseman must come from practice and exercise. But when it comes to the strokes of his sword, then he is noble and mighty, and Sir Bleoberis and Sir Palomides saw that. For believe me, they are wily men of arms, and they know at once, when they see a young knight, by his riding, how sure they are to give him a fall from his horse or a great blow. But for the most part they will not get down on foot with young knights, for they are strong and well armed. For in the same way Sir Lancelot du Lake, when he was first made knight, was often worsted on horseback, but on foot he always won back his renown, and killed and trampled many knights of the Round Table. And so the shame Sir Lancelot dealt to many knights makes men of prowess wary. For I have often seen old, proven knights shamed and killed by men who were only young beginners."

So they rode on, talking earnestly together along the way.
