Chapter 5: How Sir Lancelot came to the court and heard of La Cote Male Taile, and how he followed after him, and how La Cote Male Taile was taken prisoner

Here we leave this tale for a while, and speak of Sir Lancelot du Lake: how, when he had come to the court of King Arthur, he heard tell of the young knight La Cote Male Taile, how he killed the lion, and how he took upon himself the adventure of the black shield, which was called at that time the hardiest adventure in the world.

"God save me," said Sir Lancelot to many of his companions, "it was a shame to all the noble knights to let such a young knight take such an adventure upon him, to his destruction. For I want you to know," said Sir Lancelot, "that that damsel Maledisant has carried that shield many a day to seek out the most proven knights. And she was the one from whom Breuse Saunce Pité took that shield, and afterwards Tristram de Liones rescued that shield from him and gave it back to the damsel, a little before the time that Sir Tristram fought with my nephew Sir Blamore de Ganis, over a quarrel between the King of Ireland and him."

Then many knights were sorry that Sir La Cote Male Taile had gone out on that adventure.

"Truly," said Sir Lancelot, "I mean to ride after him."

And within seven days Sir Lancelot overtook La Cote Male Taile, and then he greeted him and the damsel Maledisant. And when Sir Mordred saw Sir Lancelot, he left their company. And so Sir Lancelot rode with them for a whole day, and all the while that damsel rebuked La Cote Male Taile. And then Sir Lancelot answered for him, and then she left off, and rebuked Sir Lancelot.

So in the meantime Sir Tristram sent a letter by a damsel to Sir Lancelot, excusing himself for his marriage to Isolde of the White Hands; and he said in the letter that, as he was a true knight, he had never lain with Isolde of the White Hands. And Sir Tristram wrote to Sir Lancelot exceedingly courteously and like a gentleman, all the while begging him to be his good friend, and a good friend to Isolde the Fair of Cornwall, and that Sir Lancelot would speak for him if ever he saw her. And within a short time, by the grace of God, said Sir Tristram, he would speak with Isolde the Fair, and with him too, very soon. Then Sir Lancelot left the damsel and Sir La Cote Male Taile, to read that letter over and to write another letter to Sir Tristram de Liones.

And in the meanwhile La Cote Male Taile rode with the damsel until they came to a castle called Pendragon. And there were six knights standing in front of him, and one of them offered to joust with La Cote Male Taile. And there La Cote Male Taile struck him over his horse's rump. And then the other five knights set on him all at once with their spears, and there they struck La Cote Male Taile down, horse and man. And then they dismounted quickly, and all laid hands on him at once, and took him prisoner, and so led him into the castle and kept him there as a prisoner.

And in the morning Sir Lancelot got up, and sent the damsel off with letters to Sir Tristram, and then he took his way after La Cote Male Taile. And on the way, on a bridge, there was a knight who offered to joust with Sir Lancelot, and Sir Lancelot struck him down. And then they fought a noble battle together on foot, and a mighty one, and at last Sir Lancelot struck him down grovelling on his hands and his knees. And then that knight yielded, and Sir Lancelot received him kindly.

"Sir," said the knight, "I ask you to tell me your name, for my heart warms to you greatly."

"No," said Sir Lancelot, "at this time I will not tell you my name, unless you first tell me yours."

"Certainly," said the knight. "My name is Sir Nerovens, and I was made a knight by my lord Sir Lancelot du Lake."

"Ah, Nerovens de Lile," said Sir Lancelot, "I am very glad that you have proved a good knight; for now, believe me, my name is Sir Lancelot du Lake."

"Alas," said Sir Nerovens de Lile, "what have I done!"

And with that he fell flat at his feet, and would have kissed them, but Sir Lancelot would not let him; and then each of them rejoiced greatly in the other. And then Sir Nerovens told Sir Lancelot that he should not go by the Castle of Pendragon. "For there is a lord there, a mighty knight, and many knights with him, and tonight I heard it said that yesterday they took a knight prisoner who was riding with a damsel, and they say he is a knight of the Round Table."
