Chapter 6: How Sir Lancelot fought with six knights, and afterwards with Sir Brian, and how he freed the prisoners

"Ah," said Sir Lancelot, "that knight is my companion, and I shall rescue him or else lose my life for it."

And with that he rode hard until he came before the Castle of Pendragon. And at once six knights came out, and all made ready to set on Sir Lancelot at once. Then Sir Lancelot set his spear in rest, and struck the foremost so that he broke his back in two; and three of them hit him and three missed. And then Sir Lancelot passed through them, and swiftly he turned back in again, and struck another knight through the breast and out through the back more than a yard, and with that his spear broke. So then all the four knights who remained drew their swords and slashed at Sir Lancelot. And Sir Lancelot placed his strokes so well that with four separate strokes they were out of their saddles, exceedingly badly wounded. And straight away he rode charging into that castle.

And at once the lord of the castle, who at that time was called Sir Brian de les Isles, who was a noble man and a great enemy to King Arthur, was armed within a short while and on horseback. And then they set their spears in rest and crashed together so hard that both their horses went down to the ground. And then they got clear of their saddles, and set their shields, and drew their swords, and rushed at each other like madmen, and many strokes were given in a short while. At last Sir Lancelot gave Sir Brian such a blow that he went down on his knees, and then Sir Lancelot rushed on him, and with great force pulled off his helm. And when Sir Brian saw that he would be killed, he yielded, and put himself at his mercy and in his grace. Then Sir Lancelot made him free all the prisoners he had in his castle, and in it Sir Lancelot found thirty of Arthur's knights and forty ladies, and so he freed them, and then he rode on his way. And as soon as La Cote Male Taile was freed, he got his horse, and his armour, and his damsel Maledisant.

Meanwhile Sir Nerovens, whom Sir Lancelot had fought with before at the bridge, sent a damsel after Sir Lancelot to learn how he fared at the Castle of Pendragon. And then those within the castle wondered what knight he was, when Sir Brian and his knights freed all those prisoners.

"Don't wonder at it," said the damsel, "for the best knight in this world was here and did this day's work. And believe me," she said, "it was Sir Lancelot."

Then Sir Brian was very glad, and so was his lady, and all his knights, that such a man should have beaten them. And when the damsel and La Cote Male Taile understood that it was Sir Lancelot du Lake who had ridden with them in their company, and she remembered how she had rebuked him and called him a coward, then she was exceedingly downcast.
