Chapter 7: How Sir Lancelot met the damsel called Maledisant, and renamed her the Damsel Bienpensant

So then they took their horses and rode off at a good pace after Sir Lancelot. And within two miles they overtook him, and greeted him, and thanked him, and the damsel begged Sir Lancelot's pardon for her ill conduct, saying, "For now I know that the flower of all knighthood is divided evenly between Sir Tristram and you. For God knows," said the damsel, "that I have long been looking for you, my lord Sir Lancelot, and for Sir Tristram, and now I thank God I have met you. And once at Camelot I met Sir Tristram, and there he won back for me this black shield, with the white hand holding a naked sword, which Sir Breuse Saunce Pité had taken from me."

"Now, fair damsel," said Sir Lancelot, "who told you my name?"

"Sir," she said, "there came a damsel from a knight you fought with at the bridge, and she told me your name was Sir Lancelot du Lake."

"Blame on her, then," said Sir Lancelot, "but her lord, Sir Nerovens, must have told her. But, damsel," said Sir Lancelot, "I will ride with you on this condition: that you do not rebuke this knight Sir La Cote Male Taile any more. For he is a good knight, and I have no doubt he will prove a noble knight; and it was for his sake, and for pity that he should not be destroyed, that I followed him, to help him in this great need."

"Ah, Jesus thank you," said the damsel. "For now I will tell you and him both: I never rebuked him out of any hate I had for him, but for the great love I had for him. For all along I thought that he was too young and too tender to take these adventures upon him. And so, if I had had my way, I would have driven him off, out of the fear I had for his life; for it can be no young knight's deed to carry this adventure through to the end."

"By God," said Sir Lancelot, "that is well said. And where you are called the Damsel Maledisant, the evil-speaking, I will call you the Damsel Bienpensant, the kind-thinking."

And so they rode on a long while until they came to the border of the country of Surluse, and there they found a fine village with a strong bridge like a fortress. And when Sir Lancelot and the others were at the bridge, a crowd of gentlemen and yeomen leapt out in front of them.

"Fair lords," they said, "you may not pass this bridge and this fortress because of that black shield that I see one of you carrying; and so only one of you shall pass at a time. So choose which of you shall go onto this bridge first."

Then Sir Lancelot offered himself to go onto this bridge first.

"Sir," said La Cote Male Taile, "I beg you, let me go into this fortress, and if I fare well I will send for you; and if it happens that I am killed, so be it. And if it turns out that I am taken prisoner, then you can rescue me."

"I am unwilling," said Sir Lancelot, "to let you take this passage."

"Sir," said La Cote Male Taile, "I beg you, let me put my body to this adventure."

"Now go your way," said Sir Lancelot, "and Jesus speed you."

So he went in, and at once two brothers met him; the one was called Sir Plaine de Force, and the other was called Sir Plaine de Amours. And at once they came at Sir La Cote Male Taile; and first La Cote Male Taile struck down Plaine de Force, and after that he struck down Plaine de Amours. And then they took up their shields and swords, and told La Cote Male Taile to dismount, and so he did. And there was slashing and thrusting with swords, and so they began to press La Cote Male Taile very hard, and they gave him many great wounds on his head, and on his breast, and on his shoulders. And every now and then he gave heavy blows back. And then the two brothers circled and sidestepped to get on both sides of Sir La Cote Male Taile, but by sheer force and knightly prowess he got them in front of him. And then, when he felt himself so wounded, he doubled his strokes, and gave them so many wounds that he felled them to the ground, and would have killed them if they had not yielded.

And straight away Sir La Cote Male Taile took the best horse of the three of them, and so rode on his way to the next fortress and bridge. And there he met the third brother, whose name was Sir Plenorius, a very noble knight, and there they jousted together, and each struck the other down, horse and man, to the ground. And then they got clear of their horses, and set their shields, and drew their swords, and gave many heavy blows; and one while the one knight was forward on the bridge, and another while the other. And so they fought for two hours and more, and never rested. And all the while Sir Lancelot and the damsel watched them.

"Alas," said the damsel, "my knight is fighting exceedingly hard and too long."

"Now you can see," said Sir Lancelot, "that he is a noble knight; for, considering this is his first battle, and his grievous wounds, and wounded as he is, it is a marvel that he can endure this long battle with that good knight."
