Chapter 8: How La Cote Male Taile was taken prisoner and then rescued by Sir Lancelot, and how Sir Lancelot overcame four brothers

Meanwhile Sir La Cote Male Taile sank right down on the ground; what with his wounds and what with the loss of blood, he could not stand. Then the other knight took pity on him.

"Fair young knight," he said, "don't be dismayed, for if you had been fresh when you met me, as I was, I know well that I would not have lasted as long as you have done. And so, for your noble deeds of arms, I will show you kindness and courtesy in every way I can."

And at once this noble knight, Sir Plenorius, took him up in his arms and led him into his tower. And then he had wine brought for him, and had him examined, and his bleeding wounds stopped.

"Sir," said La Cote Male Taile, "leave me, and hurry to that bridge again, for there you will meet a very different kind of knight from me."

"Why," said Plenorius, "is there another kind of knight behind you, of your company?"

"Yes," said La Cote Male Taile, "there is a much better knight than I am."

"What is his name?" said Plenorius.

"You won't learn it from me," said La Cote Male Taile.

"Well," said the knight, "he shall be met, whoever he is."

Then Sir Plenorius heard a knight calling, who said, "Sir Plenorius, where are you? Either you hand over to me the prisoner you have led into your tower, or else come out and fight me."

Then Plenorius got his horse, and came galloping with a spear in his hand towards Sir Lancelot. And then they set their spears in rest, and came together like thunder, and each struck the other so mightily that their horses fell down under them. And then they got clear of their horses, and pulled out their swords, and like two bulls they laid into each other with great strokes and thrusts. But all the while Sir Lancelot gained ground on him, and Sir Plenorius circled to try to get round him. But Sir Lancelot would not allow that, but drove him back and back, until he came near his tower gate.

And then Sir Lancelot said, "I know you well for a good knight, but believe me, your life and death are in my hand; and so yield to me, and hand over your prisoner."

The other answered not a word, but struck mightily on Sir Lancelot's helm, so that the fire sprang out of his eyes. Then Sir Lancelot doubled his strokes, so thick, and struck at him so mightily, that he made him kneel on his knees. And with that Sir Lancelot leapt on him, and pulled him down grovelling. Then Sir Plenorius yielded himself, and his tower, and all his prisoners, to do with as he wished.

Then Sir Lancelot received him and accepted his pledge. And then he rode to the other bridge, and there Sir Lancelot jousted with three more of his brothers: one was called Pillounes, and the second was called Pellogris, and the third Sir Pellandris. And first, on horseback, Sir Lancelot struck them down, and afterwards he beat them on foot, and made them yield to him. And then he returned to Sir Plenorius, and there in his prison he found King Carados of Scotland, and many other knights, and they were all freed. And then Sir La Cote Male Taile came to Sir Lancelot, and then Sir Lancelot would have given him all these fortresses and these bridges.

"No," said La Cote Male Taile, "I will not take Sir Plenorius' lands. Provided that he will promise you, my lord Sir Lancelot, to come to King Arthur's court and be his knight, he and all his brothers, I will beg you, my lord, to let him keep his lands."

"I am content," said Sir Lancelot, "on condition that he will come to the court of King Arthur and become his man, and his five brothers too. And as for you, Sir Plenorius," said Sir Lancelot, "I will undertake that at the next feast, if a seat falls vacant, you shall be a knight of the Round Table."

"Sir," said Plenorius, "at the next feast of Pentecost I will be at Arthur's court, and at that time I will be guided and ruled as King Arthur and you wish."

Then Sir Lancelot and Sir La Cote Male Taile rested there until Sir La Cote Male Taile was healed of his wounds, and there they had merry times and good rest, and many good games, and there were many fair ladies.
