Chapter 10: How Isolde the Fair sent letters to Sir Tristram by her maid Bragwaine, and of several adventures of Sir Tristram

Now we leave Sir La Cote Male Taile here, and turn to Sir Tristram de Liones, who was in Brittany. When Isolde the Fair learned that he was married, she sent him, by her maid Bragwaine, letters as piteous as could be thought of and written, and her conclusion was that, if it pleased Sir Tristram, he should come to her court, and bring Isolde of the White Hands with him, and they would be looked after as well as she was herself. Then Sir Tristram called Sir Kehydius to him, and asked him whether he would go with him into Cornwall secretly. He answered him that he was ready at all times. And then he had a little ship made ready in secret, and in it they went, Sir Tristram, Kehydius, Dame Bragwaine, and Gouvernail, Sir Tristram's squire. So when they were at sea a contrary wind blew them onto the coast of North Wales, near the Castle Perilous. Then Sir Tristram said, "You will wait for me here for these ten days, and Gouvernail, my squire, with you. And if it happens that I have not come back by that day, take the shortest way into Cornwall; for in this forest there are many strange adventures, as I have heard tell, and I mean to try some of them before I leave. And when I can, I will hurry after you."

Then Sir Tristram and Kehydius took their horses and left their company. And so they rode a mile and more into that forest; and at last Sir Tristram saw ahead of him a fine-looking knight, armed, sitting by a spring, and a strong, mighty horse tied to an oak very near him, and a man waiting on horseback beside him, leading a horse loaded with spears. And this knight who sat at the spring seemed by his face to be exceedingly downcast. Then Sir Tristram rode up to him and said, "Fair knight, why do you sit there drooping so? You look like a knight-errant by your arms and armour, and so square up to joust with one of us, or with both."

At that the knight said nothing, but took his shield and buckled it about his neck, and nimbly he took his horse and leapt onto him. And then he took a great spear from his squire, and rode off a furlong. Sir Kehydius asked Sir Tristram's leave to joust first.

"Do your best," said Sir Tristram.

So they met, and there Sir Kehydius had a fall, and was badly wounded high up above the breast. Then Sir Tristram said, "Knight, that was well jousted. Now make yourself ready for me."

"I am ready," said the knight.

And then that knight took a bigger spear in his hand, and charged against Sir Tristram, and there by great force that knight struck Sir Tristram down from his horse, and he had a great fall. Then Sir Tristram was deeply ashamed, and nimbly he got clear of his horse, and put his shield before his shoulder, and drew his sword. And then Sir Tristram asked that knight, by his knighthood, to dismount and fight with him on foot.

"Gladly," said the knight; and so he dismounted, and got clear of his horse, and threw his shield onto his shoulder, and drew his sword, and there they fought a long battle together, very nearly two hours. Then Sir Tristram said, "Fair knight, hold your hand, and tell me where you come from, and what your name is."

"As for that," said the knight, "I will think about it; but if you will tell me your name, perhaps I will tell you mine."
