Chapter 12: How Sir Palomides followed the Questing Beast, and struck down Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak with one spear

And meanwhile there came Sir Palomides, the good knight, following the Questing Beast, which had a head shaped like a serpent's head, and a body like a leopard, haunches like a lion, and feet like a hart; and in its body there was a noise as if it were the noise of thirty couple of hounds on the scent, and that beast made such a noise wherever it went; and Sir Palomides followed this beast forever, for it was called his quest. And just as he was following this beast, it came past Sir Tristram, and soon after came Palomides. And to cut a long story short, he struck down Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak both with one spear; and so he went on after the beast Glatisant, which was called the Questing Beast; and so these two knights were exceedingly angry that Sir Palomides would not fight with them on foot. Here men of honour may understand that no man was ever made who could stand at all times, but sometimes he was put to the worse by ill luck; and at times the worse knight put the better knight to shame.

Then Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak got Sir Kehydius onto a shield between the two of them, and took him to a forester's lodge, and there they gave him into the forester's charge to look after him well, and they stayed with him three days. Then the two knights took their horses, and at the crossroads they parted. And then Sir Tristram said to Sir Lamorak, "I ask you, if you happen to meet Sir Palomides, tell him that he will find me at the same spring where I met him, and there I, Sir Tristram, will prove whether he is a better knight than I am."

And so each went his separate way from the other, and Sir Tristram rode close to where Sir Kehydius was; and Sir Lamorak rode until he came to a chapel, and there he put his horse out to pasture. And at once there came Sir Meliagaunce, who was King Bagdemagus' son, and he put his horse out to pasture there, and was not aware of Sir Lamorak; and then this knight Sir Meliagaunce made his lament over the love he had for Queen Guinevere, and there he made a woeful complaint. Sir Lamorak heard all this, and in the morning Sir Lamorak took his horse and rode into the forest, and there he met two knights waiting under the cover of the wood.

"Fair knights," said Sir Lamorak, "what are you doing, waiting and watching here? And if you are knights-errant who want to joust, look, I am ready."

"No, sir knight," they said, "not so. We are not waiting here to joust with you, but we are lying in wait here for a knight who killed our brother."

"What knight was that," said Sir Lamorak, "whom you would so gladly meet?"

"Sir," they said, "it is Sir Lancelot who killed our brother, and if we can ever meet him he will not escape, but we will kill him."

"You are taking a great deal on yourselves," said Sir Lamorak, "for Sir Lancelot is a noble, proven knight."

"As for that, we have no doubt, for there is not one of us who is not good enough for him."

"I will not believe that," said Sir Lamorak, "for never in all the days of my life have I heard of any knight that Sir Lancelot was not too strong for."
