Chapter 13: How Sir Lamorak met Sir Meliagaunce, and how they fought over the beauty of Queen Guinevere

Just as they stood talking like this, Sir Lamorak saw Sir Lancelot come riding straight towards them; then Sir Lamorak greeted him, and he greeted him in return. And then Sir Lamorak asked Sir Lancelot if there was anything he could do for him in these borders.

"No," said Sir Lancelot, "not at this time, thank you."

Then each went his way from the other, and Sir Lamorak rode back to where he had left the two knights, and then he found them hidden in the leafy wood.

"Shame on you," said Sir Lamorak, "you false cowards! It is a pity and a shame that any of you should take the high order of knighthood."

So Sir Lamorak left them, and within a while he met Sir Meliagaunce. And then Sir Lamorak asked him why he loved Queen Guinevere as he did: "For I was not far from you when you made your complaint by the chapel."

"Were you?" said Sir Meliagaunce. "Then I will stand by it: I love Queen Guinevere. What do you want to do about it? I will prove and make good that she is the fairest lady and the most beautiful in the world."

"As to that," said Sir Lamorak, "I say no to it, for Queen Morgause of Orkney, Sir Gawain's mother, is the fairest queen and lady alive."

"That is not so," said Sir Meliagaunce, "and I will prove it with my hands on your body."

"Will you indeed?" said Sir Lamorak. "I could not ask for a better quarrel to fight in."

Then they parted from each other in great anger. And then they came riding together as if it were thunder, and each struck the other so hard that their horses fell backwards to the earth. And then they got clear of their horses, and set their shields, and drew their swords. And then they crashed together like wild boars, and so they fought a long while. For Meliagaunce was a good man and of great strength, but Sir Lamorak was far too strong for him, and kept driving him back, though each had wounded the other badly.

And as they stood fighting like this, by chance Sir Lancelot and Sir Bleoberis came riding by. And then Sir Lancelot rode between them, and asked them why they were fighting each other like this: "And you are both knights of King Arthur's!"
