Chapter 14: How Sir Meliagaunce told why they were fighting, and how Sir Lamorak jousted with King Arthur

"Sir," said Meliagaunce, "I will tell you why we are fighting this battle. I praised my lady, Queen Guinevere, and said she was the fairest lady in the world, and Sir Lamorak said no to it, for he said Queen Morgause of Orkney was fairer than she and more beautiful."

"Ah, Sir Lamorak, why do you say that?" said Sir Lancelot. "It is not your place to run down your princess, when you are under her rule, as we all are."

And with that he dismounted and said, "For this quarrel, get ready, for I will prove on your body that Queen Guinevere is the fairest lady and the most gracious in the world."

"Sir," said Sir Lamorak, "I am loath to fight you in this quarrel, for every man thinks his own lady the fairest; and though I praise the lady I love most, you should not be angry; for though my lady Queen Guinevere is fairest in your eyes, you may be sure that Queen Morgause of Orkney is fairest in mine, and so every knight thinks his own lady the fairest. And believe me, sir, you are the man in the world, except Sir Tristram, whom I am most loath of all to fight. But if you insist on fighting me, I will hold out against you as long as I can."

Then Sir Bleoberis spoke up and said, "My lord Sir Lancelot, I never knew you so ill-advised as you are now, for Sir Lamorak is speaking to you only reasonably and knightly. For I tell you, I have a lady, and I think she is the fairest lady in the world. Would that be good reason for you to be angry with me for such words? And you know well that Sir Lamorak is as noble a knight as any I know, and he has always borne you and us good will, and so I beg you, be good friends."

Then Sir Lancelot said to Sir Lamorak, "I beg you, forgive me my ill will, and if I was ill-advised I will make amends."

"Sir," said Sir Lamorak, "amends are soon made between you and me."

And so Sir Lancelot and Sir Bleoberis went on their way, and Sir Meliagaunce and Sir Lamorak took their horses, and each went his way from the other.

And within a while King Arthur came, and met Sir Lamorak, and jousted with him; and there he struck Sir Lamorak down, and wounded him badly with a spear, and so he rode away from him; and so Sir Lamorak was angry that he would not fight with him on foot, although Sir Lamorak did not know it was King Arthur.
