Chapter 15: How Sir Kay met Sir Tristram, and of the insults afterwards spoken about the knights of Cornwall, and how they jousted

Now we leave this tale, and speak of Sir Tristram, who as he rode met Sir Kay the Seneschal; and there Sir Kay asked Sir Tristram what country he was from. He answered that he was from the country of Cornwall.

"That may well be," said Sir Kay, "for I never yet heard of any good knight who came out of Cornwall."

"That is ill said," said Sir Tristram, "but if it pleases you to tell me your name, I ask you to."

"Sir, you may be sure," said Sir Kay, "that my name is Sir Kay the Seneschal."

"Is that your name?" said Sir Tristram. "Now believe me, you are called the most shameful-tongued knight now living. All the same, you are called a good knight, but you are called unlucky, and exceedingly perverse with your tongue."

And so they rode together until they came to a bridge. And there was a knight who would not let them pass until one of them jousted with him; and so that knight jousted with Sir Kay, and there that knight gave Sir Kay a fall. His name was Sir Tor, Sir Lamorak's half-brother. And then the two of them rode to their lodging, and there they found Sir Brandiles, and Sir Tor came there soon after. And as these four knights sat at supper, three of them said every shameful thing about Cornish knights. Sir Tristram heard all that they said, and he said little, but he thought the more; but at that time he did not reveal his name.

In the morning Sir Tristram took his horse and waited for them on their way. And there Sir Brandiles offered to joust with Sir Tristram, and Sir Tristram struck him down, horse and all, to the earth. Then Sir Tor le Fise de Vayshoure rode against Sir Tristram, and there Sir Tristram struck him down, and then he rode on his way; and Sir Kay followed him, but he wanted none of his company. Then Sir Brandiles came to Sir Kay and said, "I would gladly know what that knight's name is."

"Come on with me," said Sir Kay, "and we will ask him to tell us his name."

So they rode together until they came near him, and then they saw where he sat by a spring, and had taken off his helmet to drink at the spring. And when he saw them coming he laced on his helmet quickly, and took his horse, and offered to joust with them.

"No," said Sir Brandiles, "we jousted with you lately enough; we have not come for that. But we have come for this: to ask you, by your knighthood, to tell us your name."

"My fair knights, since that is your wish, and to please you, you shall know that my name is Sir Tristram de Liones, nephew to King Mark of Cornwall."

"Well and good," said Sir Brandiles, "and well met! And believe me, we are very glad that we have found you, and we belong to a fellowship that would be very glad of your company. For you are the knight in the world whose company the noble fellowship of the Round Table most desires to have."

"God thank them," said Sir Tristram, "for their great goodness. But as yet I feel well that I am not fit to be of their fellowship, for I have never yet done such worthy deeds as would make me fit for the company of such a fellowship."

"Ah," said Sir Kay, "if you are Sir Tristram de Liones, you are the man now said to have the most prowess, except Sir Lancelot du Lake; for there is no one alive, Christian or heathen, who can find another knight like him, to speak of his prowess, and of his hands, and his truth as well. For no creature has ever yet been able to say dishonour of him and make it good."

So they talked a long while, and then they parted from each other, each going whatever way seemed best to them.
