Chapter 16: How King Arthur was lured into the Forest Perilous, and how Sir Tristram saved his life

Now you shall hear what the cause was that King Arthur came into the Forest Perilous, which was in North Wales, through the doing of a lady. Her name was Annowre, and this lady came to King Arthur at Cardiff; and by fair promises and fair pledges she made King Arthur ride with her into that Forest Perilous; and she was a great sorceress; and she had loved King Arthur for many days, and because she wanted him to lie with her she came into that country. So when the king had gone with her, many of his knights followed after King Arthur when they missed him, such as Sir Lancelot, Brandiles, and many others; and when she had brought him to her tower she wanted him to lie with her; and then the king remembered his lady, and would not lie with her for any craft she could work. Then every day she would make him ride into that forest to fight with his own knights, meaning to have King Arthur killed. For when this Lady Annowre saw that she could not have him at her will, then she worked by false means to have King Arthur destroyed, and killed.

Then the Lady of the Lake, who was always friendly to King Arthur, understood by her subtle crafts that King Arthur was likely to be destroyed. And so this Lady of the Lake, who was called Nimue, came into that forest to look for Sir Lancelot du Lake or Sir Tristram to help King Arthur; for this Lady of the Lake knew well that on that same day King Arthur would be killed, unless he had help from one of these two knights. And so she rode up and down until she met Sir Tristram, and as soon as she saw him she knew him.

"Oh my lord Sir Tristram," she said, "well met, and blessed be the time that I have met you! For this same day, and within these two hours, the foulest deed that was ever done in this land will be done."

"Oh fair damsel," said Sir Tristram, "can I set it right?"

"Come with me," she said, "and as fast as you can, for you will see the most honourable knight in the world in a hard spot."

Then Sir Tristram said, "I am ready to help such a noble man."

"He is neither better nor worse," said the Lady of the Lake, "than the noble King Arthur himself."

"God forbid," said Sir Tristram, "that he should ever be in such distress."

Then they rode together at a great pace, until they came to a little tower or castle; and below that castle they saw a knight standing on foot fighting with two knights; and so Sir Tristram watched them, and at last the two knights struck down the one knight, and one of them unlaced his helmet to kill him. And the Lady Annowre got King Arthur's sword into her hand to strike off his head. And with that Sir Tristram came with all his might, crying, "Traitress, traitress, leave that!"

And at once Sir Tristram struck one of the knights through the body so that he fell dead; and then he rushed at the other and struck his back in two; and meanwhile the Lady of the Lake cried to King Arthur, "Don't let that false lady escape!"

Then King Arthur overtook her, and with the same sword he struck off her head, and the Lady of the Lake took up her head and hung it by the hair from her saddlebow. And then Sir Tristram got King Arthur onto a horse and rode on with him, but he charged the Lady of the Lake not to reveal his name for the time being.

When the king was on horseback he thanked Sir Tristram heartily, and wanted to know his name; but he would not tell him, except that he was a poor knight-errant; and so he kept King Arthur company until he met some of his knights. And within a while he met Sir Ector de Maris, and he did not know King Arthur or Sir Tristram, and he wanted to joust with one of them. Then Sir Tristram rode at Sir Ector, and struck him from his horse. And when he had done so he came back to the king and said, "My lord, there is one of your knights; he can keep you company. And another day, I trust to God, you will understand from that deed I have done for you that I would do you service."

"Alas," said King Arthur, "let me know who you are."

"Not at this time," said Sir Tristram.

So he left, and left King Arthur and Sir Ector together.
