Chapter 17: How Sir Tristram came to Isolde the Fair, and how Kehydius fell in love with her, and of a letter that Tristram found

And then on the day appointed Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak met at the spring; and then they took Kehydius from the forester's house, and so they rode with him to the ship where they had left Dame Bragwaine and Gouvernail, and so they all sailed into Cornwall together. And by the agreement and the advice of Dame Bragwaine, when they had landed they rode to Sir Dinas the Seneschal, a trusty friend of Sir Tristram's. And so Dame Bragwaine and Sir Dinas rode to King Mark's court, and told the queen, Isolde the Fair, that Sir Tristram was near her in that country. Then for very pure joy Isolde the Fair fainted; and when she could speak she said, "Noble knight Seneschal, help me to speak with him, or my heart will burst."

Then Sir Dinas and Dame Bragwaine brought Sir Tristram and Kehydius secretly into the court, to a chamber that Isolde the Fair had appointed for it; and as for the joy there was between Isolde the Fair and Sir Tristram, there is no tongue that can tell it, nor heart think it, nor pen write it. And as the French book tells, the very first time that Sir Kehydius ever saw Isolde the Fair he was so in love with her that for very pure love he could never draw back from it. And in the end, as you shall hear before the book is ended, Sir Kehydius died for the love of Isolde the Fair. And then he secretly wrote her letters and ballads, of the finest that were in fashion in those days. And when Isolde the Fair understood his letters she took pity on his lament, and without thinking she wrote another letter to comfort him with.

And all this while Sir Tristram was in a tower at the command of Isolde the Fair, and whenever she could she came to Sir Tristram. So one day King Mark was playing chess below a chamber window; and at that time Sir Tristram and Sir Kehydius were inside the chamber above King Mark, and as ill luck would have it Sir Tristram found the letter that Kehydius had sent to Isolde the Fair, and he had also found the letter that she wrote to Kehydius, and at that same time Isolde the Fair was in the same chamber. Then Sir Tristram came to Isolde the Fair and said, "Madam, here is a letter that was sent to you, and here is the letter that you sent to the man who sent you that letter. Alas, madam, for the good love I have loved you with! And I have forsaken many lands and riches for your love, and now you are a traitress to me, which gives me great pain. But as for you, Sir Kehydius, I brought you out of Brittany into this country, and I won back the lands of your father, King Howell, and on top of that I married your sister Isolde of the White Hands for the goodness she did me. And yet, as I am a true knight, she is still a virgin as far as I am concerned. But know this, Sir Kehydius: for this falsehood and treason you have done me, I will take my revenge on you."

And with that Sir Tristram drew out his sword and said, "Sir Kehydius, defend yourself!"

And then Isolde the Fair fell to the ground in a faint. And when Sir Kehydius saw Sir Tristram coming at him he saw no other remedy, but leapt out of a bay window, right over the head of King Mark where he sat playing chess. And when the king saw someone come hurtling over his head he said, "Fellow, who are you, and why are you leaping out of that window?"

"My lord the king," said Kehydius, "it happened that I was asleep in the window above your head, and as I slept I dozed off, and so I fell down."

And so Sir Kehydius excused himself.
