Chapter 18: How Sir Tristram left Tintagil, and how he grieved and stayed so long in a forest that he went out of his mind

Then Sir Tristram was badly afraid that the king would find out he was there; and so he withdrew into the stronghold of the Tower, and armed himself in such armour as he had, to fight with anyone who would stand against him. And so when Sir Tristram saw there was no resistance against him, he sent Gouvernail for his horse and his spear, and like a knight he rode out of the castle openly, which was called the Castle of Tintagil. And right at the gate he met Gingalin, Sir Gawain's son. And at once Sir Gingalin put his spear in its rest, and charged at Sir Tristram and broke his spear; and Sir Tristram at that time had only a sword, and gave him such a blow on the helmet that he fell down from his saddle, and his sword slid down and cut clean through his horse's neck. And so Sir Tristram rode his way into the forest, and King Mark saw all this happen. And then he sent a squire to the hurt knight, and commanded him to come to him, and so he did. And when King Mark learned that it was Sir Gingalin, he welcomed him and gave him a horse, and asked him what knight it was who had fought with him.

"Sir," said Gingalin, "I do not know what knight he was, but I know very well that he sighs and grieves greatly."

Then within a while Sir Tristram met a knight of his own who was called Sir Fergus. And when he had met him he grieved so greatly that he fell down off his horse in a faint, and he was in such sorrow for three days and three nights. Then at last Sir Tristram sent Sir Fergus to the court, to ask what news there was. And as he rode along the way he met a damsel who came from Sir Palomides, to find out and learn how Sir Tristram was doing. Then Sir Fergus told her how he was almost out of his mind.

"Alas," said the damsel, "where shall I find him?"

"In such and such a place," said Sir Fergus.

Then Sir Fergus found Queen Isolde sick in her bed, grieving more than any earthly woman ever grieved. And when the damsel found Sir Tristram she grieved greatly because she could not help him, for the more she made of him, the greater was his pain. And at last Sir Tristram took his horse and rode away from her. And then it was three days before she could find him, and then she brought him food and drink, but he would have none of it; and then another time Sir Tristram escaped from the damsel, and it happened that he rode by the same castle where Sir Palomides and Sir Tristram fought when Isolde the Fair parted them. And there by chance the damsel met Sir Tristram again, grieving more than any earthly creature ever grieved; and she went to the lady of that castle and told her of Sir Tristram's misfortune.

"Alas," said the lady of that castle, "where is my lord, Sir Tristram?"

"Right here by your castle," said the damsel.

"It is a happy chance," said the lady, "that he is so near me. He shall have the best food and drink; and I have a harp of his, on which he taught me, for in fine harping he takes the prize of the world."

So this lady and the damsel brought him food and drink, but he ate little of it. Then one night he sent his horse away from him, and then he unlaced his armour, and then Sir Tristram would go into the wilderness, and break down the trees and boughs; and at other times, when he found the harp that the lady had sent him, then he would harp, and play on it and weep at the same time. And sometimes, when Sir Tristram was in the wood and the lady did not know where he was, then she would sit down and play on that harp: then Sir Tristram would come to that harp, and listen to it, and sometimes he would harp himself. So he lived there for a quarter of a year. Then at last he ran away, and she did not know what had become of him. And then he was naked, and grew lean and wasted; and so he fell in with herdsmen and shepherds, and every day they would give him some of their food and drink. And when he did any mischief they would beat him with rods, and so they clipped his hair with shears and made him look like a fool.
