Chapter 19: How Sir Tristram dunked Dagonet in a well, and how Palomides sent a damsel to look for Tristram, and how Palomides met King Mark

And one day Dagonet, King Arthur's fool, came into Cornwall with two squires; and as they rode through that forest they came to a fair well where Sir Tristram used to stay. And the weather was hot, and they dismounted to drink from that well, and meanwhile their horses broke loose. Just then Sir Tristram came up to them, and first he dunked Sir Dagonet in that well, and then his squires, and the shepherds laughed at it. And straight away he ran after their horses and brought them back one by one, and then, wet as they were, he made them jump up and ride on their way. So Sir Tristram lived there half a year naked, and would never come into town or village.

Meanwhile the damsel that Sir Palomides had sent to look for Sir Tristram went back to Sir Palomides and told him all the misery that Sir Tristram was suffering.

"Alas," said Sir Palomides, "it is a great pity that so noble a knight should ever be brought so low for the love of a lady. But all the same, I will go and look for him, and comfort him if I can."

Now a little before that time Isolde the Fair had ordered Sir Kehydius out of the country of Cornwall. So Sir Kehydius left with a sorrowful heart, and by chance he met Sir Palomides, and they joined company. And each of them complained to the other of the burning love they had for Isolde the Fair.

"Now let us," said Sir Palomides, "look for Sir Tristram, who loved her as well as we do, and let us see whether we can bring him back to himself."

So they rode into that forest, and for three days and three nights they never once took lodging, but went on looking for Sir Tristram.

And once, by chance, they met King Mark, who had ridden away from his men all alone. When they saw him Sir Palomides knew him, but Sir Kehydius did not.

"Ah, false king," said Sir Palomides, "it is a pity you are alive, for you are a destroyer of all honourable knights, and by your malice and your vengeance you have destroyed that most noble knight, Sir Tristram de Liones. And so defend yourself," said Sir Palomides, "for you shall die this day."

"That would be a shameful thing," said King Mark, "for you two are armed and I am unarmed."

"As for that," said Sir Palomides, "I shall find a remedy. Here is a knight with me, and you shall have his armour."

"No," said King Mark, "I will not fight with you, for you have no quarrel with me. All the trouble that Sir Tristram has came from a letter that he found. As for me, I did him no wrong, and God knows I am very sorry for his distress and his sickness."

So when the king had excused himself in this way they were friends, and King Mark would have taken them to Tintagil; but Sir Palomides would not go, and turned towards the realm of Logres, and Sir Kehydius said that he would go into Brittany.

Now we turn back to Sir Dagonet. When he and his squires were on horseback again, he decided that the shepherds had set that fool on to treat them so, because they had laughed at them. And so they rode up to the herdsmen and beat them soundly. Sir Tristram saw them beating the men who used to give him food and drink, and he ran over there and got Sir Dagonet by the head, and threw him to the ground so hard that he was badly bruised and lay still. And then he wrenched his sword out of his hand, and with it he ran at one of his squires and struck off his head, and the other fled. And so Sir Tristram went on his way with that sword in his hand, running as if he were raving mad.

Then Sir Dagonet rode to King Mark and told him how he had fared in that forest. "And so," said Sir Dagonet, "beware, King Mark, and do not come near that well in the forest, for there is a naked fool there, and that fool and I, fool, met together, and he nearly killed me."

"Ah," said King Mark, "that is Sir Matto le Breune, who went out of his wits because he lost his lady. For when Sir Gaheris struck down Sir Matto and won his lady from him, he was never in his right mind again, and that was a pity, for he was a good knight."
