Chapter 20: How a rumour spread that Sir Tristram was dead, and how Isolde the Fair tried to kill herself

Then Sir Andred, who was Sir Tristram's cousin, had a lady who was his lover say and spread it about that she had been with Sir Tristram before he died. And she brought this tale to King Mark's court: that she had buried him by a spring, and that before he died he had begged King Mark to make his cousin, Sir Andred, king of the country of Liones, of which Sir Tristram was lord. Sir Andred did all this because he wanted to have Sir Tristram's lands. And when King Mark heard that Sir Tristram was dead he wept and grieved greatly.

But when Queen Isolde heard this news she was in such sorrow that she was nearly out of her mind; and so one day she resolved to kill herself and not to live on after Sir Tristram's death. And so one day Isolde the Fair got hold of a sword secretly and carried it into her garden, and there she drove the sword through a plum tree up to the hilt, so that it stuck fast, and it stood breast-high. And as she was about to run upon the sword and kill herself, King Mark saw it all: how she knelt down and said, "Sweet Lord Jesus, have mercy on me, for I cannot live after the death of Sir Tristram de Liones, for he was my first love and he shall be the last."

And with these words King Mark came up and took her in his arms, and then he took up the sword, and carried her away with him into a tower; and there he had her guarded, and kept a close watch on her, and after that she lay sick a long while, near to the point of death.

Meanwhile Sir Tristram ran naked in the forest with the sword in his hand, and so he came to a hermitage, and there he lay down and slept. And while he slept the hermit stole his sword away, and laid food down beside him. So he was kept there ten days, and at last he left and came back to the herdsmen.

And there was a giant in that country called Taulas, and for fear of Sir Tristram he had not dared to go about freely for more than seven years, but mostly kept himself in a strong castle of his own. And so this Taulas heard that Sir Tristram was dead, from the rumour at King Mark's court. Then this Taulas went about freely every day. And so it happened one day that he came to the herdsmen, wandering and sauntering, and there he sat down to rest among them.

Meanwhile there came a knight of Cornwall who had a lady with him, and his name was Sir Dinant. And when the giant saw him he left the herdsmen and hid under a tree, and so the knight came to that spring, and there he dismounted to rest. And as soon as he was off his horse this giant Taulas came between the knight and his horse, and took the horse and leapt on it. Then at once he rode at Sir Dinant and took him by the collar, and pulled him up in front of him on the horse, and was about to strike off his head.

Then the herdsmen said to Sir Tristram, "Help that knight over there."

"You help him," said Sir Tristram.

"We don't dare," said the herdsmen.

Then Sir Tristram noticed the knight's sword where it lay; and so he ran over there and took up the sword and struck off Sir Taulas's head, and so he went his way back to the herdsmen.
