Chapter 21: How King Mark found Sir Tristram naked and had him carried home to Tintagil, and how he was recognised there by a little hound

Then the knight took up the giant's head and carried it with him to King Mark, and told him what adventure had happened to him in the forest, and how a naked man had rescued him from the grim giant, Taulas.

"Where did you have this adventure?" said King Mark.

"Truly," said Sir Dinant, "at the fair spring in your forest where many knights-errant meet, and that is where the madman is."

"Well," said King Mark, "I will see that wild man."

So within a day or two King Mark commanded his knights and his huntsmen to be ready in the morning to hunt, and so in the morning he went into that forest. And when the king came to that well he found lying beside it a fine naked man, and a sword by him. Then King Mark blew his horn and sounded the strake, the call that gathers in the hunt, and with that his knights came to him. And then the king commanded his knights: "Take that naked man gently, and bring him to my castle."

So they did, softly and gently, and threw cloaks over Sir Tristram, and so led him to Tintagil; and there they bathed him, and washed him, and gave him hot broths until they had brought him well back to his memory. But all this while there was no one who knew Sir Tristram, or what man he was.

So it happened one day that the queen, Isolde the Fair, heard of such a man, who had run naked in the forest, and how the king had brought him home to the court. Then Isolde the Fair called Dame Bragwaine to her and said, "Come with me, for we will go and see this man that my lord brought from the forest the other day."

So they went out, and asked where the sick man was. And then a squire told the queen that he was in the garden taking his rest, and resting himself in the sun. So when the queen looked at Sir Tristram she did not remember him. But all the while she kept saying to Dame Bragwaine, "It seems to me I must have seen him before in many places."

But as soon as Sir Tristram saw her he knew her well enough. And then he turned his face away and wept.

Now the queen always had with her a little hound that Sir Tristram had given her the first time she ever came into Cornwall, and that hound would never leave her unless Sir Tristram was near where Isolde the Fair was; and this hound had been sent from the King of France's daughter to Sir Tristram for great love. And as soon as this little hound caught the scent of Sir Tristram, she leapt up on him and licked his cheeks and his ears, and then she whined and gave tongue, and she sniffed at his feet and at his hands, and at every part of his body she could get to.

"Ah, my lady," said Dame Bragwaine to Isolde the Fair, "alas, alas," she said, "I see it is my own lord, Sir Tristram."

And with that Isolde fell down in a swoon, and lay so a long while. And when she could speak she said, "My lord Sir Tristram, blessed be God that you are alive! And now I am sure you will be discovered by this little hound, for she will never leave you. And I am sure too that as soon as my lord, King Mark, knows who you are he will banish you out of the country of Cornwall, or else he will destroy you. For God's sake, my own lord, give way to King Mark, and then make your way to the court of King Arthur, for there you are loved; and whenever I can I shall send to you; and when you wish you may come to me, and at all times, early and late, I will be at your command, to live as poor a life as ever queen or lady did."

"Oh, madam," said Sir Tristram, "go away from me, for I have escaped great anger and danger for your love."
