Chapter 22: How King Mark, on the advice of his council, banished Sir Tristram from Cornwall for ten years

Then the queen left, but the hound would not leave him; and with that King Mark came up, and the hound went for him, and bayed at them all. With that Sir Andred spoke and said, "Sir, this is Sir Tristram, I can tell by the hound."

"No," said the king, "I cannot believe that."

Then the king asked him on his faith who he was, and what his name was.

"So help me God," said he, "my name is Sir Tristram de Liones. Now do with me what you will."

"Ah," said King Mark, "I am sorry you have recovered."

And then he had his barons called to sentence Sir Tristram to death. But many of his barons would not agree to it, and especially Sir Dinas the Seneschal, and Sir Fergus. And so, on the advice of them all, Sir Tristram was banished out of the country for ten years, and he swore his oath to it on a book before the king and his barons. And so he was made to leave the country of Cornwall; and many barons brought him to his ship, some of whom were his friends and some his enemies.

And in the meantime there came a knight of King Arthur's, whose name was Dinadan, and he had come to look for Sir Tristram. Then they showed him where he was, armed at all points, going to the ship.

"Now, fair knight," said Sir Dinadan, "before you leave this court, I ask you to joust with me."

"With a good will," said Sir Tristram, "if these lords will give me leave."

Then the barons granted it, and so they ran together, and there Sir Tristram gave Sir Dinadan a fall. And then he begged Sir Tristram to give him leave to go in his company.

"You shall be very welcome," said Sir Tristram then.

And so they took their horses and rode to their ships together. And when Sir Tristram was out at sea he said, "Give my greetings to King Mark and all my enemies, and tell them I will come back when I can. And I am well rewarded for fighting Sir Marhaus, and freeing all this country from bondage; and I am well rewarded for the fetching of Queen Isolde out of Ireland, and the cost of it, and the danger I was in first and last, and on the way home what danger I had to bring Queen Isolde back from the Castle Pluere; and I am well rewarded for when I fought with Sir Bleoberis for Sir Segwarides' wife; and I am well rewarded for when I fought with Sir Blamore de Ganis for King Anguish, father of Isolde the Fair; and I am well rewarded for when I struck down the good knight Sir Lamorak de Galis at King Mark's request; and I am well rewarded for when I fought with the King with the Hundred Knights and the King of North Wales, who would both have put his land in bondage, and by me they were put to shame; and I am well rewarded for the killing of Taulas, the mighty giant, and many other deeds I have done for him, and now I have my reward. And tell King Mark that many noble knights of the Round Table have spared the barons of this country for my sake. And am I not well rewarded for when I fought with the good knight Sir Palomides and rescued Queen Isolde from him? And at that time King Mark said before all his barons that I should have been better rewarded."

And with that he put to sea.
