Chapter 23: How a damsel looked for someone to help Sir Lancelot against thirty knights, and how Sir Tristram fought with them

And at the next landing place, close by the sea, Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan were met by Sir Ector de Maris and Sir Bors de Ganis; and there Sir Ector jousted with Sir Dinadan, and struck him and his horse down. And then Sir Tristram wanted to joust with Sir Bors, and Sir Bors said that he would not joust with any Cornish knights, for they are not counted men of honour; and all this happened on a bridge. And with that Sir Bleoberis and Sir Driant came up, and Sir Bleoberis offered to joust with Sir Tristram, and there Sir Tristram struck down Sir Bleoberis.

Then Sir Bors de Ganis said, "I never knew a Cornish knight of such great valour, or so brave, as that knight who wears the trappings embroidered with crowns."

And then Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan left them and rode into a forest, and there a damsel met them who had come, for the love of Sir Lancelot, to look for some noble knights of King Arthur's court to rescue Sir Lancelot. For it had been arranged, through the treachery of Queen Morgan le Fay, that Sir Lancelot should be killed, and for that purpose she had set thirty knights to lie in wait for Sir Lancelot, and this damsel knew of this treachery. And for this reason the damsel had come to look for noble knights to help Sir Lancelot. For that night, or the day after, Sir Lancelot was to come to where these thirty knights were. And so this damsel had met Sir Bors and Sir Ector and Sir Driant, and there she told all four of them of the treachery of Morgan le Fay; and then they promised her that they would be close by where Sir Lancelot was to meet the thirty knights: "And if it turns out they set upon him, we will come to his rescue as best we can."

So the damsel left, and by chance the damsel met Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan, and there the damsel told them all the treachery that had been planned against Sir Lancelot.

"Fair damsel," said Sir Tristram, "take me to the place where they are to meet Sir Lancelot."

Then Sir Dinadan said, "What are you going to do? It is not for us to fight thirty knights, and believe me, I will have none of it. To take on one knight, two or three of us is quite enough, if they are real men; but to take on fifteen knights apiece, that I will never undertake."

"For shame," said Sir Tristram, "just do your part."

"No," said Sir Dinadan, "I will have none of it, unless you will lend me your shield, for you carry a shield of Cornwall; and the knights of Cornwall have such a name for cowardice that nobody ever bothers a man behind one of your shields."

"No," said Sir Tristram, "I will not part with my shield, for the sake of the lady who gave it to me. But one thing," said Sir Tristram, "I promise you, Sir Dinadan: unless you promise me to stand by me, I will kill you here and now. For I ask nothing more of you than to take on one knight. And if your heart fails you, stand by and watch me and them."

"Sir," said Sir Dinadan, "I promise you to watch, and to do what I can to save myself; but I wish I had never met you."

So then at once these thirty knights came close by the other four knights, and the four saw them, and each party saw the other. And so the thirty knights let them pass, for this reason: that they did not want to anger them, in case they had to fight Sir Lancelot; and the four knights let them pass with this intent, that they wanted to see and watch what they would do with Sir Lancelot. And so the thirty knights passed on and came by Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan, and then Sir Tristram shouted out, "Look, here is a knight against you, for the love of Sir Lancelot!"

And there he killed two with one spear and ten with his sword. And then Sir Dinadan came in, and he did exceedingly well, and so of the thirty knights only ten got away, and they fled. Sir Bors de Ganis and his three companions saw this whole battle, and then they saw plainly that it was the same knight who had jousted with them at the bridge. Then they took their horses and rode up to Sir Tristram, and praised him and thanked him for his good deeds, and they all asked Sir Tristram to go with them to their lodging; and he said no, he would not go to any lodging. Then all four knights begged him to tell them his name.

"Fair lords," said Sir Tristram, "for the present I will not tell you my name."
