Chapter 24: How Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan came to a lodging where they had to joust with two knights

Then Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan rode on their way until they came to the shepherds and the herdsmen, and there they asked them if they knew of any lodging or shelter near at hand.

"Truly, sirs," said the herdsmen, "there is good lodging close by in a castle; but there is a custom there that no knight shall be lodged unless he jousts with two knights, and if he is only one knight he must joust with two. And as soon as you are inside you will be matched."

"That's a nasty sort of lodging," said Sir Dinadan. "Lodge where you like, for I will not lodge there."

"For shame," said Sir Tristram, "are you not a knight of the Round Table? So you cannot refuse your lodging and keep your honour."

"Not so," said the herdsmen, "for if you are beaten and get the worst of it you will not be lodged there, and if you beat them you will be well lodged."

"Ah," said Sir Dinadan, "they are two solid knights."

Then Sir Dinadan would not lodge there on any account, except that Sir Tristram charged him by his knighthood; and so they rode there. And to cut a long story short, Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan struck them both down, and so they went into the castle and had as good a welcome as they could think of or wish for.

And when they had taken off their armour, and meant to be merry and well rested, there came in at the gates Sir Palomides and Sir Gaheris, demanding the custom of the castle.

"What's all this?" said Sir Dinadan. "I want my rest."

"That cannot be," said Sir Tristram. "Now we must defend the custom of this castle, since we have got the better of the lords of this castle; and so," said Sir Tristram, "you must make yourself ready."

"It was in the devil's name," said Sir Dinadan, "that I ever came into your company."

And so they made themselves ready; and Sir Gaheris met Sir Tristram, and Sir Gaheris had a fall; and Sir Palomides met Sir Dinadan, and Sir Dinadan had a fall: so it was fall for fall. So then they had to fight on foot. Sir Dinadan would not do that, for he was so badly bruised from the fall that Sir Palomides had given him. Then Sir Tristram unlaced Sir Dinadan's helmet, and begged him to help him.

"I will not," said Sir Dinadan, "for I am badly wounded from the thirty knights we had to deal with only a little while ago. But you behave," said Sir Dinadan to Sir Tristram, "like a madman, like a man out of his mind who wants to throw his life away, and I may curse the hour I ever set eyes on you. For in all the world there are no two knights so mad as Sir Lancelot and you, Sir Tristram. Once I fell into Sir Lancelot's company, as I have now with you, and he set me such a job of work that I kept to my bed for a quarter of a year. Jesus defend me," said Sir Dinadan, "from two such knights, and especially from your company!"

"Then," said Sir Tristram, "I will fight them both." Then Sir Tristram told them both to come on: "For I will fight with you."

Then Sir Palomides and Sir Gaheris made ready, and struck at them both. Then Dinadan struck at Sir Gaheris a stroke or two, and turned away from him.

"No," said Sir Palomides, "it is too great a shame for two of us knights to fight one."

And then he told Sir Gaheris to stand aside with that knight who had no appetite for fighting. Then they rushed together and fought a long time, and at last Sir Tristram doubled his strokes, and drove Sir Palomides back more than three strides. And then by common consent Sir Gaheris and Sir Dinadan went between them, and parted them. And then, with Sir Tristram's agreement, they would have lodged together. But Sir Dinadan would not lodge in that castle. And then he cursed the hour he ever came into their company, and so he took his horse and his armour and left.

Then Sir Tristram asked the lords of that castle to lend him a man to bring him to a lodging, and so they did, and they overtook Sir Dinadan, and rode to their lodging two miles from there with a good man in a priory, and there they were very comfortable. And that same night Sir Bors and Sir Bleoberis, and Sir Ector and Sir Driant, stayed on in the same place where Sir Tristram had fought with the thirty knights; and there they met Sir Lancelot that same night, and they had promised to lodge with Sir Colgrevance that same night.
