Chapter 25: How Sir Tristram jousted with Sir Kay and Sir Sagramore le Desirous, and how Sir Gawain turned Sir Tristram away from Morgan le Fay

But as soon as the noble knight Sir Lancelot heard of the shield of Cornwall, he knew well that it was Sir Tristram who had fought with his enemies. And then Sir Lancelot praised Sir Tristram, and called him the man of most honour in the world.

Now there was a knight in that priory called Pellinore, and he wanted to know Sir Tristram's name, but he could not get it by any means; and so Sir Tristram left, and left Sir Dinadan in the priory, for he was so weary and so badly bruised that he could not ride.

Then this knight, Sir Pellinore, said to Sir Dinadan, "Since you will not tell me that knight's name, I will ride after him and make him tell me his name, or he shall die for it."

"Beware, sir knight," said Sir Dinadan, "for if you follow him you will regret it."

So that knight, Sir Pellinore, rode after Sir Tristram and challenged him to joust. Then Sir Tristram struck him down and wounded him through the shoulder, and so he went on his way.

And on the next day Sir Tristram met some pursuivants, the heralds' messengers, and they told him that a great tournament had been proclaimed between King Carados of Scotland and the King of North Wales, and that each side was to joust against the other at the Castle of Maidens. And these pursuivants were searching all the country for the good knights, and in particular King Carados had a search made for Sir Lancelot du Lake, and the King of North Wales had a search made for Sir Tristram de Liones. And at that time Sir Tristram meant to be at those jousts.

And so by chance they met Sir Kay the Seneschal and Sir Sagramore le Desirous; and Sir Kay asked Sir Tristram to joust, and Sir Tristram more or less refused him, because he did not want to be hurt or bruised before the great jousts that were to be held at the Castle of Maidens, and so he meant to take his ease and rest. And all the while Sir Kay kept shouting, "Sir knight of Cornwall, joust with me, or else yield to me as a recreant!"

When Sir Tristram heard him say so he turned towards him, and then Sir Kay refused him and turned his back.

Then Sir Tristram said, "As I find you, so I'll take you."

Then Sir Kay turned, against his will, and Sir Tristram struck Sir Kay down, and so he rode on.

Then Sir Sagramore le Desirous rode after Sir Tristram, and made him joust with him, and there Sir Tristram struck Sir Sagramore le Desirous down from his horse, and rode on his way. And the same day he met a damsel who told him that he could win great honour from a knight-errant who was doing much harm all over that country. When Sir Tristram heard her say so, he was glad to go with her to win honour. So Sir Tristram rode with that damsel about six miles, and then Sir Gawain met him, and at once Sir Gawain recognised the damsel, that she was a damsel of Queen Morgan le Fay's. Then Sir Gawain understood that she was leading that knight into some harm.

"Fair knight," said Sir Gawain, "where are you riding now with that damsel?"

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "I do not know where I am riding, except as the damsel leads me."

"Sir," said Sir Gawain, "you shall not ride with her, for she and her lady never did good, but only ill."

And then Sir Gawain drew his sword and said, "Damsel, unless you tell me this minute why you are leading this knight with you, you will die for it on the spot. I know all your lady's treachery, and yours."

"Mercy, Sir Gawain," she said, "and if you will spare my life I will tell you."

"Speak," said Sir Gawain, "and you shall have your life."

"Sir," she said, "Queen Morgan le Fay, my lady, has set some thirty ladies to search and watch for Sir Lancelot or Sir Tristram. And by the wiles of these ladies, whichever of them first met either of these two knights was to lead him to Morgan le Fay's castle, saying that he would do deeds of honour there; and if either of the two knights came there, there are thirty knights lying in wait in a tower, watching for Sir Lancelot or for Sir Tristram."

"Shame on it," said Sir Gawain, "that such false treachery should ever be worked or used by a queen, and a king's sister, and the daughter of a king and queen!"
