Chapter 26: How Sir Tristram and Sir Gawain rode out to fight the thirty knights, but they did not dare to come out

"Sir," said Sir Gawain, "will you stand with me, and we will see what the malice of these thirty knights amounts to?"

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "go to them, if you please, and you will see that I will not fail you. For it is not long since I and a companion met with thirty knights of that queen's company; and God speed us, so that we may win honour."

So then Sir Gawain and Sir Tristram rode towards the castle where Morgan le Fay was, and all the while Sir Gawain judged that he must be Sir Tristram de Liones, because he had heard that two knights had killed and beaten thirty knights. And when they came before the castle Sir Gawain spoke out loud and said, "Queen Morgan le Fay, send out your knights that you have set lying in wait for Sir Lancelot and for Sir Tristram. Now," said Sir Gawain, "I know your false treachery, and everywhere I ride men shall know of your false treachery. And now let us see," said Sir Gawain, "whether you dare come out of your castle, you thirty knights."

Then the queen spoke, and all the thirty knights together, and said, "Sir Gawain, you know very well what you are doing and saying; for by God we know you exceedingly well, but all that you say and do, you say it trusting in the pride of that good knight who is there with you. For there are some of us who know the hands of that knight very well indeed. And believe this, Sir Gawain: it is more for his sake than for yours that we will not come out of this castle. For you may be sure, Sir Gawain, that we know the knight who carries the arms of Cornwall, and who he is."

Then Sir Gawain and Sir Tristram left and rode on their way together for a day or two; and there by chance they met Sir Kay and Sir Sagramore le Desirous. And they were glad of Sir Gawain, and he of them, but they did not know who the knight with the shield of Cornwall was, except by guessing. And so they rode together for a day or two. And then they caught sight of Sir Breuse Saunce Pité chasing a lady to kill her, for he had already killed her lover.

"Keep still, all of you," said Sir Gawain, "and none of you show yourselves, and you will see me pay back that false knight over there; for if he spots you he is so well horsed that he will get away."

And then Sir Gawain rode between Sir Breuse and the lady, and said, "False knight, leave her, and fight with me."

When Sir Breuse saw no one but Sir Gawain he set his spear in rest, and Sir Gawain did the same against him; and there Sir Breuse overthrew Sir Gawain, and then he rode over him, and across him twenty times, to destroy him. And when Sir Tristram saw him do so base a deed, he charged out against him. And when Sir Breuse saw him with the shield of Cornwall he knew well that it was Sir Tristram, and then he fled, and Sir Tristram went after him; and Sir Breuse Saunce Pité was so well horsed that he got clean away, and Sir Tristram followed him a long way, for he would gladly have been avenged on him. And so when he had chased him a long time, he saw a fair well, and he rode over to it to rest, and tied his horse to a tree.
