Chapter 27: How the damsel Bragwaine found Tristram sleeping by a spring, and how she gave him letters from Isolde the Fair

And then he pulled off his helmet and washed his face and his hands, and so he fell asleep. Meanwhile there came a damsel who had looked for Sir Tristram by many ways and on many days within this land. And when she came to the spring she looked at him, and had forgotten what Sir Tristram looked like, but she knew him by his horse, called Passe-Brewel, which had been Sir Tristram's horse for many years. For when he was mad in the forest Sir Fergus had kept the horse. So this lady, Dame Bragwaine, waited there until he was awake. So when she saw him wake she greeted him, and he her in return, for each knew the other from long acquaintance. Then she told him how she had looked for him far and wide, and there she told him that she had letters from Queen Isolde the Fair. Then at once Sir Tristram read them, and you may be sure he was glad, for there were many piteous laments in them.

Then Sir Tristram said, "Lady Bragwaine, you shall ride with me until that tournament at the Castle of Maidens is over, and then you shall carry letters and news back with you."

And then Sir Tristram took his horse and looked for lodging, and there he met a good old knight and asked him to lodge him. Just then Gouvernail came to Sir Tristram, and he was glad of that lady. Now this old knight's name was Sir Pellounes, and he told of the great tournament that was to be at the Castle of Maidens. And there Sir Lancelot and thirty-two knights of his blood had had shields of Cornwall made. And just then someone came to Sir Pellounes and told him that Sir Persides de Bloise had come home; then that knight held up his hands and thanked God for his homecoming. And there Sir Pellounes told Sir Tristram that he had not seen his son, Sir Persides, in two years.

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "I know your son well enough for a good knight."

So once Sir Tristram and Sir Persides came to their lodging both at the same time, and so they took off their armour and put on their clothes. And then these two knights welcomed each other. And when Sir Persides understood that Sir Tristram was from Cornwall, he said he had once been in Cornwall: "And there I jousted before King Mark; and it so happened that at that time I overthrew ten knights, and then Sir Tristram de Liones came at me and overthrew me, and took my lady away from me, and that I shall never forget, but I shall remember it if ever I see my chance."

"Ah," said Sir Tristram, "now I understand that you hate Sir Tristram. What do you think, do you suppose that Sir Tristram is not able to withstand your malice?"

"Yes," said Sir Persides, "I know well that Sir Tristram is a noble knight and a much better knight than I am; yet I shall not owe him my good will."

Just as they stood talking like this at a bay window of that castle, they saw many knights riding to and fro towards the tournament. And then Sir Tristram noticed a fine-looking knight riding on a great black horse, with a black-covered shield.

"What knight is that," said Sir Tristram, "with the black horse and the black shield? He looks a good knight."

"I know him well," said Sir Persides. "He is one of the best knights in the world."

"Then it is Sir Lancelot," said Tristram.

"No," said Sir Persides, "it is Sir Palomides, who is still unchristened."
