Chapter 28: How Sir Tristram was unhorsed by Sir Palomides, and how Lancelot overthrew two knights

Then they saw many people of the country greet Sir Palomides. And a little while after there came a squire of the castle, who told Sir Pellounes, the lord of that castle, that a knight with a black shield had struck down thirteen knights.

"Fair brother," said Sir Tristram to Sir Persides, "let us throw cloaks over ourselves and go and watch the sport."

"Not so," said Sir Persides. "We will not go there like servants. We will ride like men and good knights, ready to stand up to our enemies."

So they armed themselves, and took their horses and great spears, and went to where many knights were trying themselves out before the tournament. And at once Sir Palomides saw Sir Persides, and then he sent a squire to him, and said, "Go to that knight over there with the green shield with a gold lion on it, and tell him I request him to joust with me, and tell him that my name is Sir Palomides."

When Sir Persides understood Sir Palomides' request, he made himself ready, and at once they met together, but Sir Persides took a fall. Then Sir Tristram squared up to be revenged on Sir Palomides, and Sir Palomides saw it, and he was ready and Sir Tristram was not, and so he took him at a disadvantage and struck him over his horse's tail when he had no spear in his rest. Then Sir Tristram leapt up and quickly took his horse, and he was angry beyond measure and badly ashamed of that fall. Then Sir Tristram sent Gouvernail to Sir Palomides, and asked him to joust with him at his request.

"No," said Sir Palomides, "I will not joust with that knight at this time, for I know him better than he thinks. And if he is angry he may put it right tomorrow at the Castle of Maidens, where he can see me and many other knights."

With that came Sir Dinadan, and when he saw Sir Tristram angry he did not care to joke.

"Look," said Sir Dinadan, "here's the proof of it: however good a man is, he can still take a fall; and no man was ever so wise that he couldn't be caught out; and the only man who rides well is the one who never fell."

So Sir Tristram was exceedingly angry, and said to Sir Persides and to Sir Dinadan, "I will have my revenge."

Just as they stood there talking, there came past Sir Tristram a fine-looking knight with a black shield, riding very soberly and heavily.

"What knight is that?" said Sir Tristram to Sir Persides.

"I know him well," said Sir Persides, "for his name is Sir Briant of North Wales."

So he passed on among the other knights of North Wales. And then Sir Lancelot du Lake came in with a shield bearing the arms of Cornwall, and he sent a squire to Sir Briant, and requested him to joust with him.

"Well," said Sir Briant, "since I am asked to joust, I will do what I can."

And there Sir Lancelot struck Sir Briant down from his horse with a great fall. And then Sir Tristram wondered what knight he was who bore the shield of Cornwall.

"Whoever he is," said Sir Dinadan, "I promise you he is of King Ban's blood, and they are the knights of the most noble prowess in the world, if you count them man for man."

Then there came two knights of North Wales, one called Hew de la Montaine and the other Sir Madok de la Montaine, and they challenged Sir Lancelot on the spot. Sir Lancelot did not refuse them but made himself ready, and with one spear he struck them both down over their horses' rumps. And so Sir Lancelot rode his way.

"By the good Lord," said Sir Tristram, "he is a good knight who bears the shield of Cornwall, and it seems to me he rides in the best manner that I ever saw a knight ride."

Then the King of North Wales rode to Sir Palomides and begged him earnestly, for his sake, to joust with that knight "who has done us of North Wales this insult."

"Sir," said Sir Palomides, "I am very unwilling to fight that knight, and the reason is that the great tournament is tomorrow, and so, by my own choice, I will keep myself fresh."

"No," said the King of North Wales, "I beg you, ask him to joust."

"Sir," said Sir Palomides, "I will joust at your request, and ask that knight to joust with me; and I have often seen a man take a fall that he asked for himself."
