Chapter 29: How Sir Lancelot jousted with Palomides and overthrew him, and how afterwards he was attacked by twelve knights

Then Sir Palomides sent a squire to Sir Lancelot, and requested him to joust.

"Good fellow," said Sir Lancelot, "tell me your lord's name."

"Sir," said the squire, "my lord's name is Sir Palomides, the good knight."

"Well and good," said Sir Lancelot, "for there is no knight I have seen these seven years whom I would rather fight than him."

And so each knight made himself ready with two great spears.

"Now," said Sir Dinadan, "you'll see that Sir Palomides will acquit himself very well."

"That may be so," said Sir Tristram, "but I promise you that knight with the shield of Cornwall will give him a fall."

"I don't believe it," said Sir Dinadan.

Just then they spurred their horses and set their spears in rest, and each hit the other. And Sir Palomides broke a spear on Sir Lancelot, and he sat firm and did not move; but Sir Lancelot struck him so swiftly that he made him leave his horse's saddle, and the stroke broke his shield and his hauberk, and if he had not fallen he would have been killed.

"How about that?" said Sir Tristram. "I knew well, by the way they both rode, that Sir Palomides would have a fall."

Then Sir Lancelot rode his way, and rode to a spring to drink and to rest himself, and the men of North Wales watched where he rode. And then twelve knights followed him to do him harm, for this reason: so that he should not win the victory the next day at the tournament of the Castle of Maidens. So they came upon Sir Lancelot suddenly, and he scarcely had time to put on his helmet and take his horse before they were at him. And then Sir Lancelot got his spear, and rode through them, and there he killed a knight and broke a spear in his body. Then he drew his sword and struck to the right and to the left, so that within a few strokes he had killed three more knights, and the rest who stayed, he wounded them badly, every one who stayed. So Sir Lancelot escaped from his enemies of North Wales, and then Sir Lancelot rode his way to a friend's, and lodged there until the next morning; for he would not fight in the tournament on the first day, because of his great exertion. And on the first day he was with King Arthur, where he was set up high on a stand to judge who was most worthy for his deeds. So Sir Lancelot was with King Arthur, and did not joust on the first day.
