Chapter 30: How Sir Tristram bore himself on the first day of the tournament, and how he won the prize there

Now we turn to Sir Tristram de Liones, who commanded Gouvernail, his servant, to get him a black shield with no other device on it. And so Sir Persides and Sir Tristram left their host Sir Pellounes, and rode early towards the tournament, and then they joined King Carados' side, the King of Scotland's. And at once knights opened the field, some of the King of North Wales' side and some of King Carados' side, and there the fighting began in earnest. Then there was crashing and rushing. Just then Sir Persides and Sir Tristram came in, and they fared so well that they drove the King of North Wales back. Then Sir Bleoberis de Ganis and Sir Gaheris came in with the men of North Wales, and then Sir Persides was struck down and nearly killed, for more than forty horsemen rode over him. For Sir Bleoberis did great deeds of arms, and Sir Gaheris did not fail him. When Sir Tristram saw them, and saw them do such deeds of arms, he wondered who they were. Sir Tristram also thought it a shame that Sir Persides was so treated; and then he took a great spear in his hand, and rode at Sir Gaheris and struck him down from his horse. And then Sir Bleoberis was angry, and took a spear and rode against Sir Tristram in great fury; and there Sir Tristram met him, and struck Sir Bleoberis from his horse. So then the King with the Hundred Knights was angry, and he put Sir Bleoberis and Sir Gaheris back on their horses, and there a great fight began. And all the while Sir Tristram held them very hard, and all the while Sir Bleoberis was exceedingly busy against Sir Tristram. And there Sir Dinadan came against Sir Tristram, and Sir Tristram gave him such a blow that he swooned in his saddle. Then Sir Dinadan came straight to Sir Tristram and said, "Sir, I know you better than you think. But here I give you my solemn word: I will never come against you again, because I promise you that sword of yours is never landing on my helmet again."

With that Sir Bleoberis came, and Sir Tristram gave him such a blow that down went his head; and then he caught him so hard by the helmet that he pulled him under his horse's feet. And then King Arthur had the horn blown to end the day. Then Sir Tristram went off to his tent, and Sir Dinadan rode with him; and Sir Persides and King Arthur, and the kings on both sides, wondered what knight that was with the black shield. Many gave their opinion, and some recognised him as Sir Tristram, and held their peace and would say nothing. So on that first day King Arthur, and all the kings and lords who were judges, gave Sir Tristram the prize; and yet they did not know him, but named him the Knight with the Black Shield.
