Chapter 31: How Sir Tristram went over to the side against King Arthur's because he saw Sir Palomides on that side

Then the next morning Sir Palomides left the King of North Wales and rode over to King Arthur's side, where King Carados was, and the King of Ireland, and Sir Lancelot's kin, and Sir Gawain's kin. So Sir Palomides sent the damsel to Sir Tristram, the same damsel he had sent to look for him when he was out of his mind in the forest, and this damsel asked Sir Tristram who he was and what his name was.

"As for that," said Sir Tristram, "tell Sir Palomides that he shall not know at this time, not until I have broken two spears on him. But let him know this much," said Sir Tristram, "that I am the same knight he struck down the evening before the tournament; and tell him plainly that whichever side Sir Palomides is on, I will be on the opposite side."

"Sir," said the damsel, "you must understand that Sir Palomides will be on King Arthur's side, where the noblest knights in the world are."

"In the name of God," said Sir Tristram, "then I will be with the King of North Wales, because Sir Palomides will be on King Arthur's side; and I would not do it otherwise, except for his sake."

So when King Arthur had come they sounded for the field; and then the fighting began in earnest, and King Carados jousted with the King of the Hundred Knights, and there King Carados had a fall. Then there was crashing and rushing, and just then knights of King Arthur's came in, and they drove back the King of North Wales' knights.

Then Sir Tristram came in, and began so roughly and so mightily that no one could stand against him, and so Sir Tristram kept it up a long time. And at last Sir Tristram fell in among the company of King Ban's kin, and there Sir Bors de Ganis fell on him, and Sir Ector de Maris, and Sir Blamore de Ganis, and many other knights. And then Sir Tristram struck to the right and to the left, so that all the lords and ladies spoke of his noble deeds. But at last Sir Tristram would have had the worst of it, had it not been for the King with the Hundred Knights. And then he came with his company and rescued Sir Tristram, and brought him away from those knights who bore the shields of Cornwall. And then Sir Tristram saw another company keeping to themselves, some forty knights together, and Sir Kay the Seneschal was their commander. Then Sir Tristram rode in among them, and there he struck Sir Kay down from his horse; and there he went through those knights like a greyhound among rabbits.

Then Sir Lancelot found a knight who was badly wounded in the head.

"Sir," said Sir Lancelot, "who wounded you so badly?"

"Sir," he said, "a knight who bears a black shield, and I may curse the hour I ever met him, for he is a devil and no man."

So Sir Lancelot left him and meant to meet Sir Tristram, and so he rode with his sword drawn in his hand to look for Sir Tristram; and then he saw him, how he charged here and there, and at every stroke Sir Tristram all but struck down a knight.

"Jesus have mercy!" said the king. "Since the time I first bore arms I never saw any knight do such marvellous deeds of arms."

"And if I were to attack this knight," said Sir Lancelot to himself, "I would shame myself."

And with that Sir Lancelot put up his sword. And then the King with the Hundred Knights, and a hundred more of North Wales, attacked the twenty of Sir Lancelot's kin; and those twenty knights held together all the time like wild boars, and none would fail another. And so when Sir Tristram saw the nobility of these twenty knights he marvelled at their good deeds, for he saw by their bearing and by their discipline that they would rather die than leave the field.

"Now, Jesus," said Sir Tristram, "well may he be valiant and full of prowess who has such a company of noble knights among his kin, and very likely he is a noble man who is their leader and commander."

He meant Sir Lancelot du Lake. So when Sir Tristram had watched them a long time, he thought it a shame to see two hundred knights battering at twenty knights. Then Sir Tristram rode to the King with the Hundred Knights and said, "Sir, leave off your fighting with those twenty knights, for you win no honour from them, you being so many and they so few; and believe me, they will not leave the field, I can see it by their faces and their bearing; and you will get no honour if you kill them. So leave off fighting them, for, to increase my own honour, I will ride to the twenty knights and help them with all my might and power."

"No," said the King with the Hundred Knights, "you shall not do so. Now that I see your spirit and courtesy, I will withdraw my knights for your pleasure; for a good knight will always favour another, and like will draw to like."
