Chapter 32: How Sir Tristram found Palomides by a spring, and brought him back with him to his lodging

Then the King with the Hundred Knights withdrew his knights. And all this while, and long before, Sir Lancelot had been watching Sir Tristram, fully intending to join company with him. And then suddenly Sir Tristram, Sir Dinadan, and Gouvernail, his man, rode their way into the forest, so that no one noticed where they went. So then King Arthur sounded the end of the day, and gave the King of North Wales the prize, because Sir Tristram had been on his side. Then Sir Lancelot rode here and there, as mad as a lion that has missed its kill, because he had lost Sir Tristram, and so he went back to King Arthur. And then over the whole field there was such a noise that it could be heard on the wind two miles away, as the lords and ladies cried, "The Knight with the Black Shield has won the field!"

"Alas," said King Arthur, "what has become of that knight? It is a shame to all of you in the field to let him get away from you like that; with gentleness and courtesy you might have brought him to me at the Castle of Maidens."

Then the noble King Arthur went to his knights and comforted them as best he could, and said, "My good companions, don't be dismayed, even though you have lost the field today."

And many were hurt and badly wounded, and many were unharmed.

"My companions," said King Arthur, "see that you keep your spirits up, for tomorrow I will be in the field with you and avenge you on your enemies."

So that night King Arthur and his knights rested.

The damsel who came from Isolde the Fair to Sir Tristram had been with Queen Guinevere all the while the tournament was going on, and the queen kept asking her for what reason she had come into that country.

"Madam," she answered, "I have come for no other reason than from my lady Isolde the Fair, to learn how you are."

For on no account would she tell the queen that she came for Sir Tristram's sake. So this lady, Dame Bragwaine, took her leave of Queen Guinevere, and she rode after Sir Tristram. And as she rode through the forest she heard a great cry; then she commanded her squire to go into the forest to find out what that noise was. And so he came to a spring, and there he found a knight tied to a tree, crying out as if he were mad, with his horse and his armour standing by him. And when he saw the squire, he started up and broke himself loose, and took his sword in his hand, and ran to kill the squire. Then the squire took his horse and fled as fast as ever he could to Dame Bragwaine, and told her what had happened to him. Then she rode to Sir Tristram's tent, and told Sir Tristram what she had come upon in the forest.

"Alas," said Sir Tristram, "on my life, there is some good knight in trouble."

Then Sir Tristram took his horse and his sword and rode there, and there he heard how the knight lamented to himself and said, "I, woeful knight, Sir Palomides, what misfortune has fallen on me, that I am trampled down like this by falsehood and treason, through Sir Bors and Sir Ector! Alas," he said, "why do I live so long!"

And then he took his sword in his hands, and made many strange signs and gestures; and so in his raging he threw his sword into that spring. Then Sir Palomides wailed and wrung his hands. And at last, out of pure sorrow, he ran into that spring, up to his belly, and searched for his sword. Then Sir Tristram saw that, and ran at Sir Palomides, and held him fast in his arms.

"Who are you," said Palomides, "holding me like this?"

"I am a man of this forest, who means you no harm."

"Alas," said Sir Palomides, "I can never win honour where Sir Tristram is; for wherever he is, if I am there too, then I get no honour; and if he is away, then for the most part I win the prize, unless Sir Lancelot is there, or Sir Lamorak."

Then Sir Palomides said, "Once in Ireland Sir Tristram got the better of me, and another time in Cornwall, and in other places in this land."

"What would you do," said Sir Tristram, "if you had Sir Tristram?"

"I would fight with him," said Sir Palomides, "and ease my heart on him. And yet, to tell you the truth, Sir Tristram is the noblest knight living in this world."

"What will you do?" said Sir Tristram. "Will you come with me to your lodging?"

"No," he said, "I will go to the King with the Hundred Knights, for he rescued me from Sir Bors de Ganis and Sir Ector, or else I would have been treacherously killed."

Sir Tristram spoke such kind words to him that Sir Palomides went with him to his lodging. Then Gouvernail went on ahead, and told Dame Bragwaine to go out of the way to her own lodging, "and tell Sir Persides not to pick any quarrel with him." And so they rode together until they came to Sir Tristram's tent, and there Sir Palomides had all the welcome that could be had, all that night. But on no account could Sir Palomides find out who Sir Tristram was; and so after supper they went to rest, and Sir Tristram, from his great exertion, slept until it was day. And Sir Palomides could not sleep for anguish; and at dawn he took his horse secretly, and rode his way to Sir Gaheris and to Sir Sagramore le Desirous, where they were in their tents; for the three of them had been companions at the beginning of the tournament. And then in the morning the king sounded for the tournament on the third day.
