Chapter 33: How Sir Tristram struck down Sir Palomides, and how he jousted with King Arthur, and other feats

So the King of North Wales and the King with the Hundred Knights, the two of them, met King Carados and the King of Ireland; and there the King with the Hundred Knights struck down King Carados, and the King of North Wales struck down the King of Ireland. With that Sir Palomides came in, and when he came he did great work, for he was well known by his indented shield, its colours cut in a zigzag. Then King Arthur came in, and they did great deeds of arms together, and put the King of North Wales and the King with the Hundred Knights to the worse. Then Sir Tristram came in with his black shield, and at once he jousted with Sir Palomides, and there by sheer force Sir Tristram struck Sir Palomides over his horse's rump.

Then King Arthur cried, "Knight with the Black Shield, get ready for me!"

And in the same way Sir Tristram struck King Arthur down. And then, by the strength of King Arthur's knights, the king and Sir Palomides were put back on their horses. Then King Arthur, with a great eager heart, took a spear in his hand, and there from the one side he struck Sir Tristram over his horse. Then at once Sir Palomides came at Sir Tristram, while he was on foot, to ride him down. Then Sir Tristram saw him coming, and there he stepped aside, and in great fury he caught him by the arm and pulled him down from his horse. Then Sir Palomides quickly got up, and then they laid into each other mightily with their swords; and many kings, queens, and lords stood and watched them. And at last Sir Tristram struck Sir Palomides on the helmet three mighty strokes, and at every stroke he gave him he said, "This one is for Sir Tristram's sake!"

With that Sir Palomides fell face down on the ground.

Then the King with the Hundred Knights came, and brought Sir Tristram a horse, and so he was mounted again. By then Sir Palomides was mounted, and in great fury he rode at Sir Tristram with his spear in the rest, and gave him a great blow with his sword. Then Sir Tristram dodged his spear, and caught him by the neck with both his hands, and pulled him clean out of his saddle, and so he carried him in front of him the length of ten spears, and then in front of them all he let him fall wherever he might. Then Sir Tristram saw King Arthur with a naked sword in his hand, and Sir Tristram rode at King Arthur with his spear; and King Arthur boldly stood his ground and with his sword he cut his spear in two, and with that Sir Tristram was stunned; and so King Arthur gave him three or four strokes before he could get out his sword. And at last Sir Tristram drew his sword, and each attacked the other very hard. With that the great crush of the fighting parted them. Then Sir Tristram rode here and there and did his utmost, so that that day Sir Tristram struck down eleven of the good knights of King Ban's blood, who were of Sir Lancelot's kin; so that all the great lords marvelled at his great deeds, and all cried out for the Knight with the Black Shield.
