Chapter 34: How Sir Lancelot wounded Sir Tristram, and how afterwards Sir Tristram struck down Sir Palomides

Then this cry was so loud that Sir Lancelot heard it. And then he took a great spear in his hand and came towards the cry.

Then Sir Lancelot cried, "Knight with the Black Shield, get ready to joust with me!"

When Sir Tristram heard him say so, he took his spear in his hand, and both of them lowered their heads, and they came together like thunder. And Sir Tristram's spear broke in pieces, and Sir Lancelot, by ill luck, struck Sir Tristram in the side, a deep wound, near to death; but still Sir Tristram did not leave his saddle, and so the spear broke. With that Sir Tristram, wounded as he was, got out his sword, and he rushed at Sir Lancelot, and gave him three great strokes on the helmet so that the fire sprang out of it, and Sir Lancelot bowed his head low toward his saddlebow. And with that Sir Tristram left the field, for he felt himself so wounded that he thought he would die; and Sir Dinadan saw him and followed him into the forest. Then Sir Lancelot stayed and did many marvellous deeds.

So when Sir Tristram had got away to the edge of the forest he dismounted, and unlaced his armour and bathed his wound. Then Sir Dinadan thought he was going to die.

"No, no," said Sir Tristram, "Dinadan, never fear, for my heart is whole, and I shall soon be whole of this wound, by the mercy of God."

By then Sir Dinadan noticed Palomides coming, riding straight at them. And then Sir Tristram saw that Sir Palomides was coming to destroy him.

And so Sir Dinadan gave him warning, and said, "Sir Tristram, my lord, you are so badly wounded that you can't fight him, so I will ride against him and do to him what I can; and if I am killed, you can pray for my soul. And meanwhile you can slip away and go into the castle, or into the forest, so that he won't meet you."

Sir Tristram smiled and said, "I thank you, Sir Dinadan, for your good will, but you shall know that I am able to handle him."

And then he quickly armed himself, and took his horse, and a great spear in his hand, and said to Sir Dinadan, "Goodbye."

And he rode toward Sir Palomides at a gentle pace. Then when Sir Palomides saw that, he made as if to see to his horse, but he did it for this reason: he was waiting for Sir Gaheris, who was coming after him. And when he had come, he rode toward Sir Tristram. Then Sir Tristram sent to Sir Palomides and asked him to joust with him; and if he struck down Sir Palomides, he would do nothing more to him; and if it so happened that Sir Palomides struck down Sir Tristram, he told him to do his worst. So they were agreed. Then they met together, and Sir Tristram struck down Sir Palomides so that he had a grievous fall, and lay as still as if he were dead. And then Sir Tristram rode at Sir Gaheris, and he did not want to joust; but whether he wanted to or not, Sir Tristram struck him over his horse's rump, so that he lay as still as if he were dead. And then Sir Tristram rode his way and left Sir Persides' squire in the tents, and Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan rode to an old knight's house to lodge. And that old knight had five sons at the tournament, and he prayed God earnestly for their coming home. And so, as the French book says, they came home, all five of them, well beaten.

And when Sir Tristram had gone off into the forest, Sir Lancelot kept up the fight just as hard, like a man in a frenzy who took no care for himself, and you may be sure there were many noble knights against him. And when King Arthur saw Sir Lancelot do such marvellous deeds of arms, he armed himself, and took his horse and his armour, and rode into the field to help Sir Lancelot; and many knights came in with King Arthur. And to cut a long story short, in the end the King of North Wales and the King of the Hundred Knights were put to the worse; and because Sir Lancelot stayed and was the last in the field, the prize was given to him. But Sir Lancelot would not have the prize, not for king, queen, or knight; and where the cry was cried through the field, "Sir Lancelot, Sir Lancelot has won the field today!", Sir Lancelot had another cry made against it: "Sir Tristram has won the field, for he began first, and he has held out to the last, and so he has done on the first day, the second, and the third!"
