Chapter 35: How the prize of the third day was given to Sir Lancelot, and Sir Lancelot gave it to Sir Tristram

Then all ranks and degrees, high and low, spoke of Sir Lancelot with great honour, for the honour he had done to Sir Tristram; and for doing that honour to Sir Tristram he was more praised and renowned at that time than if he had overthrown five hundred knights. And all the people, every one, for this nobility, first the great lords both high and low, and after them the common people, cried out at once, "Sir Lancelot has won the field, whoever says no!"

Then Sir Lancelot was angry and ashamed, and so with that he rode to King Arthur.

"Alas," said the king, "we are all dismayed that Sir Tristram has left us like this. By God," said King Arthur, "he is one of the noblest knights I ever saw hold spear or sword in hand, and the most courteous knight in his fighting; for I saw him hard at it," said King Arthur, "when he struck Sir Palomides on the helmet three times, so that he battered his helmet down with his strokes, and he also said, 'Here is a stroke for Sir Tristram,' and he said it three times."

Then King Arthur, Sir Lancelot, and Sir Dodinas le Savage took their horses to look for Sir Tristram, for through Sir Persides the king had been told where Sir Tristram was in his tent. But when they came there, Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan were gone.

Then King Arthur and Sir Lancelot were downcast, and went back again to the Castle of Maidens, grieving greatly for Sir Tristram's wound and his sudden departure.

"So help me God," said King Arthur, "I am sadder that I cannot meet him than for all the hurts all my knights have had at the tournament."

Just then Sir Gaheris came and told King Arthur how Sir Tristram had struck down Sir Palomides, and that it was at Sir Palomides' own request.

"Alas," said King Arthur, "that was a great dishonour to Sir Palomides, seeing that Sir Tristram was badly wounded. And now all of us, kings and knights and men of honour, may say that Sir Tristram may be called a noble knight, and one of the best knights I ever saw in all the days of my life. For I want you all to know, kings and knights," said King Arthur, "that I never saw a knight do so marvellously as he has done these three days; for he was the first to begin and the one who held out longest, except for this last day. And though he was hurt, it was a manly chance between two noble knights; and when two noble men meet, one of them must needs have the worse, as God allows at the time."

"As for me," said Sir Lancelot, "I would not have hurt Sir Tristram, not for all the lands my father ever left me, if I had known him at the time. I hurt him because I did not see his shield. For if I had seen his black shield, I would not have meddled with him, for many reasons; for not long ago he did as much for me as any knight ever did, and it is well known that he fought thirty knights, with no help except Sir Dinadan. And I promise you one thing," said Sir Lancelot, "Sir Palomides shall regret his ungracious dealing in going after that noble knight whom I hurt like that by mischance."

Sir Lancelot said all the honour of Sir Tristram that could be said. Then King Arthur held a great feast for all who would come. And so we let King Arthur pass, and turn a little to Sir Palomides, who, after his fall from Sir Tristram, was nearly driven out of his wits for spite against Sir Tristram. And so he followed him, trusting to chance. And as he came by a river, in his frenzy he would have made his horse leap over it; and the horse lost its footing and fell into the river, so that Sir Palomides was afraid he would be drowned. And then he got clear of his horse, and swam to the land, and let his horse go down the river wherever it might.
