Chapter 36: How Palomides came to the castle where Sir Tristram was, and of the quest that Sir Lancelot and ten knights made for Sir Tristram

And when he came to the land he took off his armour, and sat roaring and crying like a man out of his mind. Just then a damsel came right past Sir Palomides, who had been sent from Sir Gawain and his brother to Sir Mordred, who lay sick in the same place, with that old knight where Sir Tristram was. For, as the French book says, Sir Persides had wounded Sir Mordred badly some ten days before; and if it had not been for love of Sir Gawain and his brother, Sir Persides would have killed Sir Mordred. And so this damsel came past Sir Palomides, and she and he had words together, which pleased neither of them. And so the damsel rode on her way until she came to the old knight's place, and there she told that old knight how she had met by chance the maddest knight she had ever met.

"What did he bear on his shield?" said Sir Tristram.

"It was indented with white and black," said the damsel.

"Ah," said Sir Tristram, "that was Sir Palomides, the good knight. For I know him well," said Sir Tristram, "as one of the best knights living in this realm."

Then that old knight took a little riding horse, and rode for Sir Palomides, and brought him to his own manor. And Sir Tristram knew Sir Palomides very well, but he said very little, for at that time Sir Tristram was up and walking on his feet, and well recovered from his wounds. And always when Sir Palomides saw Sir Tristram he would stare at him in great wonder, and it always seemed to him that he had seen him before.

Then he would say to Sir Dinadan, "If I ever meet Sir Tristram, he won't escape my hands."

"I'm amazed," said Sir Dinadan, "that you boast like this behind Sir Tristram's back, when it is not long since he was in your hands, and you in his. Why didn't you hold on to him when you had him? For I saw myself, two or three times, that you got precious little honour out of Sir Tristram."

Then Sir Palomides was ashamed. So we leave them for a little while in the old castle with the old knight, Sir Darras.

Now we shall speak of King Arthur, who said to Sir Lancelot, "If it had not been for you, we would not have lost Sir Tristram, for he was here every day until the time you met him; and it was in an evil hour," said Arthur, "that you fought him."

"My lord Arthur," said Lancelot, "you lay it on me that I was the cause of his going; God knows it was against my will. But when men are hot in deeds of arms they often hurt their friends as well as their foes. And my lord," said Sir Lancelot, "you must understand that Sir Tristram is a man I am loath to offend, for he has done more for me than I have ever yet done for him."

But then Sir Lancelot had a book brought out, and then Sir Lancelot said, "Here we are, ten knights who will swear on a book never to rest one night where we rested the night before, for this twelvemonth, until we find Sir Tristram. And as for me," said Sir Lancelot, "I promise you on this book that if I can meet him, by fair means or foul I shall bring him to this court, or else I shall die for it."

And the names of these ten knights who undertook this quest were these: first was Sir Lancelot, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Bors de Ganis, and Bleoberis, and Sir Blamore de Ganis, and Lucan the butler, Sir Uwain, Sir Galihud, Lionel, and Galihodin. So these ten noble knights left the court of King Arthur, and so they rode on their quest together until they came to a cross where four ways parted, and there the company split four ways to look for Sir Tristram.

And as Sir Lancelot rode on by chance, he met Dame Bragwaine, who had been sent into that country to look for Sir Tristram, and she was fleeing as fast as her palfrey could go. So Sir Lancelot met her and asked her why she was fleeing.

"Ah, fair knight," said Dame Bragwaine, "I am fleeing in fear of my life, for Sir Breuse Saunce Pité is following me to kill me."

"Keep close to me," said Sir Lancelot.

Then when Sir Lancelot saw Sir Breuse Saunce Pité, Sir Lancelot shouted at him, and said, "False knight, destroyer of ladies and damsels, your last day has come!"

When Sir Breuse Saunce Pité saw Sir Lancelot's shield he knew it well, for at that time he was not bearing the arms of Cornwall, but his own shield. And then Sir Breuse fled, and Sir Lancelot followed after him. But Sir Breuse was so well mounted that when he wanted to flee he could flee easily, and stand his ground too when he wanted to. And then Sir Lancelot went back to Dame Bragwaine, and she thanked him for his great trouble.
