Chapter 38: How King Mark resented Sir Tristram's good name, and how some of King Arthur's knights jousted with knights of Cornwall

Now we will leave Sir Tristram, Sir Palomides and Sir Dinadan in prison, and speak of other knights who searched for Sir Tristram in many different parts of this land. And some went into Cornwall; and by chance Sir Gaheris, King Arthur's nephew, came to King Mark, and there he was well received, and sat at King Mark's own table and ate from his own dish. Then King Mark asked Sir Gaheris what news there was in the realm of Logres.

"Sir," said Sir Gaheris, "the king reigns like a noble knight. And just lately there was as great a jousting and tournament as I ever saw in the realm of Logres, and the noblest knights were at that jousting. But there was one knight who did marvellously for three days, and he carried a black shield, and of all the knights I ever saw, he proved the best."

"Then," said King Mark, "that was Sir Lancelot, or Sir Palomides the pagan."

"Not so," said Sir Gaheris, "for both Sir Lancelot and Sir Palomides were on the opposite side, against the Knight with the Black Shield."

"Then it was Sir Tristram," said the king.

"Yes," said Sir Gaheris.

And with that the king hung his head, and in his heart he was badly afraid that Sir Tristram would win himself such honour in the realm of Logres that he himself would not be able to stand against him. So Sir Gaheris had a fine welcome from King Mark, and from Queen Isolde the Fair, who was glad of Sir Gaheris's words; for she knew well by the deeds and the manner of it that it was Sir Tristram. And then the king held a royal feast, and to that feast came Sir Uwain le Fise de Roy Ureine, whom some called Uwain le Blanchemains. And this Sir Uwain challenged all the knights of Cornwall. Then the king was mad with rage that he had no knights to answer him. Then Sir Andred, King Mark's nephew, leapt up and said, "I will take on Sir Uwain."

Then he went and armed himself and mounted in the best way he could. And there Sir Uwain met Sir Andred, and struck him down so that he lay fainting on the ground. Then King Mark was sorry and angry beyond measure that he had no knight to avenge his nephew Sir Andred.

So the king called Sir Dinas the Seneschal to him, and begged him for his sake to take it on himself to joust with Sir Uwain.

"Sir," said Sir Dinas, "I am very unwilling to fight any knight of the Round Table."

"Even so," said the king, "for my love take on this joust."

So Sir Dinas made himself ready, and at once they met together with great spears, but Sir Dinas was overthrown, horse and man, a great fall. And who was angry but King Mark!

"Alas," he said, "have I no knight who will take on that knight there?"

"Sir," said Sir Gaheris, "for your sake I will joust."

So Sir Gaheris made himself ready, and when he was armed he rode into the field. And when Sir Uwain saw Sir Gaheris's shield he rode up to him and said, "Sir, you are not doing your duty. For, sir, when you were first made a knight of the Round Table you swore that you would never knowingly fight against your own fellowship. And by God, Sir Gaheris, you knew me well enough by my shield, and I know you just as well by yours. And though you would break your oath, I will not break mine. For there is no one here, not even you, who shall think I am afraid of you; I would dare well enough to fight you, and yet we are the sons of two sisters."

Then Sir Gaheris was ashamed, and so with that every knight went his way, and Sir Uwain rode off into the country.

Then King Mark armed himself, and took his horse and his spear, with a squire along with him. And then he rode on ahead of Sir Uwain, and suddenly, at a gap, he ran at him while he was off his guard, and there he struck him almost through the body, and left him there. So within a while Sir Kay came by and found Sir Uwain, and asked him how he had been hurt.

"I don't know why or how," said Sir Uwain, "but I am sure I got this wound by treachery. For a knight came suddenly at me here before I was aware of him, and wounded me without warning."

Then Sir Andred arrived there, looking for King Mark.

"You traitor knight," said Sir Kay, "if I knew it was you who had wounded this noble knight so treacherously, you would never get out of my hands."

"Sir," said Sir Andred, "I never wounded him, and I am willing to let him say so himself."

"Shame on you, false knight," said Sir Kay, "for you men of Cornwall are worth nothing."

So Sir Kay had Sir Uwain carried to the Abbey of the Black Cross, and there he was healed. And then Sir Gaheris took his leave of King Mark, but before he left he said, "Sir king, you brought a foul shame on yourself and your court when you banished Sir Tristram out of this country. For you would have had no need to fear any knight if he had been here."

And so he left.
