Chapter 39: Of King Mark's treachery, and how Sir Gaheris struck down both him and his cousin Andred

Then Sir Kay the Seneschal came to King Mark, and there he was given a good welcome, on the outside.

"Now, fair lords," said King Mark, "will you try an adventure in the forest of Morris? I know well it holds as hard an adventure as any I know."

"Sir," said Sir Kay, "I will try it."

And Sir Gaheris said he would think it over, for King Mark was always full of treachery. And with that Sir Gaheris left and rode on his way. And on the same road that Sir Kay was to ride he lay down to rest, ordering his squire to watch for Sir Kay: "And warn me when he comes."

So within a while Sir Kay came riding that way, and then Sir Gaheris took his horse and met him, and said, "Sir Kay, you are not wise to ride at King Mark's request, for everything he does is treachery."

Then Sir Kay said, "I beg you, let us try this adventure."

"I will not fail you," said Sir Gaheris.

And so they rode on until they came to a lake that was called at that time the Perilous Lake, and there they waited in the thicket at the edge of the wood.

Meanwhile King Mark, in the castle of Tintagil, sent away all his barons, and everyone else except those who were in his secrets was sent out of his chamber. And then he had his nephew Sir Andred called, and told him to arm himself and mount quickly; and by that time it was midnight. And so King Mark was armed in black, horse and all; and so they two sallied out at a secret back gate, with their servants with them, and rode until they came to that lake. Then Sir Kay saw them first, and took his spear, and offered to joust. And King Mark rode against him, and they struck each other very hard, for the moon shone as bright as day. And there at that joust Sir Kay's horse fell down, for his horse was not as big as the king's horse, and Sir Kay's horse bruised him very badly. Then Sir Gaheris was angry that Sir Kay had a fall. Then he cried, "Knight, sit fast in your saddle, for I will avenge my companion!"

Then King Mark was afraid of Sir Gaheris, and so, against his will, King Mark rode against him, and Sir Gaheris gave him such a blow that he fell down. So then at once Sir Gaheris ran at Sir Andred and struck him clean off his horse, so that his helmet drove into the earth, and he nearly broke his neck. And with that Sir Gaheris dismounted, and got Sir Kay up. And then they both went on foot to the two of them, and told them to yield and tell their names, or else they would die. Then with great pain Sir Andred spoke first, and said, "It is King Mark of Cornwall, so be careful what you do; and I am Sir Andred, his cousin."

"Shame on you both," said Sir Gaheris, "for a false traitor! You have done false treachery, and he too, under the false welcome you gave us! It would be a pity," said Sir Gaheris, "for you to live any longer."

"Save my life," said King Mark, "and I will make amends; and remember that I am an anointed king."

"It would be all the more shame," said Sir Gaheris, "to save your life. You are a king anointed with the holy oil, and so you ought to stand by all men of honour; and so you deserve to die."

With that he laid into King Mark without saying any more, and King Mark covered himself with his shield and defended himself as well as he could. And then Sir Kay laid into Sir Andred, and with that King Mark yielded to Sir Gaheris. And then he knelt down, and swore his oath on the crossguard of the sword that never while he lived would he be against knights-errant. And he also swore to be a good friend to Sir Tristram, if ever he came into Cornwall.

By then Sir Andred was on the ground, and Sir Kay would have killed him.

"Let him be," said Sir Gaheris. "Don't kill him, I beg you."

"It would be a pity," said Sir Kay, "for him to live any longer. For this man is a close cousin to Sir Tristram, and he has always been a traitor to him, and it was through him that he was exiled out of Cornwall; and so I will kill him," said Sir Kay.

"You shall not," said Sir Gaheris. "Since I have given the king his life, I beg you, give this man his life."

And with that Sir Kay let him go. And so Sir Kay and Sir Gaheris rode on their way to Dinas the Seneschal, because they had heard it said that he loved Sir Tristram well. So they rested there, and soon afterwards they rode to the realm of Logres. And so within a little while they met Sir Lancelot, who always kept Dame Bragwaine with him, thinking that this way he would sooner meet Sir Tristram. And Sir Lancelot asked what news there was in Cornwall, and whether they had heard of Sir Tristram or not. Sir Kay and Sir Gaheris answered that they had heard nothing of him. Then they told Sir Lancelot their adventure, word for word. Then Sir Lancelot smiled and said, "What is bred in the bone is hard to get out of the flesh."

And so they made merry together.
