Chapter 40: How Sir Tristram, Sir Palomides, and Sir Dinadan, after a long time in prison, were set free

Now we leave this tale, and speak of Sir Dinas, who had a lady-love in the castle, and she loved another knight better than him. And so when Sir Dinas went out hunting she let herself down from the wall by a towel, and took two of his little hounds with her, and so she went to the knight she loved, and he loved her in return. And when Sir Dinas came home and missed his lady-love and his hounds, he was angrier about his hounds than about the lady. So then he rode after the knight who had his lady-love, and told him to turn and joust. So Sir Dinas struck him down, so that with the fall he broke his leg and his arm. And then his lady and lover begged Sir Dinas's pardon, and said she would love him better than she ever had.

"No," said Sir Dinas, "I will never trust those who have once betrayed me. And so, as you have begun, so end, for I will never have anything to do with you again."

And so Sir Dinas left, and took his hounds with him, and so rode to his castle.

Now we will turn to Sir Lancelot, who was very downcast that he could never hear any news of Sir Tristram, for all this while he was in prison with Sir Darras, with Palomides and Dinadan. Then Dame Bragwaine took her leave to go into Cornwall, and Sir Lancelot, Sir Kay and Sir Gaheris rode to look for Sir Tristram in the country of Surluse.

Now this tale speaks of Sir Tristram and his two companions. For every day Sir Palomides wrangled and spoke out against Sir Tristram.

"I'm amazed at you, Sir Palomides," said Sir Dinadan. "If you had Sir Tristram here, I'm sure you would do him no harm; for if a wolf and a sheep were shut in a prison together, the wolf would leave the sheep in peace. And you may be sure," said Sir Dinadan, "this man here is Sir Tristram, in a word. So now you must do your best with him, and let's see if you can settle it with your hands."

Then Sir Palomides was abashed and said little.

"Sir Palomides," said Sir Tristram then, "I have heard plenty of your ill will against me, but I will not fight you at this time if I can help it, because I fear the lord of this place who has us in his keeping. For if I did not fear him more than I fear you, it would soon be settled."

So they made peace between them. Just then a damsel came in and said, "Knights, take heart, for your lives are safe; I heard my lord Sir Darras say so."

Then all three were glad, for every day they had expected to die.

Then soon after this Sir Tristram fell so sick that he thought he would die. Then Sir Dinadan wept, and so did Sir Palomides, and the two of them grieved greatly. So a damsel came in to them and found them mourning. Then she went to Sir Darras, and told him that the mighty knight who carried the black shield was likely to die.

"That shall not be," said Sir Darras, "for God forbid that, when knights come to me for help, I should let them die in my prison. So," said Sir Darras to the damsel, "fetch that knight and his companions before me."

And then at once Sir Darras saw Sir Tristram brought before him. He said, "Sir knight, I am sorry for your sickness, for you are called a very noble knight, and so you seem to be. And you may be sure it shall never be said that Sir Darras destroyed such a noble knight as you in prison, even though you have killed three of my sons, which grieved me greatly. But now you shall go, and your companions, and your armour and horses have been kept fair and clean, and you shall go wherever you please, on this condition: that you, knight, will promise me to be a good friend to my two sons who are still alive, and also that you tell me your name."

"Sir," he said, "as for me, my name is Sir Tristram de Liones, and I was born in Cornwall, and I am King Mark's nephew. And as for the death of your sons, I could not help it; for if they had been my own nearest kin I could have done no differently. And if I had killed them by treason or treachery, I would have deserved to die."

"I take all this into account," said Sir Darras, "that everything you did was done by the force of knighthood, and that was why I would not put you to death. But since you are Sir Tristram, the good knight, I beg you with all my heart to be a good friend to me and to my sons."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "I promise you, on my life, that as long as I live I will do you service, for you have done no more to us than a true-hearted knight ought to do."

Then Sir Tristram rested there until he had recovered from his sickness; and when he was big and strong they took their leave, and every knight took his horse, and so they left and rode together until they came to a crossroads.

"Now, companions," said Sir Tristram, "here we will part, each his own way."

And because Sir Dinadan had the first adventure of them, I will begin with him.
