Chapter 41: How Sir Dinadan rescued a lady from Sir Breuse Saunce Pité, and how Sir Tristram received a shield from Morgan le Fay

So as Sir Dinadan rode by a spring he found a lady grieving greatly.

"What is wrong with you?" said Sir Dinadan.

"Sir knight," said the lady, "I am the most wretched lady in the world. For within these five days a knight called Sir Breuse Saunce Pité came here, and he killed my own brother, and ever since he has kept me at his own will, and of all men in the world I hate him most. And so I beg you, by your knighthood, to avenge me, for he will not be long, but will be here at once."

"Let him come," said Sir Dinadan, "and for the honour of all women I will do my part."

With this Sir Breuse came, and when he saw a knight with his lady he was mad with rage. And then he said, "Sir knight, defend yourself against me!"

So they crashed together like thunder, and each struck the other exceedingly hard, but Sir Dinadan put a grievous wound through his shoulder, and before Sir Dinadan could even turn, Sir Breuse was gone and fled. Then the lady begged him to bring her to a castle nearby, only four miles from there; and so Sir Dinadan brought her there, and she was made welcome, for the lord of that castle was her uncle. And so Sir Dinadan rode on his way upon his adventure.

Now we turn this tale to Sir Tristram, who by chance came to a castle to ask for lodging, and Queen Morgan le Fay was in it. And so when Sir Tristram was let into that castle he had a good welcome all that night. And in the morning, when he wanted to leave, the queen said, "You may be sure you shall not leave so easily, for you are here as a prisoner."

"Jesus forbid!" said Sir Tristram. "For I was a prisoner only lately."

"Fair knight," said the queen, "you shall stay with me until I know who you are and where you come from."

And always the queen would seat Sir Tristram on one side of her, and her lover on the other side. And Queen Morgan kept gazing at Sir Tristram, and at that the knight grew jealous, and had a mind to run at Sir Tristram suddenly with a sword, but he held back for shame. Then the queen said to Sir Tristram, "Tell me your name, and I will let you leave when you wish."

"On that condition I will tell you: my name is Sir Tristram de Liones."

"Ah," said Morgan le Fay, "if I had known that, you would not have left as soon as you shall. But since I have made a promise I will keep it, provided that you will promise me to carry a shield that I shall give you to the castle of the Hard Rock, where King Arthur has had a great tournament proclaimed. And I beg you that you will be there, and do as many deeds of arms for me as you can. For at the Castle of Maidens, Sir Tristram, you did deeds of arms as marvellous as any I ever heard of a knight doing."

"Madam," said Sir Tristram, "let me see the shield that I am to carry."

Then the shield was brought out, and its field was gold, with a king and a queen painted on it, and a knight standing above them, one foot on the king's head and the other on the queen's.

"Madam," said Sir Tristram, "this is a fine shield and a mighty one; but what does it mean, this king and this queen, and the knight standing on both their heads?"

"I will tell you," said Morgan le Fay. "It means King Arthur and Queen Guinevere, and a knight who holds them both in bondage and in servitude."

"Who is that knight?" said Sir Tristram.

"That you shall not know at this time," said the queen.

But as the French book says, Queen Morgan loved Sir Lancelot best, and always desired him, and he would never love her nor do anything at her request; and so she kept many knights about her to take him by force. And because she believed that Sir Lancelot loved Queen Guinevere as his lady, and she him in return, Queen Morgan le Fay had that shield made to put Sir Lancelot to shame, so that King Arthur might come to understand the love between them. Then Sir Tristram took that shield and promised her to carry it at the tournament at the Castle of the Hard Rock. But Sir Tristram did not know that the shield was made against Sir Lancelot; but afterwards he knew it.
