Chapter 43: How Morgan le Fay buried her lover, and how Sir Tristram praised Sir Lancelot and his family

Now we stop speaking of Sir Tristram, and speak of the knight who was wounded to the death. Then his servant dismounted, and took off his helmet, and then he asked his lord whether there was any life left in him.

"There is life in me," said the knight, "but it is very little. And so, when you have helped me up, jump up behind me, and hold me tight so that I don't fall, and bring me to Queen Morgan le Fay. For the deep draughts of death are drawing to my heart, so that I cannot live, and I would gladly speak with her before I die; for otherwise my soul will be in great peril if I die."

So at once, with great pain, his servant brought him to the castle, and there Sir Hemison fell down dead. When Morgan le Fay saw him dead she grieved beyond all reason; and then she had him stripped to his shirt, and so she had him put into a tomb. And around the tomb she had these words written: "Here lies Sir Hemison, slain by the hands of Sir Tristram de Liones."

Now we turn to Sir Tristram, who asked the knight his host whether he had seen any knights-errant lately.

"Sir," he said, "last night Ector de Maris lodged here with me, and a damsel with him, and that damsel told me that he was one of the best knights in the world."

"That is not so," said Sir Tristram, "for I know four better knights of his own blood. And the first is Sir Lancelot du Lake, call him the best knight; and Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Blamore de Ganis, and Sir Gaheris."

"No," said his host, "Sir Gawain is a better knight than he."

"That is not so," said Sir Tristram, "for I have met them both, and I found Sir Gaheris the better knight. And Sir Lamorak I call as good as any of them, except Sir Lancelot."

"Why don't you name Sir Tristram?" said his host. "For I count him as good as any of them."

"I don't know Sir Tristram," said Tristram.

So they talked and joked as long as they cared to, and then went to bed. And in the morning Sir Tristram took his leave of his host and left, and rode toward the Roche Dure, the Hard Rock, and Sir Tristram had no adventure but that one. And so he did not rest until he came to the castle, where he saw five hundred tents.
