Chapter 44: How Sir Tristram carried the shield that Morgan le Fay had given him at a tournament

Then the King of Scots and the King of Ireland held the field against King Arthur's knights, and a great fight began there. Then Sir Tristram came in and did marvellous deeds of arms, for there he struck down many knights. And all the while he was in front of King Arthur with that shield. And when King Arthur saw that shield he wondered greatly for what purpose it had been made; but Queen Guinevere guessed it for what it was, and so she was downcast. Now there was a damsel of Queen Morgan's in a chamber near King Arthur, and when she heard King Arthur speak of that shield, she spoke out openly to King Arthur.

"Sir king, you may be sure this shield was made for you, to warn you of your shame and dishonour, and of what concerns you and your queen."

And then at once that damsel stole away secretly, so that no one knew what had become of her. Then King Arthur was grave and angry, and asked where that damsel had come from. There was not one who knew her, or knew what had become of her. Then Queen Guinevere called Sir Ector de Maris to her, and there she made her complaint to him, and said, "I know well this shield was made by Morgan le Fay to insult me and Sir Lancelot, and so I am badly afraid that I may be destroyed."

And all the while the king watched Sir Tristram, who did such marvellous deeds of arms that he wondered hard what knight he could be, and he knew well it was not Sir Lancelot. And he had been told that Sir Tristram was in Brittany with Isolde of the White Hands; for he judged that if he had been in the realm of Logres, Sir Lancelot or some of his companions who were on the quest for Sir Tristram would have found him before that time. So King Arthur wondered what knight he could be. And all the while Sir Arthur's eye was on that shield. The queen saw all that, and it made her badly afraid.

Then all the while Sir Tristram struck down knights, a wonder to see, on the right hand and on the left, so that scarcely any knight could stand against him. And the King of Scots and the King of Ireland began to withdraw. When Arthur saw that, he thought that the knight with the strange shield should not escape him. Then he called Sir Uwain le Blanchemains to him, and told him to arm himself and make ready. So at once King Arthur and Sir Uwain squared up to Sir Tristram, and demanded that he tell them where he had got that shield.

"Sir," he said, "I had it from Queen Morgan le Fay, King Arthur's sister."

So here ends the story of this book, for it is the first book of Sir Tristram de Liones.

Here follows the second book of Sir Tristram.
