Chapter 1: How Sir Tristram jousted with King Arthur and struck him down, because he would not tell him why he carried that shield

"And if it turns out that you can describe what you carry," said King Arthur, "then you are worthy to carry the arms."

"As for that," said Sir Tristram, "I will answer you. This shield was given to me, not asked for, by Queen Morgan le Fay. And as for me, I cannot describe these arms, for that is no part of my charge, and yet I trust in God to carry them with honour."

"Truly," said King Arthur, "you ought not to carry any arms unless you knew what you carry. But I beg you, tell me your name."

"To what end?" said Sir Tristram.

"Because I want to know," said Arthur.

"Sir, you shall not know at this time."

"Then you and I shall fight together," said King Arthur.

"Why," said Sir Tristram, "will you fight with me unless I tell you my name? And that is little needed of you, if you were a man of honour, for you have seen me this day at great labour, and so you are an ill-bred knight to ask for a fight with me, considering how hard I have laboured. All the same I will not fail you, and have no doubt that I am not afraid of you. Though you think you have me at a great advantage, yet I shall hold out against you well enough."

And with that King Arthur set his shield and lowered his spear, and Sir Tristram did the same against him, and they came together so eagerly. And there King Arthur broke his spear all to pieces on Sir Tristram's shield. But Sir Tristram hit Arthur in return, so that horse and man fell to the earth. And there King Arthur was wounded in the left side, a great wound and a dangerous one.

Then when Sir Uwain saw his lord Arthur lying on the ground badly wounded, he was exceedingly downcast. And then he set his shield and lowered his spear, and called out loud to Sir Tristram, and said, "Knight, defend yourself."

So they came together like thunder, and Sir Uwain shattered his spear all to pieces on Sir Tristram's shield, and Sir Tristram struck him harder and more heavily, with such force that he carried him clean out of his saddle to the earth. With that Sir Tristram turned about and said, "Fair knights, I had no need to joust with you, for I have had enough to do this day."

Then Arthur got up and went to Sir Uwain, and said to Sir Tristram, "We have got what we deserved, for out of our arrogance we demanded a fight with you, and yet we did not know your name."

"Nevertheless, by the Holy Cross," said Sir Uwain, "in my judgement he is as strong a knight as any now living."

Then Sir Tristram left, and in every place he asked and enquired after Sir Lancelot, but nowhere could he hear of him, whether he was dead or alive; and so Sir Tristram grieved greatly and sorrowed. So Sir Tristram rode by a forest, and then he noticed a fair tower beside a marsh on the one side, and on the other side a fair meadow. And there he saw ten knights fighting together. And the nearer he came, the more he saw that there was only one knight fighting against nine knights, and that one did so marvellously that Sir Tristram wondered greatly that one knight could ever do such great deeds of arms. And then within a little while he had killed half their horses and unhorsed them, and their horses ran loose in the fields and the forest. Then Sir Tristram had such great pity for that one knight who endured so much pain, and all the while he thought, by his shield, that it must be Sir Palomides. And so he rode up to the knights and called out to them, and told them to stop their fighting, for they did themselves great shame, so many knights fighting with one.

Then the master of those knights answered (his name was Breuse Saunce Pité, who was at that time the most dangerous knight living), and said this: "Sir knight, what business do you have meddling with us? And so, if you are wise, go on your way as you came, for this knight shall not escape us."

"That would be a pity," said Sir Tristram, "that so good a knight as he is should be killed so cowardly. And so I warn you, I will help him with all my might."
