Chapter 2: How Sir Tristram saved Sir Palomides' life, and how they promised to fight each other within two weeks

So Sir Tristram got down off his horse, because they were on foot, so that they should not kill his horse, and then set his shield, with his sword in his hand, and he struck out on the right hand and on the left exceedingly hard, so that at nearly every stroke he struck down a knight. And when they saw his strokes they all fled with Breuse Saunce Pité to the tower, and Sir Tristram followed hard after them with his sword in his hand, but they escaped into the tower, and shut Sir Tristram outside the gate. And when Sir Tristram saw this he went back to Sir Palomides, and found him sitting under a tree, badly wounded.

"Ah, fair knight," said Sir Tristram, "well met."

"Many thanks," said Sir Palomides, "for your great goodness, for you have rescued my life and saved me from my death."

"What is your name?" said Sir Tristram.

He said, "My name is Sir Palomides."

"O Jesus," said Sir Tristram, "you've had a fine piece of luck from me today, that I should rescue you, and you're the man in the world I hate most. But now get ready, for I will fight you."

"What is your name?" said Sir Palomides.

"My name is Sir Tristram, your mortal enemy."

"That may be so," said Sir Palomides, "but you have done too much for me this day for me to fight with you. For since you have saved my life, it will be no honour to you to fight me, for you are fresh and I am badly wounded. And so, if you must fight me, name me a day, and then I shall meet you without fail."

"You speak well," said Sir Tristram. "Now I name the place: meet me in the meadow by the river of Camelot, where Merlin set up the stone monument."

So they were agreed.

Then Sir Tristram asked Sir Palomides why the ten knights were fighting him.

"For this reason," said Sir Palomides. "As I rode on my adventures in a forest near here, I saw a dead knight lying there, and a lady weeping beside him. And when I saw her grieving so, I asked her who had killed her lord. 'Sir,' she said, 'the falsest knight in the world now living, and he is the vilest wretch that anyone ever heard tell of, and his name is Sir Breuse Saunce Pité.' Then out of pity I had the damsel mount her palfrey, and I promised to be her protection, and to help her bury her lord. And so, suddenly, as I came riding by this tower, out came Sir Breuse Saunce Pité, and suddenly he struck me from my horse. And then, before I could get back to my horse, this Sir Breuse killed the damsel. And so I took my horse again, and I was badly ashamed, and so the fight between us began. And this is the reason why we were fighting."

"Well," said Sir Tristram, "now I understand how your fight came about. But in any case remember the promise you have made me, to fight me two weeks from today."

"I shall not fail you," said Sir Palomides.

"Well," said Sir Tristram, "for now I will not leave you until you are out of danger from your enemies."

So they mounted their horses and rode together into that forest, and there they found a fair spring, with clear water bubbling up.

"Fair sir," said Sir Tristram, "I have a mind to drink of that water."

And then they got down off their horses. And then they noticed, close by them, a great horse tied to a tree, and it kept neighing. And then they noticed a fair knight in armour under a tree, lacking no piece of his armour, except that his helmet lay under his head.

"By the good Lord," said Sir Tristram, "there lies a fine-looking knight. What is best to do?"

"Wake him," said Sir Palomides.

So Sir Tristram woke him with the butt of his spear. And the knight got up in haste and put his helmet on his head, and took a great spear in his hand; and without any more words he charged at Sir Tristram, and struck him clean out of his saddle to the earth, and hurt him in the left side, so that Sir Tristram lay in great danger. Then he galloped on further, and took his distance for the charge, and came crashing down on Sir Palomides, and there he struck him partly through the body, so that he fell from his horse to the earth. And then this strange knight left them there, and went his way through the forest. With this Sir Palomides and Sir Tristram, who were on foot, got their horses back, and each asked the other's advice about what was best to do.

"By my head," said Sir Tristram, "I will follow this strong knight who has shamed us like this."

"Well," said Sir Palomides, "and I will rest near here with a friend of mine."

"Take care," said Sir Tristram to Palomides, "that you don't fail on the day you have set to fight me. For, as I judge it, you will not keep your day, for I am much stronger than you."

"As for that," said Sir Palomides, "let it be as it may, for I am not afraid of you. If I am not sick or a prisoner, I will not fail you. But I have more reason to fear that you will not meet me, for you are riding after that strong knight there. And if you meet him, it will be a hard chance if you ever escape his hands."

Right then Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides parted, and each went his separate way.
