Chapter 3: How Sir Tristram went looking for a strong knight who had struck him down, along with many other knights of the Round Table

And so Sir Tristram rode a long way after this strong knight. And at last he saw a lady lying across a dead knight.

"Fair lady," said Sir Tristram, "who has killed your lord?"

"Sir," she said, "a knight came riding here, as my lord and I were resting, and asked him where he was from, and my lord said from Arthur's court. 'Then,' said the strong knight, 'I will joust with you, for I hate all those who are of Arthur's court.' And my lord who lies here dead mounted his horse, and the strong knight and my lord met together, and there he ran my lord clean through with his spear. And so he has brought me into great woe and loss."

"I am sorry for your great grief," said Sir Tristram. "If it please you, tell me your husband's name."

"Sir," she said, "his name was Galardoun, and he would have proved a good knight."

So Sir Tristram left that sorrowful lady, and had very poor lodging. Then on the third day Sir Tristram met Sir Gawain and Sir Bleoberis in a forest, at a lodge, and both of them were badly wounded. Then Sir Tristram asked Sir Gawain and Sir Bleoberis whether they had met such a knight, with such a device, with a covered shield.

"Fair sir," said these knights, "such a knight met us, to our great harm. And first he struck down my companion, Sir Bleoberis, and badly wounded him, because he told me I should not fight with him, since he was too strong for me. That strong knight took his words with scorn, and said he said it in mockery. And then they rode at each other, and so he hurt my companion. And when he had done that, I could not for shame do anything but joust with him. And at the first course he struck me down, and my horse, to the earth. And there he nearly killed me, and he took his horse away from us and left. And it was an evil hour when we met him."

"Fair knights," said Sir Tristram, "he met me the same way, and another knight called Palomides, and he struck us both down with one spear, and hurt us very badly."

"On my faith," said Sir Gawain, "if you take my advice you will let him pass and look for him no further; for at the next feast of the Round Table, on pain of my head, you shall find him there."

"On my faith," said Sir Tristram, "I shall never rest until I find him."

And then Sir Gawain asked him his name. Then he said, "My name is Sir Tristram."

And so each told the other their names, and then Sir Tristram left and rode on his way.

And by chance, in a meadow, Sir Tristram met Sir Kay the Seneschal and Sir Dinadan.

"What news with you," said Sir Tristram, "with you knights?"

"Not good," said these knights.

"Why so?" said Sir Tristram. "Please tell me, for I am riding in search of a knight."

"What device does he carry?" said Sir Kay.

"He carries," said Sir Tristram, "a covered shield, wrapped close in cloth."

"By my head," said Sir Kay, "that is the same knight who met us. For last night we were lodged in a widow's house, and that knight was lodged there too; and when he learned that we were of Arthur's court, he spoke great insults against the king, and especially against Queen Guinevere, and so in the morning a fight was pledged with him for that reason. And at the first encounter," said Sir Kay, "he struck me down from my horse and hurt me exceedingly badly. And when my companion, Sir Dinadan, saw me struck down and hurt, he would not avenge me, but ran away from me. And so he left."

And then Sir Tristram asked them their names, and so each told the other their names. And so Sir Tristram left Sir Kay and Sir Dinadan, and so he passed through a great forest into a plain, until he came upon a priory, and there he rested with a good man six days.
