Chapter 4: How Sir Tristram struck down Sir Sagramore le Desirous and Sir Dodinas le Savage

And then he sent his man, who was called Gouvernail, and ordered him to go to a city nearby to fetch him new armour; for it had been a long time since Sir Tristram had been re-equipped, and his armour was battered and broken. And when Gouvernail, his servant, had come back with his gear, he took his leave of the widow, and mounted his horse, and rode on his way early in the morning. And by sudden chance Sir Tristram met Sir Sagramore le Desirous and Sir Dodinas le Savage. And these two knights met Sir Tristram and questioned him, and asked him if he would joust with them.

"Fair knights," said Sir Tristram, "I would joust with you with a good will, but I have promised, on a day set close at hand, to fight a strong knight. And so I am unwilling to fight with you, for if it were my misfortune to be hurt here, I should not be able to fight the fight I promised."

"As for that," said Sagramore, "whether you like it or not, you shall joust with us before you get past us."

"Well," said Sir Tristram, "if you force me to it, I must do what I can."

And then they set their shields, and came running together with great anger. But through Sir Tristram's great strength he struck Sir Sagramore from his horse. Then he spurred his horse on further, and said to Sir Dodinas, "Knight, get ready."

And so by sheer strength Sir Tristram struck Dodinas from his horse. And when he saw them lying on the earth, he took up his bridle and rode on his way, and his man Gouvernail with him.

As soon as Sir Tristram had gone by, Sir Sagramore and Sir Dodinas got their horses back, and mounted nimbly and followed after Sir Tristram. And when Sir Tristram saw them coming so fast after him, he turned his horse back to them, and asked them what they wanted.

"It is not long since I struck you to the earth at your own request and desire. I would have ridden past you, but you would not allow me, and now it seems to me you want to fight me some more."

"That is the truth," said Sir Sagramore and Sir Dodinas, "for we mean to be avenged for the insult you have done us."

"Fair knights," said Sir Tristram, "you have little need of that, for you brought on yourselves all that I did to you. And so I ask you, by your knighthood, to leave me alone for now. For I am sure that if I fight with you I shall not escape without great wounds, and as I suppose, you will not come away without your share either. And this is the reason why I am so unwilling to fight with you: for I must fight within these three days with a good knight, as valiant as any now living, and if I am hurt I shall not be able to fight him."

"What knight is that," said Sir Sagramore, "that you are to fight with?"

"Sirs," he said, "it is a good knight called Sir Palomides."

"By my head," said Sir Sagramore and Sir Dodinas, "you have reason to fear him, for you will find him an exceedingly good knight, and a valiant one. And because you are to fight him, we will spare you for now; otherwise you would not get away from us easily. But, fair knight," said Sir Sagramore, "tell us your name."

"Sir," he said, "my name is Sir Tristram de Liones."

"Ah," said Sagramore and Sir Dodinas, "well met, for we have heard of your great renown."

And then each took leave of the other, and they went on their way.
