Chapter 5: How Sir Tristram met Sir Lancelot at the stone monument, and how they fought each other without knowing who the other was

Then Sir Tristram left and rode straight to Camelot, to the stone monument that Merlin had made before, where Sir Lanceor, the king's son of Ireland, was killed by the hands of Balin. And in that same place the fair lady Colombe was killed, who was Sir Lanceor's love; for after he was dead she took his sword and thrust it through her body. And by Merlin's craft this knight Lanceor and his lady Colombe were buried under one stone. And at that time Merlin prophesied that in that same place two of the best knights that ever were in Arthur's days, and the best lovers, would fight. So when Sir Tristram came to the tomb where Lanceor and his lady were buried, he looked about him for Sir Palomides. Then he noticed a handsome knight coming riding towards him, all in white, with a covered shield. When he came near Sir Tristram he called out loud, "You are welcome, sir knight, and well and truly have you kept your promise."

And then they set their shields and lowered their spears, and came together with all the strength of their horses; and they met so fiercely that both horses and knights fell to the earth, and as fast as they could they got clear of their horses, and put their shields before them; and they struck at each other with bright swords, like men of great strength, and each wounded the other wonderfully badly, so that the blood ran out on the grass. And so they fought for the space of four hours, and neither would speak one word to the other, and they had hewn many pieces off each other's armour.

"O Lord Jesus," said Gouvernail, "I marvel greatly at the strokes my master has given your master."

"By my head," said Sir Lancelot's servant, "your master has not given so many but that he has taken as many or more."

"O Jesus," said Gouvernail, "it is too much for Sir Palomides or Sir Lancelot to endure, and yet it would be a pity if either of these good knights should spill the other's blood."

So they both stood and wept, and grieved greatly when they saw the bright swords covered over with the blood of their bodies.

Then at last Sir Lancelot spoke and said, "Knight, you fight wonderfully well, as well as I ever saw a knight fight. So, if it please you, tell me your name."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "I am unwilling to tell any man my name."

"Truly," said Sir Lancelot, "if I were asked, I was never unwilling to tell my name."

"That is well said," said Sir Tristram. "Then I ask you to tell me your name."

"Fair knight," he said, "my name is Sir Lancelot du Lake."

"Alas," said Sir Tristram, "what have I done! For you are the man in the world that I love best."

"Fair knight," said Sir Lancelot, "tell me your name."

"Truly," he said, "my name is Sir Tristram de Liones."

"O Jesus," said Sir Lancelot, "what a chance has come to me!"

And with that Sir Lancelot knelt down and surrendered his sword to him. And with that Sir Tristram knelt down and surrendered his sword to him. And so each gave the other the prize. And then they both went straight to the stone, and sat down on it, and took off their helmets to cool themselves, and each kissed the other a hundred times. And then soon after they took off their helmets and rode to Camelot. And there they met Sir Gawain and Sir Gaheris, who had promised Arthur never to come back to the court until they had brought Sir Tristram with them.
