Chapter 6: How Sir Lancelot brought Sir Tristram to the court, and of the great joy the king and the others showed at Sir Tristram's coming

"Turn back," said Sir Lancelot, "for your quest is done, for I have met Sir Tristram. Look, here he is in person!"

Then Sir Gawain was glad, and said to Sir Tristram, "You are welcome, for now you have greatly eased me of my labour. For what reason," said Sir Gawain, "did you come to this court?"

"Fair sir," said Sir Tristram, "I came into this country because of Sir Palomides. For he and I had set this day to fight together at the stone monument, and I wonder that I hear nothing of him. And so by chance my lord Sir Lancelot and I met."

With this King Arthur came, and when he learned that Sir Tristram was there, he ran to him and took him by the hand and said, "Sir Tristram, you are as welcome as any knight who ever came to this court."

And when the king had heard how Sir Lancelot and he had fought, and how each had wounded the other wonderfully badly, the king grieved greatly. Then Sir Tristram told the king how he had come there to fight with Sir Palomides. And then he told the king how he had rescued him from the nine knights and Breuse Saunce Pité, "and how I found a knight lying by a spring, and that knight struck down Sir Palomides and me, but his shield was covered with a cloth. So Sir Palomides left me, and I followed after that knight; and in many places I found where he had killed knights, and outjousted many."

"By my head," said Sir Gawain, "that same knight struck me down, and Sir Bleoberis, and hurt us both badly, the one with the covered shield."

"Ah," said Sir Kay, "that knight struck me down and hurt me exceedingly badly, and I would gladly have known who he was, but I could not."

"Jesus have mercy," said Arthur, "what knight was that with the covered shield?"

"I don't know," said Sir Tristram; and so they all said.

"Now," said King Arthur, "then I know, for it is Sir Lancelot."

Then they all looked at Sir Lancelot and said, "You have tricked us with your covered shield."

"It is not the first time," said Arthur, "that he has done so."

"My lord," said Sir Lancelot, "truly, believe me, I was the same knight who carried the covered shield; and because I did not want it known that I was of your court, I spoke no good of your house."

"That is the truth," said Sir Gawain, Sir Kay and Sir Bleoberis.

Then King Arthur took Sir Tristram by the hand and went to the Round Table. Then Queen Guinevere came, and many ladies with her, and all the ladies said with one voice, "Welcome, Sir Tristram!"

"Welcome," said the damsels.

"Welcome," said the knights.

"Welcome," said Arthur, "as one of the best knights, and the noblest in the world, and the man of most honour. For in every kind of hunting you carry off the prize, and of all the measures of the hunting horn you are the first maker, and of all the terms of hunting and hawking you are the founder, and of all instruments of music you are the best. And so, noble knight," said Arthur, "you are welcome to this court. And also, I ask you," said Arthur, "grant me a favour."

"It shall be at your command," said Tristram.

"Well," said Arthur, "what I want of you is that you stay in my court."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "I am unwilling to do that, for I have business in many countries."

"Not so," said Arthur. "You have promised it to me; you cannot say no."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "I will do as you wish."

Then Arthur went round the seats of the Round Table, and looked at every seat that stood empty for lack of a knight. And then the king saw letters in the seat of Marhaus that said, "This is the seat of the noble knight Sir Tristram." And then Arthur made Sir Tristram a knight of the Round Table, with as much splendour and as great a feast as could be imagined. For Sir Marhaus had been killed earlier by the hands of Sir Tristram on an island; and that was well known at that time in Arthur's court, for this Marhaus was a worthy knight. And Sir Tristram and he fought because of the evil deeds that Marhaus did to the country of Cornwall. And they fought so long, circling and sidestepping, until they fell bleeding to the earth; for they were so badly wounded that they could not stand for bleeding. And Sir Tristram by good fortune recovered, and Sir Marhaus died from the stroke on the head.

So now we leave Sir Tristram and speak of King Mark.
