Chapter 7: How King Mark, out of spite against Sir Tristram, came into England with two knights, and how he killed one of the knights

Then King Mark was bitterly resentful of Sir Tristram's renown, and so he drove him out of Cornwall. Yet he was King Mark's nephew; but Mark had great suspicion of Sir Tristram because of his queen, Isolde the Fair, for it seemed to him that there was too much love between the two of them. So when Sir Tristram had left Cornwall for England, King Mark heard of the great feats of prowess that Sir Tristram did there, and it grieved him badly. So he sent men of his own to spy out what deeds he did. And the queen secretly sent spies of her own to learn what deeds he had done, for there was great love between the two of them. So when the messengers had come home, they told the truth as they had heard it, that he surpassed all other knights, unless it was Sir Lancelot. Then King Mark was very downcast at this news, and Isolde the Fair was just as glad. Then, in great spite, he took with him two good knights and two squires, and disguised himself, and set off into England with the intention of killing Sir Tristram. And one of these two knights was called Bersules, and the other knight was called Amant. So as they rode, King Mark asked a knight he met where he would find King Arthur.

He said, "At Camelot."

He also asked that knight about Sir Tristram, whether he had heard of him at King Arthur's court.

"Believe me," said that knight, "you will find Sir Tristram there, a man of as great honour as any now living. For by his prowess he won the tournament of the Castle of Maidens, which stands by the Hard Rock. And since then he has beaten thirty knights with his own hands, men of great honour. And the last fight he ever fought, he fought with Sir Lancelot, and that was a marvellous fight. And it was not by force that Sir Lancelot brought Sir Tristram to the court, and King Arthur rejoiced over him exceedingly, and so made him a knight of the Round Table; and his seat was the one that had been the good knight Sir Marhaus's."

Then King Mark was exceedingly sorry when he heard of the honour done to Sir Tristram; and so they parted.

Then King Mark said to his two knights, "Now I will tell you my plan. You are the men I trust most of anyone alive, and I want you to know that my coming here is for this purpose: to destroy Sir Tristram by trickery or by treason. And it will be hard if he ever escapes our hands."

"Alas," said Sir Bersules, "what do you mean? For you are set on such a course that you are shamefully minded. For Sir Tristram is the most honourable knight we know living, and so I warn you plainly, I will never agree to put him to death. And so I give up my service, and leave you."

When King Mark heard him say so, he suddenly drew his sword and said, "Ah, traitor!" and struck Sir Bersules on the head, so that the sword went down to his teeth.

When Amant the knight saw him do that base deed, he and the squires said it was foully done, and wickedly. "And so we'll serve you no longer. And believe me, we will accuse you of treason before Arthur."

Then King Mark was furiously angry and would have killed Amant; but he and the two squires held together, and cared nothing for his malice. When King Mark saw he could not be avenged on them, he said this to the knight Amant: "Understand this: if you accuse me of treason, I shall defend myself against it before King Arthur. But I demand of you that you do not tell my name, that I am King Mark, whatever becomes of me."

"As for that," said Sir Amant, "I will not give away your name."

And so they parted, and Amant and his companions took the body of Bersules and buried it.
