Chapter 8: How King Mark came to a spring where he found Sir Lamorak lamenting for love of King Lot's wife

Then King Mark rode until he came to a spring, and there he rested, and was in doubt whether he would ride to Arthur's court or not, or go back again to his own country. And as he was resting like this by that spring, a well-armed knight on horseback came by him; and he got down, and tied his horse to a tree, and sat down at the edge of the spring; and there he languished and grieved greatly, and made the most sorrowful lament of love that anyone ever heard; and all this while he did not notice King Mark. And this was a great part of his lament. He cried and wept, saying, "O fair Queen of Orkney, King Lot's wife, and mother of Sir Gawain and of Sir Gaheris, and mother of many others, for love of you I am in great pain."

Then King Mark got up and went near him and said, "Fair knight, you have made a pitiful lament."

"Truly," said the knight, "it is a hundred times more pitiful than my heart can put into words."

"I ask you," said King Mark, "tell me your name."

"Sir," he said, "as for my name, I will not hide it from any knight who carries a shield, and my name is Sir Lamorak de Galis."

But when Sir Lamorak heard King Mark speak, he knew well by his speech that he was a Cornish knight.

"Sir," said Sir Lamorak, "I can tell by your tongue that you are from Cornwall, where there lives the most shameful king now living, for he is a great enemy to all good knights. And that is well proved, for he has driven out of that country Sir Tristram, who is the most honourable knight now living, and all knights speak of his honour; and out of jealousy over his queen he has driven him out of his country. It is a pity," said Sir Lamorak, "that any such false coward of a knight as King Mark should ever be matched with so fair and good a lady as Isolde the Fair, for all the world speaks shame of him, and of her all the honour that any queen may have."

"I have no part in this matter," said King Mark, "and I will not speak of it."

"Well said," said Sir Lamorak.

"Sir," said King Mark, "can you tell me any news?"

"I can tell you," said Sir Lamorak, "that there is to be a great tournament soon beside Camelot, at the Castle of Jagent; and the King with the Hundred Knights and the King of Ireland, as I believe, are holding that tournament."

Then a knight came by who was called Sir Dinadan, and greeted them both. And when he learned that King Mark was a knight of Cornwall, he abused him on King Mark's account a thousand times worse than Sir Lamorak had. Then he offered to joust with King Mark. And Mark was very unwilling to do it, but Sir Dinadan egged him on so that he jousted with Sir Lamorak. And Sir Lamorak struck King Mark so hard that he carried him on the end of his spear over his horse's tail. And then King Mark got up again, and followed after Sir Lamorak. But Sir Dinadan would not joust with Sir Lamorak, but he told King Mark that Sir Lamorak was Sir Kay the Seneschal.

"That is not so," said King Mark, "for he is much bigger than Sir Kay."

And so he followed and overtook him, and told him to wait.

"What do you want?" said Sir Lamorak.

"Sir," he said, "I will fight with a sword, for you have shamed me with a spear."

And with that they rushed together with swords, and Sir Lamorak bore with him and held back from him. And King Mark was exceedingly hasty, and struck thick and fast. Sir Lamorak saw he would not stop, and grew somewhat angry, and doubled his strokes, for he was one of the noblest knights in the world; and he beat him so on the helmet that his head hung nearly down on the saddlebow. When Sir Lamorak saw him in such a state, he said, "Sir knight, how are you? It seems to me you have nearly had your fill of fighting. It would be a pity to do you any more harm, for you are only an ordinary knight. And so I give you leave to go where you like."

"Many thanks," said King Mark, "for you and I are no match."

Then Sir Dinadan mocked King Mark and said, "You're not able to match a good knight."

"As for that," said King Mark, "the first time I jousted with this knight, you refused him."

"Do you think that's a shame to me?" said Sir Dinadan. "No, sir. There is always honour for a knight in refusing what he cannot win, and so you would have won much more honour by refusing him as I did. For I warn you plainly, he could beat five like you and me. For you knights of Cornwall are no men of honour, as other knights are. And because you are no men of honour, you hate all men of honour; for there was never bred in your country such a knight as Sir Tristram."
