Chapter 9: How King Mark, Sir Lamorak, and Sir Dinadan came to a castle, and how King Mark was recognised there

Then they all rode on together, King Mark, Sir Lamorak and Sir Dinadan, until they came to a bridge, and at the end of it stood a fair tower. Then they saw a well-armed knight on horseback, brandishing a spear, calling out and offering himself to joust.

"Now," said Sir Dinadan to King Mark, "there are two brothers here, one called Alein and the other called Trian, who will joust with anyone who comes through this pass. Now go and offer yourself," said Dinadan to King Mark, "for you're always being laid flat on the ground anyway."

Then King Mark was ashamed, and with that he set his spear in rest and crashed into Sir Trian, and both broke their spears all to pieces, and rode straight past each other. Then Sir Trian sent King Mark another spear to joust again; but on no account would he joust any more. Then all three knights came to the castle, and asked the lord of the castle for lodging.

"You are very welcome," said the knights of the castle, "for the love of the lord of this castle, who is called Sir Tor le Fise Aries."

And then they came into a fair court, well kept, and they had an exceedingly good welcome, until the lieutenant of this castle, who was called Berluse, recognised King Mark of Cornwall.

Then Berluse said, "Sir knight, I know you better than you think, for you are King Mark, who killed my father before my own eyes; and you would have killed me if I had not escaped into a wood. But believe me, for the love of my lord of this castle I will neither hurt you nor harm you, nor anyone of your company. But believe me, when you have left this lodging I shall hurt you if I can, for you killed my father treacherously. But first, for the love of my lord Sir Tor, and for the love of Sir Lamorak, the honourable knight who is lodged here, you shall have no bad lodging; for it is a pity that you should ever be in the company of good knights. For you are the basest knight or king now known alive, for you are a destroyer of good knights, and all that you do is nothing but treason."
