Chapter 10: How Sir Berluse met King Mark, and how Sir Dinadan took his side

Then King Mark was badly ashamed, and said little in reply. But when Sir Lamorak and Sir Dinadan knew that he was King Mark, they were sorry to be in his company. So after supper they went to their lodging. So in the morning they rose early, and King Mark and Sir Dinadan rode together; and three miles from their lodging three knights met them, and Sir Berluse was one, and the other two were his cousins. Sir Berluse saw King Mark, and then he shouted aloud, "Traitor, defend yourself, for know this: I am Berluse!"

"Sir knight," said Sir Dinadan, "I advise you to leave off for now, for he is riding to King Arthur; and because I have promised to escort him to my lord King Arthur, I have no choice but to take his side. All the same, I do not love his character, and I would gladly be rid of him."

"Well, Dinadan," said Sir Berluse, "I am sorry that you will take his side, but now do your best."

And then he crashed into King Mark, and struck him so hard on the shield that he carried him clean out of his saddle to the ground. Sir Dinadan saw that, and he set his spear in rest, and ran at one of Berluse's companions, and struck him down out of his saddle. Then Dinadan turned his horse, and struck the third knight to the ground in the same way, for Sir Dinadan was a good knight on horseback; and there a great battle began, for Berluse and his companions held together strongly on foot. And so, through the great strength of Sir Dinadan, King Mark got Berluse to the ground, and his two companions fled; and if it had not been for Sir Dinadan, King Mark would have killed him. And so Sir Dinadan saved his life, for King Mark was nothing but a murderer. And then they took their horses and left, and left Sir Berluse there badly wounded.

Then King Mark and Sir Dinadan rode on some four English leagues, until they came to a bridge where a knight on horseback waited, armed and ready to joust.

"Look," said Sir Dinadan to King Mark, "there waits a knight who will joust, for no one shall pass this bridge without jousting with that knight."

"Good," said King Mark, "for this joust falls to you."

Sir Dinadan knew the knight well, that he was a noble knight, and he would gladly have jousted; but he would rather King Mark had jousted with him. But King Mark would not joust by any means. Then Sir Dinadan could not refuse him in any way. And then each of them made ready his spear and his shield, and they struck together, so that by sheer force Sir Dinadan was struck to the ground; and he rose up swiftly and got his horse, and called on that knight to do battle with swords.

And he answered, "Fair knight, I may not fight with you any more at this time, for such is the custom of this crossing."

Then Sir Dinadan was exceedingly angry that he could not be revenged on that knight; and so he left, and that knight would not tell his name for anything. But all along Sir Dinadan thought he would know him by his shield, that it must be Sir Tor.
