Chapter 11: How King Mark mocked Sir Dinadan, and how they met six knights of the Round Table

So as they rode along the way, King Mark began to mock Sir Dinadan, and said, "I thought you knights of the Round Table could never in any way find your match."

"You're right," said Sir Dinadan. "As for you, on my life, I count you none of the best knights. But since you hold me in such scorn, I call on you to joust with me, to test my strength."

"Not so," said King Mark, "for I will not fight with you in any way. But I ask one thing of you: that when you come to Arthur's court, you do not give away my name, for I am so hated there."

"It is a shame to you," said Sir Dinadan, "that you conduct yourself so shamefully. For I can see by you that you are full of cowardice, and you are a murderer, and that is the greatest shame a knight can have. For no knight who is a murderer ever has honour, nor ever shall. For I saw only just now that, through my strength, you would have killed Sir Berluse, a better knight than you are, or ever will be, and of more prowess."

So they rode on, talking, until they came to a fine house, where a knight stood who begged them to take their lodging with him. So at that knight's request they rested there, and made themselves comfortable, and had a warm welcome. For all knights-errant were welcome to him, and especially all those of Arthur's court. Then Sir Dinadan asked his host the name of the knight who kept the bridge.

"Why do you ask?" said the host.

"Because it is not long since he gave me a fall," said Sir Dinadan.

"Ah, fair knight," said his host, "you need not wonder at that, for he is an exceedingly good knight, and his name is Sir Tor, the son of Aries the cowherd."

"Ah," said Sir Dinadan, "was that Sir Tor? Truly, I thought so all along."

Just as they stood talking together like this, they saw six knights of King Arthur's court come riding towards them over a plain, well armed at all points. And Sir Dinadan knew them well there by their shields. The first was the good knight Sir Uwain, the son of King Uriens; the second was the noble knight Sir Brandiles; the third was Ozanna le Cure Hardy; the fourth was Uwain les Avoutres; the fifth was Sir Agravain; the sixth was Sir Mordred, brother to Sir Gawain. When Sir Dinadan had seen these six knights, he thought to himself that he would bring King Mark by some trick to joust with one of them. And at once they took their horses and rode after these knights a good three English miles. Then King Mark saw where all six of them sat around a spring, eating and drinking such food as they had, with their horses walking about and some tied up, and their shields hung in various places around them.

"Look," said Sir Dinadan, "there are knights-errant who will joust with us."

"God forbid," said King Mark, "for they are six and we are only two."

"As for that," said Sir Dinadan, "let's not hold back, for I will take on the foremost." And with that he made himself ready.

When King Mark saw him do so, as fast as Sir Dinadan rode towards them, King Mark rode away from them with all his household servants. So when Sir Dinadan saw that King Mark was gone, he took his spear out of the rest, and threw his shield onto his back, and came riding to the fellowship of the Round Table. And at once Sir Uwain knew Sir Dinadan, and welcomed him, and so did all his fellowship.
