Chapter 12: How the six knights sent Sir Dagonet to joust with King Mark, and how King Mark refused him

And then they asked him about his adventures, and whether he had seen Sir Tristram or Sir Lancelot.

"So help me God," said Sir Dinadan, "I have seen neither of them since I left Camelot."

"What knight is that," said Sir Brandiles, "who left you so suddenly and rode over that field?"

"Sir," he said, "it was a knight of Cornwall, and the most horrible coward that ever sat on a horse."

"What is his name?" said all these knights.

"I don't know," said Sir Dinadan.

So when they had rested, and talked together, they took their horses and rode to a castle where an old knight lived who gave all knights-errant a warm welcome. Then, while they were talking, Sir Griflet le Fise de Dieu came into the castle, and he was made welcome there; and they all asked him whether he had seen Sir Lancelot or Sir Tristram.

"Sirs," he answered, "I have not seen him since he left Camelot."

So as Sir Dinadan walked about and looked at the castle, he spotted King Mark in a room nearby, and then he rebuked him, and asked him why he had left like that.

"Sir," he said, "because I did not dare stay, since there were so many of them. But how did you escape?" said King Mark.

"Sir," said Sir Dinadan, "they turned out to be better friends than I had expected."

"Who is captain of that company?" said the king.

Then, to frighten him, Sir Dinadan said that it was Sir Lancelot.

"Oh Jesus," said the king, "could I know Sir Lancelot by his shield?"

"Yes," said Dinadan, "for he carries a silver shield with black bands across it."

He said all this to frighten the king, for Sir Lancelot was not in his company.

"Now I beg you," said King Mark, "to ride in my company."

"I am unwilling to do that," said Sir Dinadan, "because you abandoned my company."

Then Sir Dinadan left King Mark at once, and went to his own fellowship; and so they mounted their horses, and rode on their way, and talked of the Cornish knight, for Dinadan told them that he was in the castle where they had lodged.

"Well said," said Sir Griflet, "for I have brought Sir Dagonet here, King Arthur's fool, who is the best fellow and the merriest in the world."

"Do you want a good plan?" said Sir Dinadan. "I have told the Cornish knight that Sir Lancelot is here, and the Cornish knight asked me what shield he carried. Truly, I told him he carried the same shield that Sir Mordred carries."

"Do you want a good plan?" said Sir Mordred. "I am hurt and cannot well bear my shield or my armour, and so put my shield and my armour on Sir Dagonet, and let him set on the Cornish knight."

"That shall be done," said Sir Dagonet, "by my faith."

Then at once Dagonet was armed in Mordred's armour and his shield, and he was set on a great horse, with a spear in his hand.

"Now," said Dagonet, "show me the knight, and I believe I shall bear him down."

So all these knights rode to the edge of a wood, and waited until King Mark came along the road. Then they sent Sir Dagonet out, and he came on as fast as his horse could run, straight at King Mark. And when he came near King Mark, he shouted as if he were mad, and said, "Defend yourself, knight of Cornwall, for I will kill you!"

As soon as King Mark saw his shield, he said to himself, "That is Sir Lancelot. Alas, now I am done for." And with that he made his horse run as fast as it could, through thick and thin. And all the while Sir Dagonet followed after King Mark, shouting and berating him like a madman, through a great forest. When Sir Uwain and Sir Brandiles saw Dagonet chase King Mark like that, they all laughed as if they were mad. And then they took their horses and rode after them, to see how Sir Dagonet got on; for they would not for anything have had Sir Dagonet come to harm, because King Arthur loved him exceedingly, and had made him a knight with his own hands. And at every tournament he started up something to make King Arthur laugh. Then the knights rode here and there, shouting and chasing after King Mark, so that the whole forest rang with the noise.
