Chapter 14: How King Mark and Sir Dinadan heard Sir Palomides grieving and mourning for Isolde the Fair

Now we turn to Sir Dinadan, who found these seven knights exceedingly downcast. And when he knew how they had fared, he was just as downcast.

"My lord Uwain," said Dinadan, "I dare bet my head it is Sir Lamorak de Galis. I promise you all I shall find him, if he can be found in this country."

And so Sir Dinadan rode after this knight; and so did King Mark, who looked for him through the forest. So as King Mark rode after Sir Palomides, he heard the sound of a man grieving greatly. Then King Mark rode as near that sound as he could and as he dared. Then he saw a knight who had got down off his horse and had taken off his helmet, and there he was making a pitiful and sorrowful lament, of love.

Now we leave that, and speak of Sir Dinadan, who rode to look for Sir Palomides. And as he came into a forest he met a knight who was hunting a deer.

"Sir," said Sir Dinadan, "have you met a knight with a silver shield with lions' heads on it?"

"Yes, fair knight," said the other, "I met such a knight only a little while ago, and he went straight off that way."

"Many thanks," said Sir Dinadan, "for if I could find the track of his horse, I would not fail to find that knight."

Just then, as Sir Dinadan rode late in the evening, he heard a doleful sound, as if of a man. Then Sir Dinadan rode towards that sound; and when he came near it he got down off his horse and went up close on foot. Then he saw a knight standing under a tree, with his horse tied beside him and the helmet off his head; and all the while that knight made as doleful a lament as ever a knight made. And all the time he lamented for Isolde the Fair, the Queen of Cornwall, and said, "Ah, fair lady, why do I love you? For you are the fairest of all, and yet you never show me love, nor kindness. Alas, and yet I must love you. And I cannot blame you, fair lady, for my own eyes are the cause of this sorrow. And yet I am nothing but a fool to love you, for the best knight in the world loves you, and you love him in return, and that is Sir Tristram de Liones. And the falsest king and knight is your husband, and the greatest coward and the most full of treason is your lord, King Mark. Alas, that ever so fair a lady, peerless above all others, should be matched with the most villainous knight in the world."

King Mark heard all these words, all that Sir Palomides said of him; and so he was afraid, when he saw Sir Dinadan, that if he spotted him he would tell Sir Palomides that he was King Mark. And therefore he drew away, and took his horse and rode to his men, where he had ordered them to wait. And so he rode as fast as he could to Camelot; and that same day he found Amant there, the knight who had earlier accused him of treason before Arthur, ready for him; and so the king at once commanded them to do battle. And by ill luck King Mark struck Amant through the body. And yet Amant had the right on his side. And immediately King Mark took his horse and left the court, for fear of Sir Dinadan, that he would tell Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides who he was. Then there were maidens there, whom Isolde the Fair had sent to Sir Tristram, who knew Sir Amant well.
