Chapter 15: How King Mark wrongfully killed Sir Amant in front of King Arthur, and how Sir Lancelot brought King Mark back to King Arthur

Then, with King Arthur's leave, they went to him and spoke with him; for while the broken shaft of the spear was still stuck in his body, he spoke.

"Ah, fair damsels," said Amant, "commend me to Isolde the Fair, and tell her that I am killed for love of her and of Sir Tristram."

And there he told the damsels how cowardly King Mark had killed him, and Sir Bersules his companion: "And for that deed I accused him of treason, and here I am killed in a rightful quarrel; and it was all because Sir Bersules and I would not agree, by treason, to kill the noble knight Sir Tristram."

Then the two maidens cried aloud, so that all the court could hear it, and said, "O sweet Lord Jesus, who knows all hidden things, why do You allow so false a traitor to defeat and kill a true knight who fought in a rightful quarrel?"

Then at once word spread to the king and the queen and to all the lords that it was King Mark who had killed Sir Amant, and Sir Bersules before him; and that was why they had fought their battle. Then King Arthur was angry beyond measure, and so were all the other knights. But when Sir Tristram knew the whole matter he grieved greatly and sorrowed beyond measure, and wept for sorrow at the loss of the noble knights, Sir Bersules and Sir Amant.

When Sir Lancelot saw Sir Tristram weep, he went quickly to King Arthur and said, "Sir, I beg you, give me leave to go back after that false king and knight."

"I beg you," said King Arthur, "fetch him back; but I would not have you kill him, for my honour's sake."

Then Sir Lancelot armed himself in all haste, and mounted a great horse, and took a spear in his hand and rode after King Mark. And three English miles from there Sir Lancelot overtook him, and called out to him, "Turn round, you recreant king and knight! For whether you like it or not, you shall come with me to King Arthur's court."

King Mark turned and looked at Sir Lancelot, and said, "Fair sir, what is your name?"

"Know this," he said, "my name is Sir Lancelot. So defend yourself."

And when King Mark knew that it was Sir Lancelot, coming so fast at him with a spear, he cried out aloud, "I yield to you, Sir Lancelot, honourable knight!"

But Sir Lancelot would not hear him, and came on fast at him. King Mark saw that, and made no defence, but tumbled down out of his saddle to the ground like a sack, and there he lay still, and begged Sir Lancelot for mercy.

"Get up, recreant knight and king!"

"I will not fight," said King Mark, "but wherever you wish, I will go with you."

"Alas, alas," said Sir Lancelot, "that I may not give you one blow, for the love of Sir Tristram and of Isolde the Fair, and for the two knights you have treacherously killed!"

And so he mounted his horse and brought him to King Arthur; and there King Mark dismounted in that same place, and threw his helmet down on the ground away from him, and his sword, and fell flat on the ground at King Arthur's feet, and put himself in his grace and mercy.

"So help me God," said Arthur, "you are welcome in one way, and in another way you are not welcome. In this way you are welcome: that you have come here against your will, as I suppose."

"That is the truth," said King Mark, "or else I would not have been here; for my lord Sir Lancelot brought me here by sheer force, and I have yielded to him as a recreant."

"Well," said Arthur, "you understand that you owe me service, homage and fealty. And you never would do me any, but you have always been against me, and a destroyer of my knights. Now, how will you clear yourself?"

"Sir," said King Mark, "just as your lordship requires of me, to the limit of my power, I will make generous amends." For he was a fair speaker, and false underneath.

Then, to give great pleasure to Sir Tristram, and to make the two of them friends, the king kept King Mark with him for that time, and made a day of reconciliation between them, a broken one.
