Chapter 16: How Sir Dinadan told Sir Palomides about the battle between Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram

Now we turn back to Sir Palomides, and how Sir Dinadan comforted him in his great sorrow as best he could.

"What knight are you?" said Sir Palomides.

"Sir, I am a knight-errant as you are, and I have been looking for you a long time by your shield."

"Here is my shield," said Sir Palomides. "Believe me, if you want anything of it, I will defend it."

"No," said Sir Dinadan, "I will not fight with you except in friendship."

"And if you wish otherwise, you will find me ready soon enough," said Palomides.

"Sir," said Sir Dinadan, "which way are you riding?"

"By my head," said Sir Palomides, "I don't know, except as fortune leads me."

"Have you heard or seen anything of Sir Tristram?" said Dinadan.

"So help me God, of Sir Tristram I have both heard and seen. And even though we did not love each other at heart, yet when I was in trouble Sir Tristram saved me from my death. And yet, before he and I parted, by agreement between us both we set a day when we were to meet at the stone grave that Merlin set beside Camelot, and fight a battle there together. But I was hindered," said Sir Palomides, "so that I could not keep my day, and that grieves me badly; but I have a full excuse. For I was a prisoner with a lord, and many others too, and Sir Tristram shall understand perfectly well that I did not break it out of fear or cowardice."

And then Sir Palomides told Sir Dinadan the day on which they were to have met.

"So help me God," said Sir Dinadan, "on that same day Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram met at that same stone grave. And there was the mightiest battle ever seen in this land between two knights, for they fought for more than two hours. And they both bled so much blood there that everyone marvelled that they could ever endure it. And so at last, by agreement between them both, they were made friends and sworn brothers for ever, and no one can judge which is the better knight. And now Sir Tristram has been made a knight of the Round Table, and he sits in the seat of the noble knight Sir Marhaus."

"By my head," said Sir Palomides, "Sir Tristram is far stronger than Sir Lancelot, and the bolder knight."

"Have you tried them both?" said Sir Dinadan.

"I have seen Sir Tristram fight," said Sir Palomides, "but never Sir Lancelot, to my knowledge. But at the spring where Sir Lancelot lay asleep, there with one spear he struck down Sir Tristram and me," said Palomides, "but at that time neither knew the other."

"Fair knight," said Sir Dinadan, "as for Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram, let them be; for the worse of the two will not easily be matched by any knight I know alive."

"No," said Sir Palomides, "God forbid. But if I had a quarrel with the better of the two, I would fight him as willingly as I would you."

"Sir, I beg you, tell me your name, and in good faith I will keep you company until we come to Camelot; and there you shall win great honour now at this great tournament, for Queen Guinevere will be there, and Isolde the Fair of Cornwall."

"Believe me, sir knight, for the love of Isolde the Fair I will be there, and for nothing else; but I will not fight in King Arthur's court."

"Sir," said Dinadan, "I will ride with you and do you service, if you will tell me your name."

"Sir, you shall understand that my name is Sir Palomides, brother to Safere, the good and noble knight. And Sir Segwarides and I are Saracens born, of father and mother."

"Sir," said Sir Dinadan, "I thank you very much for telling me your name. For I am glad that I know your name, and I promise you, on my life, you shall not be harmed by me if I can help it, but rather advanced. And I will help you in that with all my power, I promise you, have no doubt of it. And certainly, on my life, you shall win great honour in King Arthur's court, and be most welcome."

So then they put on their helmets and took up their shields, and mounted their horses, and took the broad road towards Camelot. And then they saw a castle that was fine and rich, and as strong besides as any in this realm.
