Chapter 17: How Sir Lamorak jousted with several knights of the castle where Morgan le Fay was

"Sir Palomides," said Dinadan, "here is a castle I know well, and Queen Morgan le Fay, King Arthur's sister, lives in it. And King Arthur gave her this castle, which he has regretted a thousand times since; for ever since then King Arthur and she have been at strife and quarrelling. But he could never get this castle or win it from her by any kind of trickery; and whenever she could, she made war on King Arthur. And she keeps with her all the dangerous knights, to destroy all the knights King Arthur loves. And no knight shall pass this way without jousting with one knight, or with two, or with three. And if it happens that King Arthur's knight is beaten, he shall lose his horse and his armour and everything he has, and if he gets away without being made a prisoner, he will be hard put to it."

"So help me God," said Palomides, "this is a shameful custom, and a villainous practice for a queen to keep, and above all to make such war on her own lord, who is called the Flower of Chivalry, Christian or heathen. And with all my heart I would destroy that shameful custom. And I want all the world to know that she shall have no service from me. And if she sends out any knights to joust, as I suppose she will, they shall have both their hands full."

"And I will not fail you," said Sir Dinadan, "to the limit of my strength, upon my life."

So as they sat on horseback in front of the castle, a knight with a red shield came up, and two squires after him; and he came straight up to Sir Palomides, the good knight, and said to him, "Fair and noble knight-errant, I ask you, for the love you owe to knighthood, not to fight here with these men of this castle." (It was Sir Lamorak who said this.) "For I came here to seek out this deed, and it is my request; and therefore I beg you, knight, leave it to me, and if I am beaten, avenge me."

"In the name of God," said Palomides, "let us see how you get on, and we will watch you."

Then at once a knight of the castle came out and offered to joust with the Knight with the Red Shield. At once they met together, and the one with the red shield struck him so hard that he carried him over to the ground. With that, another knight of the castle came at once, and he was struck so hard that he was thrown from his saddle. And straight after came the third knight, and the Knight with the Red Shield struck him to the ground. Then Sir Palomides came and begged him to let him help in the jousting.

"Fair knight," he said to him, "allow me to have my way this time; for if there were twenty knights, I would not fear them."

And all the while there were many lords and ladies on the walls of the castle, who cried out and said, "Well jousted, Knight with the Red Shield!"

But as soon as the knight had struck them down, his squire took their horses, and took the saddles and bridles off the horses, and turned them loose into the forest, and had the knights held until the jousting was over. Just then the fourth knight came out of the castle, and briskly offered to joust with the Knight with the Red Shield; and he was ready, and he struck him so hard that horse and man fell to the ground, and the knight's back broke with the fall, and his neck too.

"O Jesus," said Sir Palomides, "that is an exceedingly good knight, and the best jouster I ever saw."

"By my head," said Sir Dinadan, "he is as good as Sir Lancelot or Sir Tristram ever were, whatever knight he may be."
