Chapter 18: How Sir Palomides wanted to joust with the knights of the castle in Sir Lamorak's place

Then straight away a knight came out of the castle with a shield striped diagonally in black and white. And at once the Knight with the Red Shield and he met so hard that he struck the knight of the castle through the striped shield and through the body, and broke the horse's back.

"Fair knight," said Sir Palomides, "you have too much on your hands, so I beg you, let me joust, for you need a rest."

"Why, sir," said the knight, "do you think I am weak and feeble? Sir, it seems to me you do me wrong, and shame me, when I am doing well enough. I tell you now what I told you before: if there were twenty knights, I would beat them; and if I am beaten or killed, then you may avenge me. And if you think I am weary, and you have an appetite to joust with me, I will find you jousting enough."

"Sir," said Palomides, "I did not say it because I wanted to joust with you, but it seems to me that you have too much on your hands."

"And therefore, if you were well-bred," said the Knight with the Red Shield, "you would not offer me shame. So I call on you to joust with me, and you shall find that I am not weary."

"Since you call on me," said Sir Palomides, "look to yourself."

Then the two knights came together as fast as their horses could run, and the knight struck Sir Palomides so hard on the shield that the spear went into his side, a great wound and a dangerous one. And with that Sir Palomides was thrown from his saddle. And that knight turned to Sir Dinadan; and when Dinadan saw him coming he cried out aloud and said, "Sir, I will not fight with you!" But he did not hold back for that, and came straight at him. So Sir Dinadan, for shame, put out his spear and shattered it all to pieces on the knight. But he struck Sir Dinadan back so hard that he struck him clean out of his saddle; but he would not allow his squires to meddle with their horses, because they were knights-errant.

Then he turned back to the castle, and jousted with seven more knights, and there was not one of them who could withstand him, but he carried each of them to the ground. And of these twelve knights he killed four in fair jousting. And the eight knights he made swear on the crossguard of a sword that they would never keep the evil customs of the castle. And when he had made them swear that oath, he let them go. And all the while the lords and the ladies stood on the castle walls, crying and saying, "Knight with the Red Shield, you have done as marvellously well as any knight we ever saw!"

And with that a knight came out of the castle unarmed, and said, "Knight with the Red Shield, you have done us too much damage today. So go back wherever you like, for there are no more here who will fight with you. We are bitterly sorry that you ever came here, for by you the old custom of this castle is undone."

And with that word he turned back into the castle and shut the gates. Then the Knight with the Red Shield turned and called his squires, and so went on his way, and rode at a great pace.

And when he was gone, Sir Palomides went to Sir Dinadan and said, "I never had such shame from any knight I ever met. And therefore I mean to ride after him and be revenged with my sword, for on horseback I believe I shall win no honour from him."

"Sir Palomides," said Dinadan, "if you take my advice, you will not meddle with him, for you will win no honour from him; and for this reason: you have seen him today with too much to do, and much too worn out."

"By almighty Jesus," said Palomides, "I shall never be at ease until I have fought him."

"Sir," said Dinadan, "then I'll give you my company, as a spectator."

"Well," said Palomides, "then you shall see how we measure our strength."

So they took their horses from their servants, and rode after the Knight with the Red Shield; and down in a valley beside a spring they saw where he had dismounted to rest, and had taken off his helmet to drink at the spring.
