Chapter 19: How Sir Lamorak jousted with Sir Palomides and wounded him badly

Then Palomides rode fast until he came near him. And then he said, "Knight, remember the shame you did me just now at the castle. So get ready, for I will fight you."

"Fair knight," he said to Palomides, "you will win no honour from me, for you have seen today that I have been badly worn out."

"As for that," said Palomides, "I will not hold back for it, for believe me, I will be revenged."

"Well," said the knight, "I may manage to hold out against you."

And with that he mounted his horse, and took a great spear in his hand, ready to joust.

"No," said Palomides, "I will not joust, for I am sure I shall win no prize at jousting."

"Fair knight," said that knight, "it would befit a knight to joust and to fight on horseback."

"You shall see what I will do," said Palomides.

And with that he got down on foot, and set his shield in front of him and drew his sword. Then the Knight with the Red Shield got down from his horse, and set his shield in front of him, and so he drew his sword. And then they came together at a gentle pace, and wondrously hard and thick they laid into each other for the space of an hour before they stopped for breath. Then they circled and sidestepped, and grew wondrously angry, and each promised the other death. They hacked so fast with their swords that they cut away half their shields and mail, so that the bare flesh stood out in places beyond their armour. And when Sir Palomides saw his opponent's sword covered with his blood, it grieved him badly. Sometimes they thrust, sometimes they struck like wild men. But at last Sir Palomides grew faint, because of the first wound he had had at the castle with a spear, for that wound grieved him wondrously badly.

"Fair knight," said Palomides, "it seems to me we have tested each other exceedingly hard; and if it may please you, I ask you, by your knighthood, tell me your name."

"Sir," said the knight to Palomides, "I am unwilling to do that, for you have done me wrong, and no knightly deed, to offer me battle, considering how worn out I was. But if you will tell me your name, I will tell you mine."

"Sir," he said, "know this: my name is Palomides."

"Ah, sir, you shall understand that my name is Sir Lamorak de Galis, son and heir of the good knight and king, King Pellinore, and Sir Tor, the good knight, is my half-brother."

When Sir Palomides heard him say so, he knelt down and asked for mercy: "For I have done you an outrage this day; considering the great deeds of arms I have seen you do, I have shamefully and unknightly called on you to do battle."

"Ah, Sir Palomides," said Sir Lamorak, "you have done and said too much to me."

And with that he embraced him with both his arms, and said, "Palomides, worthy knight, in all this land there is none better than you, nor of more prowess, and I am deeply sorry that we fought together."

"I am not," said Sir Palomides, "and yet I am worse wounded than you are; but as for that, I shall soon be healed of it. But truly, I would not have missed our meeting for the fairest castle in this land; for I shall love you all the days of my life above all other knights, except my brother, Sir Safere."

"I say the same," said Sir Lamorak, "except my brother, Sir Tor."

Then Sir Dinadan came up, and he greeted Sir Lamorak with great joy. Then their squires saw to both their shields and their armour, and stopped their wounds. And they rested there for the night at a priory nearby.
