Chapter 20: How Sir Lancelot was told that Dagonet had chased King Mark, and how a knight overthrew Dagonet and six other knights

Now we turn back again. When Sir Ganis and Sir Brandiles and their companions came to King Arthur's court, they told the king, Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram how Sir Dagonet, the fool, had chased King Mark through the forest, and how the strong knight had struck them down, all seven, with one spear. There was great laughing and joking at King Mark and at Sir Dagonet. But none of these knights could tell what knight it was who had rescued King Mark. Then they asked King Mark if he knew him, and he answered and said, "He called himself the Knight that Follows the Questing Beast, and by that name he sent one of my servants to a place where his mother was. And when she heard where he came from, she grieved exceedingly, and told my servant his name, and said, 'Oh, my dear son, Sir Palomides, why will you not come to see me?' And therefore, sir," said King Mark, "it is to be understood that his name is Sir Palomides, a noble knight." Then all these seven knights were glad that they knew his name.

Now we turn back again, for in the morning they took their horses, Sir Lamorak, Palomides and Dinadan together, with their squires and servants, and rode until they saw a fair castle that stood on a mountain, well walled in. And they rode there, and there they found a knight called Galahalt, who was lord of that castle, and there they had a warm welcome and were made very comfortable.

"Sir Dinadan," said Sir Lamorak, "what will you do?"

"Oh, sir," said Dinadan, "tomorrow I will go to King Arthur's court."

"By my head," said Sir Palomides, "I will not ride for these three days, for I am badly hurt, and I have bled a great deal, and so I will rest here."

"Truly," said Sir Lamorak, "and I will stay here with you; and when you ride, then I will ride, unless you linger too long, and then I will take my horse. So I beg you, Sir Dinadan, stay and ride with us."

"Upon my faith," said Dinadan, "I will not stay, for I have such a longing to see Sir Tristram that I cannot stay away from him long."

"Ah, Dinadan," said Sir Palomides, "now I understand that you love my mortal enemy, and so how could I trust you?"

"Well," said Dinadan, "I love my lord Sir Tristram above all others, and I will serve him and do him honour."

"So shall I," said Sir Lamorak, "in everything that lies in my power."

So in the morning Sir Dinadan rode to King Arthur's court. And on the way, as he rode, he saw a knight-errant standing there, who made himself ready to joust.

"Not so," said Dinadan, "for I have no wish to joust."

"You shall joust with me," said the knight, "before you pass this way."

"Are you asking for a joust out of love or out of hate?"

The knight answered, "You may be sure I ask it out of love, and not out of hate."

"That may well be so," said Sir Dinadan, "but it's a hard sort of love you offer me, when you want to joust with me with a sharp spear. But, fair knight," said Sir Dinadan, "since you want to joust with me, meet me at King Arthur's court, and there I will joust with you."

"Well," said the knight, "since you will not joust with me, I beg you, tell me your name."

"Sir knight," he said, "my name is Sir Dinadan."

"Ah," said the knight, "I know you very well for a good knight and a noble one, and believe me, I love you with all my heart."

"Then there shall be no jousting between us," said Dinadan.

So they parted. And the same day he came to Camelot, where King Arthur was staying. And there he greeted the king and the queen, Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram; and the whole court was glad of Sir Dinadan, for he was well-bred, wise and courteous, and a good knight. And above all, the valiant knight Sir Tristram loved Sir Dinadan exceedingly, above all other knights except Sir Lancelot.

Then the king asked Sir Dinadan what adventures he had seen.

"Sir," said Dinadan, "I have seen many adventures, and King Mark knows of some of them, but not all."

Then the king listened to Sir Dinadan as he told how Sir Palomides and he had been in front of Morgan le Fay's castle, and how Sir Lamorak had taken the jousts there ahead of them, and how he outjousted twelve knights, and killed four of them, "and how after that he struck down Sir Palomides and me both."

"I cannot believe that," said the king, "for Sir Palomides is an exceedingly good knight."

"That is the very truth," said Sir Dinadan, "but still I saw Sir Lamorak prove the better, hand to hand."

And then he told the king all about that fight, and how Sir Palomides was the weaker, and the more hurt, and had lost more of his blood. "And without a doubt," said Sir Dinadan, "if the fight had lasted longer, Palomides would have been killed."

"O Jesus," said King Arthur, "this is a great marvel to me."

"Sir," said Tristram, "do not marvel at it at all, for in my judgement there is not a more valiant knight living in the world, for I know his strength. And now I will tell you, I was never so worn out by any knight unless it was Sir Lancelot. And there is no knight in the world except Sir Lancelot who did as well as Sir Lamorak."

"So help me God," said the king, "I wish that knight, Sir Lamorak, would come to this court."

"Sir," said Dinadan, "he will be here shortly, and Sir Palomides too, but I am afraid that Palomides cannot travel yet."
