Chapter 21: How King Arthur had a joust proclaimed, and how Sir Lamorak came in and overthrew Sir Gawain and many others

Then three days later the king had a joust held at a priory. And many knights of the Round Table made themselves ready there, for Sir Gawain and his brothers made ready to joust; but Tristram, Lancelot and Dinadan would not joust, but let Sir Gawain and his brothers win the prize if they could, for the love of King Arthur. Then in the morning they armed themselves to joust, Sir Gawain and his four brothers, and did great deeds of arms there. And Sir Ector de Maris did marvellously well, but Sir Gawain surpassed all that company; and so King Arthur and all the knights gave Sir Gawain the honour at the beginning.

Just then King Arthur noticed a knight and two squires who came out from the edge of a forest, with a shield covered in leather, and then he came in stealthily and crashed about here and there, and at once with one spear he had struck down two knights of the Round Table. Then with his crashing about he lost the covering of his shield, and then the king and everyone else saw that he carried a red shield.

"O Jesus," said King Arthur, "look, there rides a bold knight, the one with the red shield."

And there was shouting and crying: "Beware the Knight with the Red Shield!"

So within a short while he had overthrown three of Sir Gawain's brothers.

"So help me God," said King Arthur, "it seems to me that is the best jouster I ever saw."

With that he saw him meet Sir Gawain, and he struck him down with such great force that he made him leave his saddle.

"How now," said the king, "Sir Gawain has had a fall. I would be well pleased if I knew what knight he is, the one with the red shield."

"I know him well," said Dinadan, "but you shall not know his name at this time."

"By my head," said Sir Tristram, "he jousted better than Sir Palomides; and if you wish to know his name, believe me, his name is Sir Lamorak de Galis."

As they stood talking like this, Sir Gawain and he met again, and there he struck Sir Gawain from his horse and bruised him badly. And in the sight of King Arthur he struck down twenty knights, besides Sir Gawain and his brothers. And so the prize was given to him outright, as a knight without equal. Then quietly and marvellously Sir Lamorak slipped away from all the company to the edge of the forest. King Arthur saw all this, for his eye never left him. Then the king, Sir Lancelot, Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan took their small riding horses and rode straight after the good knight, Sir Lamorak de Galis, and found him there.

And the king said this: "Ah, fair knight, well met."

When he saw the king he took off his helm and greeted him, and when he saw Sir Tristram he got down off his horse and ran to him to clasp him by the thighs; but Sir Tristram would not allow it, but got down before he reached him, and each took the other in his arms, and they rejoiced greatly over each other. The king was glad, and so was all the fellowship of the Round Table, except Sir Gawain and his brothers. And when they knew that he was Sir Lamorak, they bore him great malice, and were furiously angry with him for having put Sir Gawain to dishonour that day.

Then Gawain called all his brothers together in private council, and said this to them: "Fair brothers, here you can see that the man we hate, King Arthur loves, and the man we love, he hates. And believe me, my fair brothers, this Sir Lamorak will never love us, because we killed his father, King Pellinore, for we believed that he killed our father, the King of Orkney. And to spite us for Pellinore, Sir Lamorak did us a shame with our mother. Therefore I will be revenged."

"Sir," said Sir Gawain's brothers, "let us see how you will or can be revenged, and you will find us ready."

"Well," said Gawain, "keep quiet, and we will watch for our time."
