Chapter 22: How King Arthur made King Mark make peace with Sir Tristram, and how they set out for Cornwall

Now we pass over our matter, and leave Sir Gawain, and speak of King Arthur, who one day said to King Mark, "Sir, I beg you, grant me a gift that I will ask of you."

"Sir," said King Mark, "I will give you whatever you desire, if it is in my power."

"Sir, many thanks," said Arthur. "This is what I will ask of you: that you will be a good lord to Sir Tristram, for he is a man of great honour; and that you will take him with you into Cornwall, and let him see his friends, and treat him kindly there for my sake."

"Sir," said King Mark, "I promise you on my life, and by the faith that I owe to God and to you, I will honour him for your sake in everything I can or may."

"Sir," said Arthur, "and I will forgive you all the ill will I ever bore you, provided that you swear that on a book before me."

"With a good will," said King Mark.

And so he swore there on a book before him and all his knights, and with that King Mark and Sir Tristram took each other by the hands, clasped hard together. But for all this King Mark's thoughts were false, as it proved afterwards, for he put Sir Tristram in prison, and like a coward would have killed him.

Then soon afterwards King Mark took his leave to ride into Cornwall, and Sir Tristram made himself ready to ride with him. At this most of the Round Table were angry and downcast, and above all Sir Lancelot, Sir Lamorak and Sir Dinadan were angry beyond measure. For they knew well that King Mark would kill or ruin Sir Tristram.

"Alas," said Dinadan, "that my lord Sir Tristram is going away."

And Sir Tristram felt such sorrow that he was dazed like a fool.

"Alas," said Sir Lancelot to King Arthur, "what have you done? For you will lose the man of greatest honour who ever came into your court."

"It was his own wish," said Arthur, "and so I could do nothing about it, for I have done all that I can and made peace between them."

"Peace!" said Sir Lancelot. "Shame on that peace! For you will hear that he will kill Sir Tristram, or put him in a prison, for he is the most cowardly and the basest king and knight now living."

And with that Sir Lancelot left, and came to King Mark, and spoke to him like this: "Sir king, believe me, the good knight Sir Tristram is going with you. Beware of treason, I warn you. For if you do that knight any harm by any kind of falsehood or treason, by the faith I owe to God and to the order of knighthood, I will kill you with my own hands."

"Sir Lancelot," said the king, "you have said too much to me. I have sworn and spoken at large before King Arthur, in the hearing of all his knights, that I will not kill him or betray him. It would be too great a shame for me to break my promise."

"You speak well," said Sir Lancelot, "but you have such a name for falseness and treason that no one can believe you. Truly, it is well known why you came into this country, and for no other reason than to kill Sir Tristram."

So with great sorrow King Mark and Sir Tristram rode off together, for it was by Sir Tristram's own will and his own doing that he went with King Mark, and it was all so that he could see Isolde the Fair, for without the sight of her Sir Tristram could not live.
