Chapter 23: How Sir Percival was knighted by King Arthur, and how a mute maiden spoke and led him to the Round Table

Now we turn back to Sir Lamorak, and speak of his brothers: Sir Tor, who was King Pellinore's first son, fathered on the wife of Aries the cowherd, for he was born out of wedlock; and Sir Aglovale, who was his first son born in wedlock; and Sir Lamorak, Durnore and Percival, who were his sons in wedlock too. So when King Mark and Sir Tristram had left the court, there was great grief and sorrow over Sir Tristram's leaving. Then the king and his knights held no festivities of any kind for eight days afterwards. And at the end of the eight days there came to the court a knight with a young squire. And when this knight had taken off his armour, he went to the king and asked him to make the young squire a knight.

"What lineage does he come of?" said King Arthur.

"Sir," said the knight, "he is the son of King Pellinore, who once did you good service, and he is a brother of Sir Lamorak de Galis, the good knight."

"Well," said the king, "for what reason do you ask me to make him a knight?"

"You may be sure, my lord the king, that this young squire is my brother as well as Sir Lamorak's, and my name is Aglovale."

"Sir Aglovale," said Arthur, "for the love of Sir Lamorak, and for his father's sake, he shall be made a knight tomorrow. Now tell me," said Arthur, "what is his name?"

"Sir," said the knight, "his name is Percival de Galis."

So in the morning the king made him a knight in Camelot. But the king and all the knights thought it would be a long time before he proved a good knight.

Then at dinner, when the king was seated at the table, and every knight according to his prowess, the king commanded that he be seated among the ordinary knights; and so Sir Percival was seated as the king commanded. Now there was a maiden in the queen's court who came of high blood, and she was mute and had never spoken a word. Just then she came straight into the hall, and went to Sir Percival, and took him by the hand, and said aloud, so that the king and all the knights could hear it, "Arise, Sir Percival, the noble knight and God's knight, and come with me."

And so he did. And there she brought him to the right side of the Siege Perilous, and said, "Fair knight, take your seat here, for that seat belongs to you and to no one else."

Then she left at once and asked for a priest. And when she had made her confession and been given communion, she died. Then the king and all the court rejoiced greatly over Sir Percival.
