Chapter 24: How Sir Lamorak visited King Lot's wife, and how Sir Gaheris killed her, his own mother

Now we turn to Sir Lamorak, who was greatly praised there. Then, through the doing of Sir Gawain and his brothers, they sent for their mother to come near by, close to a castle beside Camelot; and it was all with the intention of killing Sir Lamorak. The Queen of Orkney was there only a short while, but Sir Lamorak knew she was there, and was very glad; and to bring this matter to its end, he sent word to her, and a night was arranged between them when Sir Lamorak should come to her. Sir Gaheris got wind of this, and he rode there ahead of him that same night, and lay in wait for Sir Lamorak, and then he saw him coming, fully armed. And where Sir Lamorak got down, he tied his horse to a secret back gate, and so he went into a parlour and took off his armour; and then he went to the queen's bed, and she welcomed him with exceedingly great joy, and he her in return, for each loved the other exceedingly. So when the knight, Sir Gaheris, saw his moment, he came to their bedside fully armed, with his sword drawn, and suddenly seized his mother by the hair and struck off her head.

When Sir Lamorak felt the blood dash over him, all hot, the blood of her whom he loved exceedingly, believe me, he was badly shaken and dismayed by that grim knight. And with that Sir Lamorak leapt out of the bed in his shirt, like a knight dismayed, saying this: "Ah, Sir Gaheris, knight of the Round Table, you have done a foul and evil thing, and to your great shame. Alas, why have you killed your mother who bore you? It would have been more right for you to kill me."

"The offence is yours," said Gaheris. "A man is born to offer his service, granted; but still you should beware whom you meddle with, for you have shamed me and my brothers. Your father killed our father; and for you to lie with our mother is more shame than we can stand. And as for your father, King Pellinore, my brother Sir Gawain and I killed him."

"Then you did him the greater wrong," said Sir Lamorak, "for my father did not kill your father; it was Balin le Savage. And my father's death is not avenged yet."

"Drop that talk," said Sir Gaheris, "for if you speak like a traitor I will kill you. But because you are naked I am ashamed to kill you. But believe me, wherever I can catch you, I will kill you. And now my mother is rid of you. Get out, take your armour, and be gone."

Sir Lamorak saw there was no help for it, but armed himself quickly, and took his horse and rode away in great sorrow. But for the shame and grief of it he would not ride to King Arthur's court, but rode another way.

But when it was known that Gaheris had killed his mother, the king was exceedingly angry, and ordered him out of his court. And believe me, Sir Gawain was angry that Gaheris had killed his mother and let Sir Lamorak escape. And the king was exceedingly angry over this matter, and so was Sir Lancelot, and many other knights.

"Sir," said Sir Lancelot, "here a great wrong has come about through villainy, and through treason plotted beforehand, that your sister has been killed so shamefully. And I dare say that it was done by treason, and I dare say you will lose that good knight Sir Lamorak, which is a great pity. I know well and am sure that if Sir Tristram knew of it, he would never come within your court again, and that would grieve you and all your knights much more."

"God forbid," said the noble King Arthur, "that I should lose Sir Lamorak or Sir Tristram, for then two of my chief knights of the Round Table would be gone."

"Sir," said Sir Lancelot, "I am sure you will lose Sir Lamorak, for Sir Gawain and his brothers will kill him by one means or another; for they have agreed and sworn among themselves to kill him if ever they see their time."

"That I will prevent," said Arthur.
