Chapter 25: How Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred met a knight in flight, and how they were both overthrown, and of Sir Dinadan

Now we leave Sir Lamorak, and speak of Sir Gawain's brothers, and especially of Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred. As they rode on their adventures they met a knight fleeing, badly wounded, and they asked him what news.

"Fair knights," he said, "there is a knight coming after me who will kill me."

With that Sir Dinadan came riding up to them by chance, but he would promise them no help. But Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred promised to rescue him. With that the knight came straight up to them, and at once offered to joust. Sir Mordred saw that and rode at him, but he knocked Mordred over his horse's tail. Sir Agravain saw that, and he rode straight at that knight, and just as he had served Mordred, so he served Agravain, and said to them, "Sirs, you may both be sure that I am Breuse Saunce Pité who has done this to you." And even then he rode over Agravain five or six times.

When Dinadan saw this, he had to joust with him, for shame. And so Dinadan and he met, and by sheer strength Sir Dinadan knocked him over his horse's tail. Then he took his horse and fled, for on foot he was one of the most valiant knights of Arthur's days, and a great destroyer of all good knights.

Then Sir Dinadan rode up to Sir Mordred and Sir Agravain.

"Sir knight," they all said, "you have done well, and you have avenged us well, so we beg you, tell us your name."

"Fair sirs, you ought to know my name: I am called Sir Dinadan."

When they understood that it was Dinadan, they were angrier than they had been before, for they hated him beyond measure because of Sir Lamorak. For Dinadan had this habit: he loved all good knights who were valiant, and he hated all those who were destroyers of good knights. And none hated Dinadan except those who were always called murderers.

Then the hurt knight whom Breuse Saunce Pité had chased spoke up (his name was Dalan), and said, "If you're Dinadan, you killed my father."

"It may well be so," said Dinadan, "but if so, it was in my own defence and at his request."

"By my head," said Dalan, "you'll die for it."

And with that he lowered his spear and set his shield. And to cut a long story short, Sir Dinadan struck him down off his horse, so that his neck was nearly broken. And in the same way he struck down Sir Mordred and Sir Agravain. And later, in the quest of the Holy Grail, they killed Dinadan, like cowards and traitors, which was a great loss, for he was a great jester and an exceedingly good knight.

And so Sir Dinadan rode to a castle called Beale-Valet. And there he found Sir Palomides, who was not yet healed of the wound that Sir Lamorak gave him. And there Dinadan told Palomides all the news he had heard and seen of Sir Tristram, and how he had gone with King Mark, and how with him he has all his will and desire. At that Sir Palomides grew angry, for he loved Isolde the Fair. And then he knew well that Sir Tristram had her for his own.
