Chapter 26: How King Arthur, the queen, and Lancelot received letters from Cornwall, and of their reply

Now we leave Sir Palomides and Sir Dinadan in the Castle of Beale-Valet, and turn back to King Arthur. A knight came out of Cornwall, whose name was Fergus, a companion of the Round Table. And there he told the king and Sir Lancelot good news of Sir Tristram, and fine letters were brought, and he told how he had left him in the castle of Tintagil. Then the damsel came who brought fine letters to King Arthur and to Sir Lancelot, and there she was given an exceedingly warm welcome by the king, and by Queen Guinevere, and by Sir Lancelot. Then they wrote fine letters in return. But Sir Lancelot kept warning Sir Tristram to beware of King Mark, for in his letters he always called him King Fox, as much as to say that he goes about everything with tricks and treason. And Sir Tristram thanked Sir Lancelot in his heart for that. Then the damsel went to Isolde the Fair, and brought her letters from the king and from Sir Lancelot, and she was exceedingly glad of them.

"Fair damsel," said Isolde the Fair, "how is my lord Arthur, and Queen Guinevere, and the noble knight Sir Lancelot?"

She answered, to cut a long story short, "All the better that you and Sir Tristram are happy."

"God reward them," said Isolde the Fair, "for Sir Tristram suffers great pain for me, and I for him."

So the damsel left, and brought letters to King Mark. And when he had read them and understood them, he was angry with Sir Tristram, for he believed that Tristram had sent the damsel to King Arthur. For Arthur and Lancelot in a way threatened King Mark. And as King Mark read these letters, he suspected treason from Sir Tristram.

"Damsel," said King Mark, "will you ride back and carry letters from me to King Arthur?"

"Sir," she said, "I am at your command, to ride whenever you wish."

"You speak well," said the king. "Come back tomorrow morning," said the king, "and fetch your letters."

Then she left, and told them how she was to ride back with letters to Arthur.

"Then we beg you," said Isolde the Fair and Sir Tristram, "when you have received your letters, come by us, so that we may see the secrets of your letters."

"Whatever I can do, madam, you know well I must do for Sir Tristram, for I have long been his own maiden."

So in the morning the damsel went to King Mark to collect his letters and leave.

"I am not minded to send my letters at this time," said King Mark.

Then privately and secretly he sent letters to King Arthur, and to Queen Guinevere, and to Sir Lancelot. So the servant set off, and found the king and the queen in Wales, at Caerleon. And as the king and the queen were at Mass, the servant came with the letters. And when Mass was over, the king and the queen opened the letters privately by themselves. And the king's letter began by speaking exceedingly curtly to King Arthur, and told him to look to himself and his own wife and his own knights; for he, Mark, was well able to rule and keep his wife.
