Chapter 27: How Sir Lancelot was angry at the letter he received from King Mark, and of Dinadan, who made a song about King Mark

When King Arthur understood the letter, he pondered many things, and thought of what his sister, Queen Morgan le Fay, had said about Queen Guinevere and Sir Lancelot. And he brooded on this thought a long while. Then he reminded himself again that his sister was his own enemy, and that she hated the queen and Sir Lancelot, and so he put all that out of his mind. Then King Arthur read the letter again, and the last clause said that King Mark took Sir Tristram for his mortal enemy; and so he assured Arthur, beyond any doubt, that he would be revenged on Sir Tristram. Then King Arthur was angry with King Mark. And when Queen Guinevere read her letter and understood it, she was angry beyond measure, for the letter spoke shamefully of her and of Sir Lancelot. And so she sent the letter privately to Sir Lancelot. And when he knew what the letter meant, he was so angry that he lay down on his bed to sleep. Sir Dinadan noticed this, for it was his way to be in the confidence of all good knights. And as Sir Lancelot slept, he stole the letter out of his hand and read it word for word. And then he grieved greatly for anger. And then Sir Lancelot woke, and went to a window, and read the letter again, and it made him angry.

"Sir," said Dinadan, "why are you angry? Open your heart to me. Truly, you know well that I wish you well, although I am a poor knight and a servant to you and to all good knights. For though I am not a man of honour myself, I love all those who are men of honour."

"That is true," said Sir Lancelot. "You are a trusty knight, and because I trust you greatly I will tell you my secret."

And when Dinadan understood it all, he said, "This is my advice: think nothing at all of these threats, for King Mark is so base that no man will ever get anything out of him by fair words. But you shall see what I will do. I will make a song about him, and when it is made I will have a harper sing it in front of him."

So at once he went and made it, and taught it to a harper called Eliot. And when he knew it, he taught it to many harpers. And so by the will of Sir Lancelot and of Arthur, the harpers went straight into Wales and into Cornwall, to sing the song that Sir Dinadan had made about King Mark, which was the foulest song that ever a harper sang, with harp or with any other instrument.
