Chapter 28: How Sir Tristram was wounded, and of a war made on King Mark, and how Sir Tristram promised to rescue him

Now we turn back to Sir Tristram and to King Mark. As Sir Tristram was at jousts and tournaments, it happened that he was badly hurt, both by a spear and by a sword, but still he always won the prize. And to rest himself he went to a good knight who lived in Cornwall, in a castle, whose name was Sir Dinas the Seneschal. Then by ill fortune a great number of men-at-arms came out of Sessoin, a hideous army, and they came in near the Castle of Tintagil; and their captain's name was Elias, a good fighting man. When King Mark understood that his enemies had come into his land, he grieved and sorrowed greatly, for by his own will King Mark would in no way send for Sir Tristram, for he hated him mortally.

So when his council had gathered, they discussed and weighed many dangers from the strength of their enemies. And then they all agreed at once, and said this to King Mark: "Sir, you may be sure you must send for Sir Tristram, the good knight, or else they will never be overcome. For they must be fought by Sir Tristram, or else we are rowing against the stream."

"Well," said King Mark, "I will do as you advise."

But still he was very unwilling, but need forced him to send for him. Then he was sent for with all the haste that could be, to come to King Mark. And when he understood that King Mark had sent for him, he mounted an easy-paced horse and rode to King Mark.

And when he had come, the king said this: "Fair nephew, Sir Tristram, this is the whole of it. Our enemies from Sessoin have come here, close at hand, and they must be met very soon and without delay, or else they will destroy this country."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "you may be sure that all my strength is at your command. And you may be sure, sir, that for these eight days I can bear no arms, for my wounds are not yet healed. And by that day I will do what I can."

"You speak well," said King Mark. "Then go back and rest and refresh yourself, and I will go and meet the Sessoins with all my strength."

So the king went off to Tintagil, and Sir Tristram went to rest. And the king raised a great army and divided it in three: Sir Dinas the Seneschal led the first part, and Sir Andred led the second part, and Sir Argius led the third part, and he was of King Mark's blood. And the Sessoins had three great divisions, and many good fighting men. And so King Mark, on the advice of his knights, sallied out of the Castle of Tintagil against his enemies. And Dinas, the good knight, rode out in front, and killed two knights with his own hands, and then the battle began. And there was marvellous breaking of spears and striking of swords, and many good knights were cut down. And Sir Dinas the Seneschal was always the best of King Mark's side. And so the battle lasted a long time, with great loss of life. But at last King Mark and Sir Dinas, however unwilling they were, withdrew to the Castle of Tintagil with great slaughter of their people; and the Sessoins followed hard on their heels, so that ten of them got inside the gates and four were killed by the portcullis.

Then King Mark sent for Sir Tristram by a servant, who told him of all the loss of life. Then he sent the servant back, and told him, "Tell King Mark that I will come as soon as I am healed, for before that I can do him no good."

Then King Mark had his answer. With that Elias came and ordered the king to yield up the castle: "For you cannot hold it for any time at all."

"Sir Elias," said the king, "I will yield up the castle if I am not rescued soon."

At once King Mark sent to Sir Tristram again for rescue. By then Sir Tristram was healed, and he had found himself ten good knights of Arthur's; and with them he rode to Tintagil. And when he saw the great army of Sessoins he marvelled very greatly. And then Sir Tristram rode by the woods and by the ditches as secretly as he could, until he came near the gates. And there a knight squared up to him when he saw that Sir Tristram meant to go in; and Sir Tristram struck him down dead, and he served three more the same way. And each of these ten knights killed a man-at-arms. So Sir Tristram went into the Castle of Tintagil. And when King Mark knew that Sir Tristram had come, he was glad of his coming, and so was all the company, and they rejoiced greatly over him.
