Chapter 29: How Sir Tristram won the battle, and how Elias asked for a man to fight him in single combat

So in the morning Elias the captain came, and told King Mark, "Come out and do battle. Now that the good knight Sir Tristram has come in, it will be a shame to you," said Elias, "to hide behind your walls."

When King Mark understood this he was angry and said not a word, but went to Sir Tristram and asked him his advice.

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "do you want me to give him his answer?"

"Gladly," said King Mark.

Then Sir Tristram said this to the messenger: "Take your lord word from the king and from me that we will do battle with him tomorrow in the open field."

"What is your name?" said the messenger.

"You may be sure my name is Sir Tristram de Liones."

With that the messenger left and told his lord Elias all that he had heard.

"Sir," said Sir Tristram to King Mark, "I beg you, give me leave to have command of the battle."

"I beg you, take command," said King Mark.

Then Sir Tristram had the battle planned, how it should be fought. He had his army divided into six parts, and appointed Sir Dinas the Seneschal to have the vanguard, and other knights to command the rest. And that same night Sir Tristram burned all the Sessoins' ships down to the cold water. As soon as Elias knew of that, he said it was Sir Tristram's doing: "For he means that not one mother's son of us shall ever escape. So, fair companions, fight boldly tomorrow, and don't lose heart at all; for any one knight, though he were the best knight in the world, cannot fight us all."

Then they drew up their army in four parts, wonderfully well fitted out and equipped with men-at-arms. So those inside sallied out, and those outside fell boldly upon them; and there Sir Dinas did great deeds of arms. Nevertheless, Sir Dinas and his company got the worst of it. With that Sir Tristram came and killed two knights with one spear; then he killed on the right hand and on the left, so that men marvelled that he could ever do such deeds of arms. And then one could see the battle sometimes driven a bowshot from the castle, and sometimes it was at the castle gates. Then Elias the captain came rushing here and there, and hit King Mark so hard on the helm that he made him leave the saddle. And then Sir Dinas got King Mark back on horseback. With that Sir Tristram came in like a lion, and there he met Elias, and he struck him so hard on the helm that he left his saddle. And so they fought until it was night, and because of the great slaughter and the wounded, each side withdrew to rest.

And when King Mark had come inside the Castle of Tintagil, he was a hundred of his knights short, and those outside were two hundred short; and they saw to the wounded men on both sides. And then they went to council; and believe me, each side was unwilling to fight any more, provided that each could come away with its honour. When Elias the captain understood how many of his men were dead, he grieved greatly; and when he knew that they were unwilling to go into battle again, he was angry beyond measure. Then Elias sent word to King Mark, in great scorn, asking whether he could find a knight who would fight for him man to man. And if he could kill King Mark's knight, he was to have the tribute of Cornwall every year. "And if his knight kills mine, I give up my claim entirely, for ever."

Then the messenger went off to King Mark, and told him how his lord Elias had sent him word to find a knight to do battle with him man to man. When King Mark understood the messenger, he told him to wait and he would have his answer. Then he called all his barons together to learn what the best advice was.

They all said at once, "We have no desire to fight in the field, for if it had not been for Sir Tristram's prowess, it is likely that we would never have escaped. And so, sir, as we judge it, it would be well done to find a knight who will do battle with him, since he makes a knightly offer."
