Chapter 30: How Sir Elias and Sir Tristram fought each other over the tribute, and how Sir Tristram killed Elias on the field

Nevertheless, when all this was said, they could find no knight who would do battle with him.

"Sir king," they all said, "there is no knight here who dares fight with Elias."

"Alas," said King Mark, "then I am utterly shamed and utterly destroyed, unless my nephew Sir Tristram will take the battle on himself."

"You may be sure," they all said, "he had more than enough on his hands yesterday, and he is weary from his labour, and badly wounded."

"Where is he?" said King Mark.

"Sir," they said, "he is in his bed, resting."

"Alas," said King Mark, "unless I have the help of my nephew Sir Tristram, I am utterly destroyed for ever."

With that someone went to Sir Tristram where he lay, and told him what King Mark had said. And with that Sir Tristram got up quickly, and put on a long gown, and came before the king and all the lords. And when he saw them all so dismayed, he asked the king and the lords what news they had.

"Never worse," said the king. And with that he told him everything, how he had had word from Elias to find a knight to fight for the tribute of Cornwall, "and I can find none."

"And as for you," said the king and all the lords, "we cannot for shame ask any more of you, for through your boldness yesterday you saved all our lives."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "now that I understand you would have my help, it is only right that I should do everything in my power, saving my honour and my life, even though I am badly bruised and hurt. And since Sir Elias offers so generously, I will fight with him, and either I will be killed on the field, or else I will free Cornwall from the old tribute. And so call his messenger quickly, and he shall be answered, for my wounds are still fresh, and they will be sorer a week from now than they are now; and so he shall have his answer, that I will do battle with him tomorrow."

Then the messenger, who had gone, was brought back before King Mark.

"Listen, fellow," said Sir Tristram. "Go quickly to your lord, and tell him to give true guarantees on his side for the tribute, as the king here shall give on his; and then tell your lord, Sir Elias, that I, Sir Tristram, King Arthur's knight and knight of the Round Table, will meet your lord on horseback tomorrow, to do battle as long as my horse can last, and after that to do battle with him on foot to the uttermost."

The messenger looked Sir Tristram over from top to toe, and with that he left and came to his lord, and told him what answer Sir Tristram had given. And with that hostages were given on both sides, and it was made as sure as it could be that whichever side had the victory, the matter would end there. And then both armies were drawn up on both sides of the field, outside the castle of Tintagil, and no one was armed but Sir Tristram and Sir Elias.

So when the terms were settled, they rode apart, and they came together as fast as their horses could run. And each knight struck the other so hard that both horses and knights went to the ground. Nevertheless they both got up quickly and set their shields on their shoulders, with naked swords in their hands, and they dashed together so that it seemed there was a flaming fire about them. So they circled and sidestepped, and hewed at helms and hauberks, and cut many pieces away from their shields, and each wounded the other exceedingly badly, so that the hot blood fell fresh upon the earth. And by the time they had fought for the space of an hour, Sir Tristram grew faint and weak from loss of blood, and gave ground badly. Sir Elias saw that, and pressed fiercely after him, and wounded him in many places. And all the while Sir Tristram circled and sidestepped, and moved away from him here and there, and covered himself with his shield as well as he could, all weakly, so that everyone said he was beaten; for Sir Elias had given him twenty strokes for one.

Then there was laughing on the Sessoins' side, and great grief on King Mark's side.

"Alas," said the king, "we are shamed and destroyed for ever!" For, as the book says, Sir Tristram was never so matched, unless it was by Sir Lancelot.

So as they stood and watched, both sides, the one side laughing and the other side weeping, Sir Tristram remembered his lady, Isolde the Fair, who was watching him, and how he was likely never to come into her presence again. Then he pulled up his shield, which before had hung very low. And then he set his shield against Elias, and gave him many heavy blows, twenty for one, and broke his shield and his hauberk all to pieces, so that the hot blood ran down to the earth. Then King Mark began to laugh, and all the men of Cornwall, and the other side to weep. And all the while Sir Tristram said to Sir Elias, "Yield!"

Then, when Sir Tristram saw him staggering so on the ground, he said, "Sir Elias, I am truly sorry for you, for you are as exceedingly good a knight as I ever met, except Sir Lancelot."

With that Sir Elias fell to the earth, and there he died.

"What shall I do," said Sir Tristram to King Mark, "now that this battle is at an end?"

Then those of Elias' side left, and King Mark took many prisoners from them, to make good the harm and the damage he had suffered from them; and the rest he sent back into their own country to ransom their companions. Then Sir Tristram's wounds were examined, and he was well healed. Yet for all this King Mark would gladly have killed Sir Tristram. But for all that Sir Tristram ever saw or heard of King Mark, he would never be on his guard against his treachery, but he would always be wherever Isolde the Fair was.
