Chapter 31: How at a great feast King Mark held a harper came and sang the song that Dinadan had made

Now we will pass over this matter, and speak of the harpers that Sir Lancelot and Sir Dinadan had sent into Cornwall. And at the great feast that King Mark held for joy that the Sessoins had been driven out of his country, Eliot the harper came with the song that Dinadan had made, and secretly brought it to Sir Tristram, and told him the song that Dinadan had made about King Mark. And when Sir Tristram heard it, he said, "O Lord Jesus, how wonderfully well Dinadan can make a song, and how wonderfully wicked, when the occasion calls for it!"

"Sir," said Eliot, "dare I sing this song before King Mark?"

"Yes, at my own risk," said Sir Tristram, "for I will be your protection."

Then at dinner Eliot the harper came in, and because he was a skilled harper, people listened to him sing that same song that Dinadan had made, which said the vilest things about King Mark and his treason that anyone ever heard.

When the harper had sung his song to the end, King Mark was furiously angry, and said, "You, harper, how dare you be so bold, at the risk of your head, as to sing this song before me?"

"Sir," said Eliot, "you may be sure I am a minstrel, and I must do as I am commanded by these lords whose arms I wear. And sir, believe me, Sir Dinadan, a knight of the Round Table, made this song, and made me sing it before you."

"You speak well," said King Mark, "and because you are a minstrel you shall go free, but I order you to get yourself out of my sight, and fast."

So the harper left and went to Sir Tristram, and told him how he had fared. Then Sir Tristram had letters written, as fine as he could make them, to Lancelot and to Sir Dinadan. And so he had the harper escorted out of the country. But as for King Mark being furiously angry, he certainly was, for he judged that the song that was sung before him had been made on Sir Tristram's advice, and so he thought to kill him and all his well-wishers in that country.
