Chapter 32: How King Mark treacherously murdered his brother Boudwin for the good service he had done him

Now we turn to another matter that happened between King Mark and his brother, who was called the good Prince Boudwin, whom all the people of the country loved exceedingly well. So it happened one time that the unbelieving Saracens landed in the country of Cornwall, soon after these Sessoins were gone. And then the good Prince Boudwin, at their landing, raised the country secretly and in haste. And before it was day he had wildfire put in three of his own ships, and suddenly he hoisted the sails, and with the wind he made those ships drive among the fleet of the Saracens. And to cut a long story short, those three ships set fire to all the ships, so that none were saved. And at daybreak the good Prince Boudwin with all his company fell on the unbelievers with shouts and cries, and killed some forty thousand, and left none alive.

When King Mark knew this, he was furiously angry that his brother should win such honour. And because this prince was better loved than he was in all that country, and also because Boudwin loved Sir Tristram well, he therefore thought to kill him. And so, hastily, like a man out of his mind, he sent for Prince Boudwin and Anglides his wife, and told them to bring their young son with them, so that he might see him. All this he did meaning to kill the child as well as his father, for he was the falsest traitor that was ever born. Alas, for his goodness and for his good deeds this noble Prince Boudwin was killed. So when he came with his wife Anglides, the king put on a friendly face to them until they had dined. And when they had dined, King Mark sent for his brother and said this: "Brother, how did you fare when the unbelievers landed near you? It seems to me it was your duty to send me word, so that I could have been at that engagement, for it would have been right that I had the honour and not you."

"Sir," said Prince Boudwin, "it was like this: if I had waited until I had sent for you, those unbelievers would have destroyed my country."

"You lie, you false traitor," said King Mark, "for you are always out to win honour away from me, and to put me to dishonour, and you cherish what I hate."

And with that he stabbed him to the heart with a dagger, so that he never spoke a word after. Then the Lady Anglides grieved greatly, and fainted, for she saw her lord killed before her face. Then there was nothing more to be done, but Prince Boudwin was stripped and brought to burial. But Anglides secretly got hold of her husband's doublet and his shirt, and she kept them hidden.

Then there was much sorrow and weeping, and Sir Tristram, Sir Dinas and Sir Fergus grieved greatly, and so did all the knights who were there; for that prince was exceedingly well loved. So Isolde the Fair sent word to Anglides, Prince Boudwin's wife, and told her to leave quickly, or else her young son, Alisander le Orphelin, would be killed. When she heard this, she took her horse and her child, and rode away with such poor men as dared ride with her.
