Chapter 33: How Anglides, Boudwin's wife, escaped with her young son, Alisander le Orphelin, and came to the Castle of Arundel

Even so, when King Mark had done this deed, he still meant to take more vengeance; and with his sword in his hand he went searching from room to room, looking for Anglides and her young son. And when she was found to be missing, he called a good knight who was called Sadok, and ordered him on pain of death to bring Anglides back, and her young son. So Sir Sadok set off and rode after Anglides. And within ten miles he overtook her, and told her to turn back and ride with him to King Mark.

"Alas, fair knight," she said, "what will you gain by my son's death, or by mine? I have had more than enough harm, and too great a loss."

"Madam," said Sadok, "your loss is a grief and a pity. But madam," said Sadok, "if you would leave this country with your son, and keep him until he comes of age, so that he may avenge his father's death, then I would let you go from me, provided you promise me to avenge the death of Prince Boudwin."

"Ah, noble knight, Jesus thank you! And if ever my son, Alisander le Orphelin, lives to be a knight, he shall have his father's doublet and his shirt with the bloody marks, and I will give him such a charge that he will remember it as long as he lives."

And with that Sadok parted from her, and each commended the other to God. And when Sadok came to King Mark, he told him on his faith that he had drowned young Alisander, her son; and King Mark was very glad of it.

Now we turn to Anglides, who rode both night and day wherever chance took her, out of Cornwall, and rested little and in few places; but all the while she made her way south towards the coast, until by fortune she came to a castle that was called Magouns, and is now called Arundel, in Sussex. And the Constable of the castle welcomed her, and said she was welcome to her own castle; and there Anglides was honourably received, for the Constable's wife was her close cousin, and the Constable's name was Bellangere; and that same Constable told Anglides that the castle was hers by right of inheritance. So Anglides lived there through years and winters, until Alisander was big and strong; there was no one so strong in all that country, and there was no one who could match him in any contest of strength.
