Chapter 35: How King Mark was told about Sir Alisander, and how he would have killed Sir Sadok for sparing his life

"Now I require you," his mother went on, "and I charge you on my blessing, and by the high order of knighthood, that you take revenge on King Mark for the death of your father."

And with that she fainted. Then Alisander leapt to his mother, and took her up in his arms, and said, "Fair mother, you have given me a great charge, and here I promise you I will be avenged on King Mark when I can; and that I promise to God and to you."

So this feast came to an end, and the Constable, on Anglides' advice, saw to it that Alisander was well horsed and armoured. Then he jousted with his twenty companions who had been made knights with him, and, to cut a long story short, he overthrew all twenty of them, so that not one could stand up to a single blow from him.

Then one of those knights went off to King Mark, and told him everything: how Alisander had been made a knight, and all the charge that his mother gave him, as you have heard before.

"Alas, false treason!" said King Mark. "I thought that young traitor was dead. Alas, whom can I trust?"

And with that King Mark took a sword in his hand, and went looking for Sir Sadok from room to room to kill him. When Sir Sadok saw King Mark coming with his sword in his hand, he said this: "Watch yourself, King Mark, and don't come near me; for know this, I saved Alisander's life, and I have never regretted it, for you falsely and cowardly killed his father Boudwin, like a traitor, for his good deeds; and so I pray Almighty Jesus to send Alisander the might and strength to be revenged on you. And now beware, King Mark, of young Alisander, for he has been made a knight."

"Alas," said King Mark, "that I should ever hear a traitor say such things to my face!"

And with that four of King Mark's knights drew their swords to kill Sir Sadok, but Sir Sadok at once killed them all in King Mark's presence. And then Sir Sadok went on into his room, and took his horse and his armour, and rode on his way at a good pace. For there was neither Sir Tristram, nor Sir Dinas, nor Sir Fergus who bore Sir Sadok any ill will. Then King Mark was angry, and thought to destroy Sir Alisander and Sir Sadok, who had saved him; for King Mark feared and hated Alisander more than any man alive.

When Sir Tristram understood that Alisander had been made a knight, he at once sent him a letter, begging him and charging him to make his way to King Arthur's court, and to put himself under the rule and into the hands of Sir Lancelot. So this letter was sent to Alisander from his cousin, Sir Tristram. And at that time he meant to do as he was told. Then King Mark called the knight who had brought him the news of Alisander, and told him to stay on in that country.

"Sir," said that knight, "so I must, for I dare not go back to my own country."

"No matter," said King Mark. "I will give you twice as much land here as you ever had of your own."

But within a short time Sir Sadok met that false knight, and killed him. Then King Mark was mad with rage beyond measure. Then he sent to Queen Morgan le Fay, and to the Queen of North Wales, begging them in his letters that the two of them, being sorceresses, would set the whole country alight with ladies who were enchantresses, and with such knights as were dangerous, like Malgrin and Breuse Saunce Pité, so that by no means should Alisander le Orphelin escape, but he should be either taken or killed. King Mark made this arrangement in order to destroy Alisander.
