Chapter 36: How Sir Alisander won the prize at a tournament, and of Morgan le Fay, and how he fought with Sir Malgrin and slew him

Now we turn again to Sir Alisander, who at his departure took his father's bloody shirt with him from his mother. And he carried it with him always, until the day of his death, as a token to make him remember his father's death. So Alisander meant to ride to London, on Sir Tristram's advice, to Sir Lancelot. And by chance he went along the coast, and took the wrong road. And there he won the prize at a tournament that King Carados held. And there he struck down King Carados and twenty of his knights, and also Sir Safere, a good knight, who was the brother of Sir Palomides, the good knight. A damsel saw all this, and saw the best knight joust that she had ever seen. And each time he struck down a knight, he made him swear to wear no armour for a twelvemonth and a day.

"This is good news," said Morgan le Fay. "This is the knight I would very much like to see."

And so she took her palfrey, and rode a long while, and then she rested in her tent. Then four knights came there, two armed and two unarmed, and they told Morgan le Fay their names: the first was Elias de Gomeret, the second was Cari de Gomeret, and those were armed; the other two were from Cameliard, cousins of Queen Guinevere, and one was called Guy, and the other was called Garaunt, and those were unarmed. There these four knights told Morgan le Fay how a young knight had struck them down before a castle. "For the maiden of that castle said that he had only lately been made a knight, and was young. But as we see it, unless it were Sir Tristram, or Sir Lancelot, or Sir Lamorak, the good knight, there is no one who could stay in the saddle against a single blow of his spear."

"Well," said Morgan le Fay, "I shall meet that knight before long, if he stays in that country."

So we turn to the damsel of the castle, who, when Alisander le Orphelin had outjousted the four knights, called him to her, and said this: "Sir knight, will you, for my sake, joust and fight with a knight of this country who is, and has long been, a bad neighbour to me? His name is Malgrin, and he will not let me be married in any way, for all that I can do, nor will he let any knight have me."

"Damsel," said Alisander, "if he comes while I am here, I will fight with him, and for your sake I will risk my poor body."

And with that she sent for him, for he would come at her command. And when each caught sight of the other, they made ready to joust, and they came together eagerly, and Malgrin broke his spear on Alisander, and Alisander struck him back so hard that he carried him clean out of his saddle to the ground. But this Malgrin got up quickly, and set his shield and drew his sword, and told him to dismount, saying, "Though you have the better of me on horseback, you'll find that I will hold out like a knight on foot."

"Well said," said Alisander; and so he quickly got clear of his horse and handed it to his servant. And then they rushed together like two boars, and laid into each other's helms and shields for a long time, for the space of three hours, so that no one could ever say which was the better knight.

And in the meantime Morgan le Fay came to the damsel of the castle, and they watched the battle. But this Malgrin was a practised old knight, and he was counted one of the most dangerous knights in the world to fight on foot, though on horseback there were many better. And all the while this Malgrin watched for his chance to kill Alisander, and so he wounded him so terribly that it was a marvel he could stand at all, he had bled so much blood; for Alisander fought wildly, and not wisely. And the other was a savage knight, and watched his chance, and struck him hard. And sometimes they rushed together with their shields, like two boars or rams, and both fell flat on their faces on the ground.

"Now, knight," said Malgrin, "hold your hand a while, and tell me who you are."

"I will not," said Alisander, "unless I choose to. But tell me your name, and why you hold this country, or else you shall die at my hands."

"Know this," said Malgrin, "that for the love of this maiden of this castle I have killed ten good knights by mischance; and through my own violence and arrogance I have killed ten other knights."

"So help me God," said Alisander, "this is the foulest confession I ever heard a knight make, nor did I ever hear tell of other men making such a shameful confession; and so it would be a great pity and a great shame to me to let you live any longer. So guard yourself as well as you can, for as I am a true knight, either you shall kill me or else I shall kill you, I promise you faithfully."

Then they laid into each other fiercely, and at last Alisander struck Malgrin to the ground. And then he tore off his helm, and swiftly struck off his head. And when he had done and finished this battle, he at once called his servant to him, who brought him his horse. And then, thinking he was strong enough, he would have mounted. And so she laid Sir Alisander in a horse-litter, and took him into the castle, for he had neither foot nor strength to stand on the ground; for he had sixteen great wounds, and one of them in particular was likely to be his death.
