Chapter 37: How Queen Morgan le Fay kept Alisander in her castle, and how she healed his wounds

Then Queen Morgan le Fay examined his wounds, and gave him such an ointment that he was likely to have died of it. And in the morning, when she came to him, he complained bitterly of the pain; and then she put other ointments on him, and then he was out of his pain. Then the damsel of the castle came, and said to Morgan le Fay, "I beg you, help me so that this knight will marry me, for he has won me with his own hands."

"You shall see," said Morgan le Fay, "what I will say."

Then Morgan le Fay went to Alisander, and told him that whatever happened he should refuse this lady "if she asks to marry you, for she is not for you."

So the damsel came and asked him to marry her.

"Damsel," said Orphelin, "I thank you, but as yet I have no mind to marry in this country."

"Sir," she said, "since you will not marry me, I beg you, seeing that you have won me, to give me to a knight of this country who has been my friend, and has loved me for many years."

"With all my heart," said Alisander. "I will agree to that."

Then the knight was sent for; his name was Gerine le Grose. And at once he betrothed them, and married them.

Then Queen Morgan le Fay came to Alisander, and told him to get up, and put him in a horse-litter, and gave him such a drink that for three days and three nights he never woke, but slept; and so she brought him to her own castle, which at that time was called La Beale Regard. Then Morgan le Fay came to Alisander, and asked him if he would like to be well.

"Who would be sick," said Alisander, "if he could be well?"

"Well," said Morgan le Fay, "then you shall promise me by your knighthood that for a twelvemonth and a day from today you will not go beyond the bounds of this castle, and without doubt you shall soon be well."

"I agree," said Sir Alisander.

And there he made her a promise, and then he was soon well. And when Alisander was well, then he regretted his oath, for he could not be revenged on King Mark. Just then there came a damsel who was a cousin of the Earl of Pase, and she was also a cousin of Morgan le Fay. And by right that castle of La Beale Regard should have been hers by true inheritance. So this damsel came into the castle where Alisander lay, and there she found him on his bed, exceedingly downcast and all gloomy.
