Chapter 38: How Alisander was freed from Queen Morgan le Fay with the help of a damsel

"Sir knight," said the damsel, "if you would cheer up, I could tell you good news."

"It would be well with me," said Alisander, "if I could hear some good news, for now I stand here a prisoner by my own promise."

"Sir," she said, "you may be sure that you are a prisoner, and worse off than you think; for my lady, my cousin Queen Morgan le Fay, keeps you here for no other purpose than to have her pleasure of you when she feels like it."

"O Jesus defend me," said Alisander, "from such pleasure! For I would rather cut off my own privates than give her pleasure of that kind."

"As Jesus help me," said the damsel, "if you would love me and be guided by me, I will get you free with your honour intact."

"Tell me how," said Alisander, "and you shall have my love."

"Fair knight," she said, "this castle ought by right to be mine, and I have an uncle who is a mighty earl, the Earl of Pase, and of all people he hates Morgan le Fay most; and I will send to him and beg him for my sake to destroy this castle for the evil customs that are kept in it; and then he will come and set wildfire in every part of the castle, and I will get you out by a secret back gate, and there you shall have your horse and your armour."

"Well said, damsel," said Alisander.

And then she said, "You can keep to the ground of this castle for this twelvemonth and a day, and then you will not break your oath."

"Truly, fair damsel," said Alisander, "what you say is true."

And then he kissed her, and gave her pleasure, as it pleased them both, at times and at their leisure.

So at once she sent to her uncle and asked him to come and destroy that castle, for, as the book says, he would have destroyed that castle before, if it had not been for that damsel. When the earl understood her letters, he sent her word back that on such and such a day he would come and destroy that castle. So when that day came, she showed Alisander a back gate through which he was to escape into a garden, and there he would find his armour and his horse. When the appointed day came, the Earl of Pase came there with four hundred knights, and set fire to every part of the castle, so that before they stopped they had not left one stone standing. And all the while the fire was in the castle, he waited in the garden. And when the fire was over, he had it proclaimed that he would hold that piece of ground where the castle of La Beale Regard had stood for a twelvemonth and a day, against all knights who might come.

So it happened that there was a duke called Ansirus, and he was of Sir Lancelot's kin. And this knight was a great pilgrim, for every third year he would be at Jerusalem. And because all his life he made a habit of going on pilgrimage, people called him Duke Ansirus the Pilgrim. And this duke had a daughter called Alice, who was an exceedingly beautiful woman, and because of her father she was called Alice la Beale Pilgrim, the Fair Pilgrim. And as soon as she heard of this proclamation she went to Arthur's court, and said openly, in the hearing of many knights, that whatever knight could overcome the knight who held that piece of ground should have her and all her lands.

When the knights of the Round Table heard her say this, many of them were glad, for she was exceedingly beautiful and had great rents. Then she had it proclaimed in castles and towns on her side, just as fast as Alisander did on his side. Then she pitched her tent right beside the piece of ground that Alisander held. And she was no sooner there than a knight of Arthur's court came, who was called Sagramore le Desirous, and he offered to joust with Alisander; and they met, and Sagramore le Desirous broke his spear on Sir Alisander, but Sir Alisander struck him so hard that he was put out of his saddle. And when the fair Alice saw him joust so well, she thought him an exceedingly handsome knight on horseback. And then she leapt out of her tent, and took Sir Alisander by the bridle, and this is what she said: "Fair knight, I ask you by your knighthood, show me your face."

"I am not afraid," said Alisander, "to show my face."

And then he took off his helm; and when she saw his face, she said, "O sweet Jesus, you I must love, and never any other!"

"Then show me your face," he said.
