Chapter 39: How Alisander met Alice la Beale Pilgrim, and how he jousted with two knights, and afterwards of him and Sir Mordred

Then she took the veil from her face. And when he saw her, he said, "Here I have found my love and my lady! Truly, fair lady," he said, "I promise you to be your knight, and no one else's who draws breath."

"Now, noble knight," she said, "tell me your name."

"My name," he said, "is Alisander le Orphelin. Now, damsel, tell me your name," he said.

"My name," she said, "is Alice la Beale Pilgrim. And when we are more at our hearts' ease, both you and I shall tell each other what blood we come from."

So there was great love between them. And as they were talking, there came a knight called Harsouse le Berbuse, and asked to break some of Sir Alisander's spears. Then Sir Alisander met him, and at the first encounter Sir Alisander struck him over his horse's rump. And then there came another knight called Sir Hewgon, and Sir Alisander struck him down as he had the other. Then Sir Hewgon offered to do battle on foot. Sir Alisander overcame him with three strokes, and would have killed him there if he had not yielded. So then Alisander made both those knights swear to wear no armour for a twelvemonth and a day.

Then Sir Alisander dismounted, and went to rest and refresh himself. Then the damsel who had helped Sir Alisander out of the castle, in her merriment, told Alice the whole story, how he had been a prisoner in the castle of La Beale Regard, and there she told her how she got him out of prison.

"Sir," said Alice la Beale Pilgrim, "it seems to me you are much indebted to this maiden."

"That is true," said Sir Alisander.

And there Alice told him what blood she came from. "Sir, you may be sure," she said, "that I am of the blood of King Ban, who was the father of Sir Lancelot."

"Truly, fair lady," said Alisander, "my mother told me that my father was a king's brother, and that I am a close cousin of Sir Tristram."

Then at this point there came three knights, one called Vains, and the second called Harvis de les Marches, and the third called Perin de la Montaine. And with one spear Sir Alisander struck all three of them down, and gave them such falls that they had no wish to fight on foot. So he made them swear to wear no arms for a twelvemonth. So when they had gone, Sir Alisander gazed at his lady Alice on horseback as he stood in her tent. And then he was so enamoured of her that he did not know whether he was on horseback or on foot.

Just then the false knight Sir Mordred came, and saw that Sir Alisander was besotted with his lady; and with that he took his horse by the bridle, and led him here and there, and had planned to lead him out of that place to shame him. When the damsel who had helped him out of that castle saw how shamefully he was being led, she at once had herself armed, and put a shield on her shoulder; and with that she mounted his horse, and took a naked sword in her hand, and she drove at Alisander with all her might, and she gave him such a blow that he thought the fire flew out of his eyes. And when Alisander felt that stroke, he looked around him, and drew his sword. And when she saw that, she fled, and so did Mordred, into the forest, and the damsel fled into the tent. So when Alisander understood for himself how the false knight would have shamed him, if it had not been for the damsel, then he was angry with himself that Sir Mordred had escaped his hands like that. But then Sir Alisander and Alice had a good laugh over the damsel, and how hard she had hit him on the helm.

Then Sir Alisander jousted like this day after day, and on foot he fought many battles with many knights of King Arthur's court, and with many strange knights. So to tell all the battles he fought would be too much to recount, for every day within that twelvemonth he fought with one knight or another, and some days he fought with three or four; and there was never a knight who got the better of him. And at the twelvemonth's end he left with his lady, Alice la Beale Pilgrim. And the damsel would never leave him, and so they went into their own country of Benwick, and lived there in great joy.
