Chapter 40: How Sir Galahalt had a joust proclaimed in Surluse, where Queen Guinevere's knights would joust against all comers

But as the book says, King Mark would never stop until he had killed him by treason. And by Alice he had a son who was called Bellangere le Beuse. And by good fortune he came to the court of King Arthur, and proved an exceedingly good knight; and he avenged his father's death, for the false King Mark killed both Sir Tristram and Alisander, falsely and treacherously. And it so happened that Alisander never had the grace or the fortune to come to King Arthur's court. For if he had come to Sir Lancelot, so all the knights who knew him said, he was one of the strongest knights there were in Arthur's days; and great grief was made for him. So we will let him pass, and turn to another tale.

So it happened that Sir Galahalt, the high prince, was lord of the country of Surluse, from which came many good knights. And this noble prince was an exceedingly good man of arms, and he always kept a noble company of knights together. And then he came to Arthur's court and told him his purpose: that it was his wish to have a joust proclaimed in the country of Surluse, which country lay within the lands of King Arthur, and there he asked leave to have the joust proclaimed.

"I give you leave," said King Arthur, "but you may be sure," said King Arthur, "that I cannot be there."

"Sir," said Queen Guinevere, "if it please you, give me leave to be at that joust."

"With right good will," said Arthur, "for Sir Galahalt, the high prince, shall have you in his keeping."

"Sir," said Galahalt, "I will do as you wish."

"Sir," then said the queen, "I will take with me Sir Lancelot, and whatever knights please me best."

"Do as you like," said King Arthur.

So at once she commanded Sir Lancelot to make himself ready, with such knights as he thought best.

So in every good town and castle of this land a proclamation was made, that in the country of Surluse Sir Galahalt would hold a joust that would last eight days, and that the high prince, with the help of Queen Guinevere's knights, would joust against all kinds of men who cared to come. When this proclamation was known, kings and princes, dukes and earls, barons and noble knights made themselves ready to be at that joust. And on the day of the jousting Sir Dinadan came in disguised, and did many great deeds of arms.
