Chapter 41: How Sir Lancelot fought in the tournament, and how Sir Palomides fought there for the sake of a damsel

Then, at the request of Queen Guinevere and of King Bagdemagus, Sir Lancelot came into the lists; but he was disguised, and that was why few people knew him. And there Sir Ector de Maris, his own brother, met him, and each broke his spear on the other right down to the hand. And then each of them got another spear. And then Sir Lancelot struck down Sir Ector de Maris, his own brother. Sir Bleoberis saw that, and he gave Sir Lancelot such a blow on the helm that he hardly knew where he was. Then Sir Lancelot was angry, and struck Sir Bleoberis so hard on the helm that his head bowed down backwards. And he struck him another blow, so that he was knocked clean out of his saddle; and so he rode by, and pushed on into the thickest of the fight. When the King of North Wales saw Sir Ector and Bleoberis lying on the ground, he was angry, for they had come in on his side against the men of Surluse. So the King of North Wales charged at Sir Lancelot and broke a spear on him all to pieces. With that Sir Lancelot caught up with the King of North Wales and gave him such a blow on the helm with his sword that he made him get clear of his horse; and at once the king was horsed again. So the party of King Bagdemagus and the party of the King of North Wales crashed into each other, and then a hard fight began; but the men of North Wales were far stronger.

When Sir Lancelot saw his side getting the worst of it, he pushed his way into the thick of the fighting with a sword in his hand; and there he struck down knights on the right hand and on the left, and pulled down knights and tore off their helms, so that everyone wondered that one knight could ever do such deeds of arms. When Sir Meliagaunce, who was the son of King Bagdemagus, saw how Sir Lancelot was faring, he marvelled greatly. And when he understood that it was he, he knew well that he was disguised on his account. Then Sir Meliagaunce asked a knight to kill Sir Lancelot's horse, either with a sword or with a spear. At that time King Bagdemagus met a knight called Sauseise, a good knight, to whom he said, "Now, fair Sauseise, meet my son Meliagaunce and give him a generous payment, for I wish he were well beaten by your hands, so that he might leave this field."

And then Sir Sauseise met Sir Meliagaunce, and each struck the other down. And then they fought on foot, and there Sauseise would have beaten Sir Meliagaunce, if a rescue had not come. So then the high prince sounded the end of the day, and every knight took off his armour and went to the great feast.

Meanwhile a damsel came to the high prince and complained that there was a knight called Goneries who kept all her lands from her. The knight was there present, and he threw down his glove to her, or to anyone who would fight in her name. So the damsel took up the glove very sorrowfully, for want of a champion. Then a young servant came to her and said, "Damsel, will you do as I tell you?"

"Very gladly," said the damsel.

"Then go to a certain knight who is lodging near here in a hermitage, and who follows the Questing Beast, and ask him to take the battle on himself; and I am sure he will grant it to you at once."

So at once she took her palfrey, and within a while she found that knight, and it was Sir Palomides. And when she asked him, he armed himself and rode with her, and made her go to the high prince and ask leave for her knight to do battle.

"Gladly," said the high prince.

Then the knights were ready in the field to joust on horseback; and each got a spear in his hand, and they met so fiercely that their spears shivered all to pieces. Then they snatched out their swords, and Sir Palomides struck Sir Goneries down to the earth. And then he tore off his helm and struck off his head. Then they went to supper, and the damsel loved Palomides as her lover, but the book says she was of his kin. So then Palomides disguised himself in this manner: on his shield he bore the Questing Beast, and on all his trappings too. And when he was ready in this way, he sent to the high prince to give him leave to joust with other knights; but he was afraid of Sir Lancelot. The high prince sent him word back that he would be welcome, and that Sir Lancelot would not joust with him. Then Sir Galahalt, the high prince, had it proclaimed that whatever knight struck down Sir Palomides should have his damsel for himself.
