Chapter 42: How Sir Galahalt and Palomides fought each other, and of Sir Dinadan and Sir Galahalt

Here begins the second day. As soon as Sir Palomides came into the field, Sir Galahalt, the high prince, was at the end of the lists, and he met Sir Palomides, and Palomides him, with great spears. And they came together so hard that their spears shivered all to pieces; but Sir Galahalt struck him so hard that he bent him backwards over his horse, and yet he did not lose his stirrups. Then they drew their swords and laid into each other with many heavy blows, so that many honourable knights left what they were doing to watch them. But at last Sir Galahalt, the high prince, struck a mighty stroke at Palomides, hard upon the helm; but the helm was so hard that the sword could not bite, but slipped and struck off the head of Sir Palomides' horse. When the high prince knew and saw the good knight fall to the earth, he was ashamed of that stroke. And with that he got down off his own horse, and begged the good knight Palomides to take that horse as his gift, and to forgive him that deed.

"Sir," said Palomides, "I thank you for your great goodness, for from a man of honour a knight will never have dishonour."

And so he mounted that horse, and the high prince had another at once.

"Now," said the high prince, "I give up that maiden to you, for you have won her."

"Ah," said Palomides, "the damsel and I are both at your command."

So they parted, and Sir Galahalt did great deeds of arms. And just then Dinadan came and met Sir Galahalt, and they came at each other so hard with their spears that their spears broke right down to their hands. But Dinadan had expected the high prince to be more tired than he was. And then he struck many heavy blows at the high prince; but when Dinadan saw that he could not get him to the ground, he said, "My lord, please leave me alone, and take someone else."

The high prince did not know it was Dinadan, and let him go graciously because of his fair words. And so they parted; but soon someone came and told the high prince that it was Dinadan.

"Truly," said the prince, "I am sorry that he has got away from me like that, for now I shall never hear the end of his mocking and his jokes."

And then Galahalt rode fast after him, and called to him, "Stop, Dinadan, for King Arthur's sake!"

"No," said Dinadan, "so God help me, we are not meeting again today."

Then, in that anger, the high prince met Meliagaunce, and he struck him in the throat, so that if he had fallen his neck would have been broken; and with the same spear he struck down another knight. Then the men of North Wales and many strangers came in, and they were close to getting the better of the men of Surluse, for Sir Galahalt, the high prince, always had a great deal on his hands. So then the good knight Semound the Valiant came, with forty knights, and he drove them all back. Then Queen Guinevere and Sir Lancelot had the end of the day sounded, and every knight took off his armour and made ready for the feast.
