Chapter 44: Of the third day, and how Sir Palomides jousted with Sir Lamorak, and other things

Now begins the third day of the jousting; and on that day King Bagdemagus made himself ready; and against him came King Marsil, who held an island as a gift from Sir Galahalt the high prince; and this island was called Pomitain. Then it happened that King Bagdemagus and King Marsil of Pomitain met with spears, and King Marsil took such a blow that he fell over his horse's rump. Then a knight of King Marsil's came in to avenge his lord, and King Bagdemagus struck him down, horse and man, to the earth. So there came an earl who was called Arrouse, and Sir Breuse, and a hundred knights of Pomitain with them, and the King of North Wales was with them; and all these were against the men of Surluse. And then a great battle began, and many knights were thrown under the horses' feet. And King Bagdemagus always did best, for he began first, and he always kept on. Gaheris, Gawain's brother, kept striking at King Bagdemagus' face; and at last King Bagdemagus hurled Gaheris down, horse and man.

Then by chance Sir Palomides, the good knight, met Sir Blamore de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis' brother. And each struck the other with great spears, so that both horses and knights fell to the earth. But Sir Blamore had such a fall that he almost broke his neck, for the blood burst out at his nose, his mouth and his ears; but in the end he recovered well, thanks to good surgeons. Then Duke Chaleins of Clarance came in; and under his command came a knight called Elis la Noire; and King Bagdemagus met him and struck Elis so that he made him leave his saddle. So Duke Chaleins of Clarance did great deeds of arms there, and for all that he came in so late on the third day, no man did as well as he except King Bagdemagus and Sir Palomides; and the prize that day was given to King Bagdemagus. And then they sounded the end of the day, and took off their armour, and went to the feast. Just then Dinadan came, and mocked and joked with King Bagdemagus until all the knights laughed at him; for he was a fine joker, and dearly loved all good knights.

So as soon as they had dined, a young servant came carrying four spears on his back; and he came to Palomides and said this: "There is a knight nearby who has sent you the choice of four spears, and asks you, for your lady's sake, to take one half of these spears and joust with him in the field."

"Tell him," said Palomides, "that I will not fail him."

When Sir Galahalt knew of this, he told Palomides to make himself ready. So Queen Guinevere, the high prince and Sir Lancelot were seated on the stands to judge these two knights. Then Sir Palomides and the strange knight ran at each other so eagerly that their spears broke right down to their hands. At once each of them took a great spear in his hand, and they shivered them all to pieces. And then each took a greater spear, and then the knight struck Sir Palomides down, horse and man, to the earth. And as he was passing over him, the strange knight's horse stumbled and fell down on Palomides. Then they drew their swords and laid into each other wonderfully hard for a long while.

Then the high prince and Sir Lancelot said they had never seen two knights fight better than they did; but the strange knight kept doubling his strokes, and drove Palomides back. With that the high prince cried, "Ho!" and then they went to their lodging. And when they had taken off their armour, they knew it was the noble knight Sir Lamorak. When Sir Lancelot knew it was Sir Lamorak, he made much of him, for above all men on earth he loved him best, except Sir Tristram. Then Queen Guinevere praised him, and so all the other good knights made much of him, except Sir Gawain's brothers. Then Queen Guinevere said to Sir Lancelot, "Sir, I ask you, if you joust any more, that you joust with none of the blood of my lord Arthur."

So he promised he would not, at least for that time.
