Chapter 45: Of the fourth day, and of many great feats of arms

Here begins the fourth day. Then the King with the Hundred Knights came into the field, and all the men of North Wales, and Duke Chaleins of Clarance, and King Marsil of Pomitain; and there came Safere, Palomides' brother, and there he told him news of his mother. And his name was called the Earl, and so he accused him before King Arthur: "For he made war on our father and mother, and there I killed him in open battle."

So they went into the field, and the damsel with them; and against them came Sir Bleoberis de Ganis and Sir Ector de Maris. Sir Palomides met Sir Bleoberis, and each struck the other down. And in the same way did Sir Safere and Sir Ector, and the two pairs fought on foot. Then Sir Lamorak came in, and he met the King with the Hundred Knights and struck him clean over his horse's tail. And in the same way he served the King of North Wales, and he also struck down King Marsil. And so, before ever he stopped, he struck down thirty knights with his spear and his sword. When Duke Chaleins saw Lamorak do such great feats, he would not meddle with him, for shame; and then he charged all his knights on pain of death: "None of you touch him; for it would be a shame to all good knights if that knight were shamed."

Then the two kings gathered their men together, and they all set upon Sir Lamorak; and he did not fail them, but rushed here and there, striking on the right hand and on the left, and tore off many helms, so that the high prince and Queen Guinevere said they had never seen a knight do such deeds of arms on horseback.

"Alas," said Lancelot to King Bagdemagus, "I will arm myself and help Sir Lamorak."

"And I will ride with you," said King Bagdemagus.

And when the two of them were mounted they came to Sir Lamorak, who stood among thirty knights; and happy was the man who could reach him with a blow, and he always struck back mightily. Then Sir Lancelot came into the thick of the fighting, and he threw down Sir Mador de la Porte. And with the broken shaft of that spear he threw down many knights. And King Bagdemagus struck on the left hand and on the right marvellously well. And then the three kings fell back. With that Sir Galahalt had the end of the day sounded, and all the heralds gave Sir Lamorak the prize. And all this while Palomides, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Safere and Sir Ector fought on foot; there were never four knights more evenly matched. And then they were parted, and taken to their lodging, and took off their armour, and so they went to the great feast.

But when Sir Lamorak had come into the court, Queen Guinevere took him in her arms and said, "Sir, you have done well this day."

Then the high prince came, and he rejoiced greatly over him, and so did Dinadan, for he wept for joy; but the joy that Sir Lancelot made over Sir Lamorak there no man could tell. Then they went to rest, and in the morning the high prince had the trumpets sound for the field.
