Chapter 46: Of the fifth day, and how Sir Lamorak bore himself

Here begins the fifth day. So it happened that Sir Palomides came out in the morning and offered to joust where King Arthur was, in a castle near Surluse; and there an honourable duke met him, and there Sir Palomides struck him over his horse's rump. And this duke was King Arthur's uncle. Then Sir Elise's son rode at Palomides, and Palomides served Elise the same way. When Sir Uwain saw this he was angry. Then he took his horse and met Sir Palomides, and Palomides struck him so hard that he went to the earth, horse and man. And to cut a long story short, he struck down three of Sir Gawain's brothers, that is to say Mordred, Gaheris and Agravain.

"O Jesus," said Arthur, "this is a great insult, that a Saracen should strike down my blood."

And with that King Arthur was mad with rage, and meant to make himself ready to joust. Sir Lamorak saw that, that Arthur and his blood were beaten; and at once he was ready, and asked Palomides if he would joust any more.

"Why shouldn't I?" said Palomides.

Then they crashed together, and broke their spears, and shivered them all to pieces, so that the whole castle rang with their blows. Then each got a greater spear in his hand, and they came together so fiercely; but Sir Palomides' spear burst all to pieces, and Sir Lamorak's held. With that Sir Palomides lost his stirrups and lay stretched out flat on his horse's back. And then Sir Palomides turned back and took his damsel, and Sir Safere went his way.

So, when he had gone, King Arthur came to Sir Lamorak and thanked him for his goodness, and begged him to tell him his name.

"Sir," said Lamorak, "you may be sure I owe you my service, but at this time I will not stay here, for I see many of my enemies about me."

"Alas," said Arthur, "now I know well that it is Sir Lamorak de Galis. O Lamorak, stay with me, and by my crown I shall never fail you; and let Gawain not dare, on his head, nor any of his brothers, to do you any wrong."

"Sir," said Sir Lamorak, "they have done me wrong, and you too."

"That is true," said the king, "for they killed their own mother, my sister, which grieves me sorely. It would have been much fairer and better if you had married her, for you are a king's son as well as they are."

"O Jesus," said the noble knight Sir Lamorak to Arthur, "I shall never forget her death. I promise you, and I swear it to God, I shall avenge her death as soon as I see a fitting time. And if it were not out of reverence for your highness, I would already have been avenged on Sir Gawain and his brothers."

"Truly," said Arthur, "I will make peace between you."

"Sir," said Lamorak, "at this time I cannot stay with you, for I must go to the jousts, where Sir Lancelot is, and the high prince Sir Galahalt."

Now there was a damsel who was the daughter of King Bandes. And there was a Saracen knight called Corsabrin, and he loved the damsel, and he would on no account allow her to be married; for this Corsabrin was always spreading rumours about her, and giving out that she was out of her mind; and in this way he kept her from being married.
