Chapter 47: How Sir Palomides fought with Corsabrin over a lady, and how Palomides slew Corsabrin

So by chance this damsel heard tell that Palomides did much for damsels' sake; so she sent him a pennon, a small streamer for his spear, and begged him to fight Sir Corsabrin for her love, and he should have her, and the lands of her father's that would come to her. Then the damsel sent to Corsabrin and told him to go to Sir Palomides, who was a pagan as well as he; and she warned him that she had sent Palomides her pennon, and that if he could overcome Palomides she would marry him. When Corsabrin knew what she had done, he was mad with rage and anger, and rode to Surluse, where the high prince was, and there he found Sir Palomides ready, and he had the pennon. So there they pledged battle with each other before Galahalt.

"Well," said the high prince, "today noble knights must joust, and after dinner we shall see how you can fare."

Then they sounded for the jousts; and in came Dinadan, and met Sir Gerin, a good knight, and he threw him down over his horse's rump; and Sir Dinadan overthrew four more knights; and there he did great deeds of arms, for he was a good knight, but he was a scoffer and a joker, and the merriest knight in company who was living at that time. And he had this way about him, that he loved every good knight, and every good knight loved him back. So then, when the high prince saw Dinadan do so well, he sent to Sir Lancelot and told him to strike down Sir Dinadan: "And when you have done so, bring him before me and the noble Queen Guinevere."

Then Sir Lancelot did as he was asked. Then he and Sir Lamorak struck down many knights, and tore off helms, and drove all the knights before them. And so Sir Lancelot struck down Sir Dinadan, and had his men unarm him, and so brought him to the queen and the high prince, and they laughed at Dinadan so hard that they could not stand.

"Well," said Sir Dinadan, "I'm still not ashamed, for it was that old rascal Sir Lancelot who struck me down."

So they went to dinner, and the whole court had good sport with Dinadan.

Then, when dinner was done, they sounded for the field, to watch Sir Palomides and Corsabrin. Sir Palomides planted his pennon in the middle of the field; and then they crashed together with their spears like thunder, and each struck the other to the earth. And then they pulled out their swords, and set their shields, and laid into each other mightily, as mighty knights, so that there was hardly a piece of armour that would hold on them; for this Corsabrin was an exceedingly cruel knight.

"Corsabrin," said Palomides, "will you give up that damsel over there to me, and the pennon?"

Then Corsabrin was angry beyond measure, and gave Palomides such a blow that he went down on one knee. Then Palomides got up quickly, and struck him on the helm so that he fell flat to the earth. And with that he tore off his helm and said, "Corsabrin, yield, or you will die by my hands."

"Shame on you," said Corsabrin. "Do your worst."

Then he struck off his head. And with that there came such a stink from his body, when the soul left it, that nobody could stand the smell. So the corpse was taken away and buried in a wood, because he was a pagan. Then they sounded the end of the day, and Palomides took off his armour.

Then he went to Queen Guinevere, to the high prince and to Sir Lancelot.

"Sir," said the high prince, "today you have seen a great miracle in Corsabrin, what a smell there was when the soul left the body. So, sir, we would ask you to take baptism upon you, and I promise you all knights will think the more of you, and speak the more of your honour."

"Sir," said Palomides, "I want you all to know that I came into this land to be christened, and in my heart I am christened, and christened I will be. But I have made such a vow that I may not be christened until I have fought seven true battles for Jesus' sake, and then I will be christened; and I trust God will accept my intent, for I mean it truly."

Then Sir Palomides asked Queen Guinevere and the high prince to have supper with him. And so they did, and Sir Lancelot and Sir Lamorak too, and many other good knights. So in the morning they heard their mass, and the trumpets sounded for the field, and then the knights made themselves ready.
