Chapter 48: Of the sixth day, and what was done then

Here begins the sixth day. Then Sir Gaheris came in, and Sir Ossaise of Surluse met him there, and Sir Gaheris struck him over his horse's rump. And then each side charged the other, and many spears were broken there, and many knights thrown under the horses' feet. So then Sir Durnore and Sir Aglovale came in, who were brothers of Sir Lamorak, and they met two other knights, and each pair struck each other so hard that all four knights and their horses fell to the earth. When Sir Lamorak saw his two brothers down he was angry beyond measure; and then he got a great spear in his hand, and with it he struck down four good knights, and then his spear broke. Then he pulled out his sword, and struck about him on the right hand and on the left, and tore off helms and pulled down knights, so that everyone marvelled at such deeds of arms as he did; for he carried on so that many knights fled. Then he put his brothers back on their horses, and said, "Brothers, you ought to be ashamed to fall off your horses like that! What is a knight, except when he is on horseback? I think nothing of a knight when he is on foot, for all battles on foot are no better than plunderers' brawls. For no knight should fight on foot unless it is for treason, or else he is driven to it by force; so, brothers, sit tight on your horses, or else never fight again in front of me."

With that Duke Chaleins of Clarance came in, and the Earl Ulbawes of Surluse met him, and each of them struck the other down. Then the knights of both sides put their lords back on their horses; for Sir Ector and Bleoberis were on foot, attending on Duke Chaleins. And the King with the Hundred Knights was with the Earl Ulbawes. With that Gaheris came and laid into the King with the Hundred Knights, and he into him. Then Duke Chaleins came and parted them.

Then they sounded the end of the day, and the knights took off their armour and went to their dinner; and in the middle of their dinner in came Dinadan and began to make fun of everyone. Then he looked at the high prince, who seemed angry over some fault he had found; for it was his way that he loved no fish, and because he had been served fish, which he hated, he was not cheerful. When Sir Dinadan had noticed the high prince, he spotted a fish with a great head, and he got it between two dishes and served the high prince with that fish. And then he said this: "Sir Galahalt, I may well compare you to a wolf, for a wolf will never eat fish, only meat."

Then the high prince laughed at his words.

"Well, well," said Dinadan to Lancelot, "what the devil are you doing in this country? For no ordinary knight can win any honour here because of you."

"Sir Dinadan," said Lancelot, "I promise you I shall never meet you again, nor that great spear of yours, for I can't stay in my saddle when that spear hits me. And if I have any luck, I shall keep well clear of that big rough body you carry around."

"Well," said Dinadan, "keep a good lookout always. God forbid that we ever meet, unless it is over a dish of meat."

Then the queen and the high prince laughed so hard that they could not sit at their table; and so they made great merriment until the morning, and then they heard mass, and the trumpets sounded for the field. And Queen Guinevere and all the great lords were seated, and judges in full armour with their shields, to see fair play.
