Chapter 49: Of the seventh battle, and how Sir Lancelot, disguised as a maiden, struck down Sir Dinadan

Now begins the seventh battle. Duke Cambines came in, and Sir Aristance, who was reckoned a good knight, met him there, and they met so hard that each bore the other down, horse and man. Then the Earl of Lambaile came and helped the duke back on his horse. Then Sir Ossaise of Surluse came, and he struck the Earl of Lambaile down from his horse. Then they began to do great deeds of arms, and many spears were broken, and many knights were thrown to the earth. Then the King of North Wales and the Earl Ulbawes struck each other so hard that all the judges thought it was like to be the death of them. Meanwhile Queen Guinevere, and the high prince, and Sir Lancelot made Sir Dinadan get ready to joust there.

"I would ride into the field," said Dinadan, "but then one of you two will meet me."

"By God," said the high prince, "you can see how we sit here as judges with our shields, and you can always look and see whether we are sitting here or not."

So Sir Dinadan left and took his horse, and met many knights, and did exceedingly well. And when he had gone, Sir Lancelot disguised himself, and put a maiden's gown over his armour, freshly dressed up. Then Sir Lancelot had Sir Galihodin lead him through the lists, and everyone wondered what damsel it was. And so, as Sir Dinadan came into the lists, Sir Lancelot, in the damsel's dress, got Galihodin's spear and charged at Sir Dinadan. And all the while Sir Dinadan kept looking up at the place where Sir Lancelot had been, and he saw someone sitting armed in Sir Lancelot's place. But when Dinadan saw a sort of damsel, he was afraid it might be Sir Lancelot in disguise; but Sir Lancelot came at him so fast that he struck him over his horse's rump. And then, with great mockery, they got Sir Dinadan into the forest nearby, and there they stripped him down to his shirt, and put a woman's gown on him, and so brought him into the field; and so they sounded the end of the day. And every knight went and took off his armour. Then Sir Dinadan was brought in among them all. And when Queen Guinevere saw Sir Dinadan brought in among them all like that, she laughed until she fell down, and so did everyone who was there.

"Well," said Dinadan to Lancelot, "you are such a cheat that I can never be on my guard against you."

Then by general agreement they gave Sir Lancelot the prize; the next was Sir Lamorak de Galis, the third was Sir Palomides, the fourth was King Bagdemagus. So these four knights had the prize, and there was great joy, and great splendour in all the court.

And in the morning Queen Guinevere and Sir Lancelot went back to King Arthur; but Sir Lamorak would on no account go with them.

"I will undertake," said Sir Lancelot, "that if you will come with us, King Arthur shall order Sir Gawain and his brothers never to do you harm."

"As for that," said Sir Lamorak, "I will not trust Sir Gawain nor any of his brothers. And you may be sure, Sir Lancelot, that if it were not for my lord King Arthur's sake, I would be a match for Sir Gawain and his brothers well enough. But as for saying that I should trust them, that I never shall; and so I ask you to commend me to my lord Arthur, and to all my lords of the Round Table. And wherever I may come, I shall do you service to the best of my power. And, sir, it was only lately that I avenged that, when my lord Arthur's kin were put to the worse by Sir Palomides."

Then Sir Lamorak parted from Sir Lancelot, and each of them wept at their parting.
