Chapter 50: How Sir Tristram was treacherously lured to a tournament to be killed there, and how he was thrown into prison

Now we turn from this matter and speak of Sir Tristram, whom this book is chiefly about, and we leave the king and the queen, Sir Lancelot and Sir Lamorak. And here begins the treason of King Mark, which he plotted against Sir Tristram. A great tournament and jousts were proclaimed along the coasts of Cornwall, and it was all done by Sir Galahalt the high prince and King Bagdemagus, with the intent of killing Lancelot, or else utterly destroying and shaming him; because Sir Lancelot always won the higher prize, this prince and this king held this joust against Sir Lancelot. And so their plan was revealed to King Mark, at which he was very glad.

Then King Mark thought he would have Sir Tristram come to that tournament disguised, so that no man would know him, with the intent that the high prince would think Sir Tristram was Sir Lancelot. So Sir Tristram came in at these jousts. And at that time Sir Lancelot was not there; but when they saw a disguised knight do such deeds of arms, they thought it was Sir Lancelot. And King Mark in particular said plainly that it was Sir Lancelot. Then they set upon him, both King Bagdemagus and the high prince and their knights, so that it was a wonder that Sir Tristram could ever endure that pain. Nevertheless, for all the pain he had, Sir Tristram won the prize at that tournament; and there he hurt many knights and bruised them, and they hurt him and bruised him wonderfully badly. So when the jousts were all over, they knew well that it was Sir Tristram de Liones; and all who were on King Mark's side were glad that Sir Tristram was hurt, and the rest were sorry for his hurt; for Sir Tristram was not so hated within the realm of England as Sir Lancelot was.

Then King Mark came to Sir Tristram and said, "Fair nephew, I am sorry for your hurts."

"Many thanks, my lord," said Sir Tristram.

Then King Mark had Sir Tristram put in a horse-litter, as a great sign of love, and said, "Fair cousin, I will be your doctor myself."

And so he rode off with Sir Tristram, and brought him to a castle while it was still daylight. And then King Mark had Sir Tristram eat. And then afterwards he gave him a drink, and as soon as he had drunk it he fell asleep. And when it was night, he had him carried to another castle, and there he put him in a strong prison, and there he appointed a man and a woman to give him his food and drink. So there he stayed a long while.

Then Sir Tristram was missed, and no one knew what had become of him. When Isolde the Fair heard how he was missing, she went secretly to Sir Sadok and begged him to find out where Sir Tristram was. Then, when Sadok knew how Sir Tristram was missing, he soon found out that he had been put in prison by King Mark and the traitors of Magouns. Then Sadok and two of his cousins lay in ambush, in arms, close by the castle of Tintagil. And as fortune would have it, King Mark came riding by with four of his nephews, and some of the traitors of Magouns. When Sir Sadok saw them, he broke out of the ambush and set upon them there. And when King Mark saw Sir Sadok, he fled as fast as he could; and there Sir Sadok killed all four of King Mark's nephews. But these traitors of Magouns killed one of Sadok's cousins with a great wound in the neck; but Sadok struck the other dead. Then Sir Sadok rode on his way to a castle that was called Liones, and there he found out about the treason and villainy of King Mark. So the men of that castle rode with Sir Sadok until they came to a castle called Arbray; and there in the town they found Sir Dinas the Seneschal, who was a good knight. But when Sir Sadok had told Sir Dinas all about King Mark's treason, he renounced such a king, and said he would give up the lands he held from him. And when he said these words, all the knights there said as Sir Dinas said. Then, on his advice and on Sir Sadok's, he had all the towns and castles in the country of Liones stocked and armed, and gathered all the people they could muster.
