Chapter 51: How King Mark had letters forged from the Pope, and how Sir Percival freed Sir Tristram from prison

Now we turn to King Mark. When he had escaped from Sir Sadok he rode to the Castle of Tintagil, and there he raised a great cry and clamour, and called to arms everyone who could bear them. Then they searched and found where four of King Mark's cousins lay dead, and the traitor of Magouns. Then the king had them buried in a chapel. Then the king had it proclaimed through all the country that held of him that they should take up arms, for he understood that he had no choice but to go to war. When King Mark heard and understood how Sir Sadok and Sir Dinas had risen in the country of Liones, he turned his mind to wiles and treason. And this is what he did: he had letters made and forged as if from the Pope, and had a clerk who was a stranger bring them to King Mark; and these letters said that King Mark must make himself ready, on pain of excommunication, to come to the Pope with his army, to help go to Jerusalem and make war on the Saracens.

When this clerk had come, as the king had arranged, King Mark at once sent these letters on to Sir Tristram, and told the clerk to say this: that if he would go to war against the unbelievers, he would be let out of prison and have all his power back. When Sir Tristram understood this letter, he said to the clerk, "Ah, King Mark, you have always been a traitor, and you always will be. But, Clerk," said Sir Tristram, "say this to King Mark: since the Apostolic Pope has sent for him, tell him to go there himself. For tell him, traitor king that he is, I will not go at his command, whether I get out of prison or not, for I can see I am well rewarded for my true service."

Then the clerk went back to King Mark, and told him Sir Tristram's answer.

"Well," said King Mark, "he shall be tricked yet."

So he went into his chamber and forged more letters; and these letters said that the Pope wanted Sir Tristram to come himself, to make war on the unbelievers. When the clerk had come back to Sir Tristram and given him these letters, Sir Tristram looked at them, and saw at once that they were King Mark's forgeries.

"Ah," said Sir Tristram, "you have always been false, King Mark, and false you will end."

Then the clerk left Sir Tristram and went back to King Mark.

By then four wounded knights had come into the Castle of Tintagil, and one of them had his neck nearly broken in two. Another had his arm cut off, the third had been run through with a spear, the fourth had his teeth knocked in two. And when they came before King Mark they cried out, "King, why don't you run? The whole country has risen against you!"

Then King Mark was angry beyond measure.

And in the meantime Sir Percival de Galis came into the country to look for Sir Tristram. And when he heard that Sir Tristram was in prison, Sir Percival freed him outright by his knightly skill. And when Sir Tristram was free he rejoiced greatly over Sir Percival, and so did each of them over the other.

Sir Tristram said to Sir Percival, "If you will stay in these borderlands I will ride with you."

"No," said Percival, "I cannot stay in this country, for I must go into Wales."

So Sir Percival left Sir Tristram, and rode straight to King Mark, and told him how he had freed Sir Tristram. And he also told the king that he had done himself great shame in putting Sir Tristram in prison, "for he is now the most renowned knight living in this world. And believe me, the noblest knights in the world love Sir Tristram, and if he makes war on you, you will not be able to hold out against it."

"That is true," said King Mark, "but I cannot love Sir Tristram, because he loves my queen and my wife, Isolde the Fair."

"Ah, shame on you," said Sir Percival, "never say such a thing again. Aren't you Sir Tristram's uncle, and he your nephew? You should never think that so noble a knight as Sir Tristram would do himself so great a dishonour as to take his uncle's wife. All the same," said Sir Percival, "he may love your queen without sin, because she is said to be one of the most beautiful ladies in the world."

Then Sir Percival left King Mark. And when he had gone, King Mark turned his mind to more treason, even though King Mark had promised Sir Percival never, by any means whatever, to harm Sir Tristram. So at once King Mark sent word to Sir Dinas the Seneschal that he should disband all the people he had raised, for he sent him an oath that he would go himself to the Pope of Rome to make war on the unbelievers, "and this is a fairer war than raising the people against your king like this." When Sir Dinas understood that King Mark would go against the unbelievers, Sir Dinas in all haste disbanded all the people. And when the people had gone off, every man to his home, King Mark found out where Sir Tristram was with Isolde the Fair; and there, by treason, King Mark had him seized and put in prison, against the promise he had made to Sir Percival.

When Queen Isolde understood that Sir Tristram was in prison she grieved as much as ever any lady or gentlewoman grieved. Then Sir Tristram sent a letter to Isolde the Fair, and begged her to be his good lady; and if it pleased her to have a ship made ready for her and for him, he would go with her to the realm of Logres, that is, this land. When Isolde the Fair understood Sir Tristram's letter and what he meant, she sent him another, and told him to take heart, for she would have the ship made ready, and everything that was needed.

Then Isolde the Fair sent to Sir Dinas, and to Sadok, and begged them by all means to seize King Mark and put him in prison until she and Sir Tristram had left for the realm of Logres. When Sir Dinas the Seneschal understood King Mark's treason he gave her his promise in return, and sent her word that King Mark would be put in prison. And as they planned it, so it was done. And then Sir Tristram was freed from prison; and at once, in all haste, Queen Isolde and Sir Tristram went and decided whom they would take with them when they left.
