Chapter 52: How Sir Tristram and Isolde the Fair came to England, and how Sir Lancelot brought them to Joyous Gard

Then Isolde the Fair and Sir Tristram took their ship, and came by water into this land. And they had not been four days in this land before a jousting and tournament was proclaimed that King Arthur had ordered. When Sir Tristram heard of that tournament he disguised himself, and Isolde the Fair too, and rode to that tournament. And when he came there he saw many knights jousting and tourneying; and so Sir Tristram took his place on the field, and to cut a long story short, he overthrew fourteen knights of the Round Table. When Sir Lancelot saw these knights overthrown like this, Sir Lancelot squared up to Sir Tristram. Isolde the Fair saw that Sir Lancelot had come onto the field. Then Isolde the Fair sent Sir Lancelot a ring, and let him know that it was Sir Tristram de Liones. When Sir Lancelot understood that it was Sir Tristram he was very glad, and would not joust. Then Sir Lancelot watched where Sir Tristram went, and rode after him; and then each of them rejoiced greatly over the other. And so Sir Lancelot brought Sir Tristram and Isolde the Fair to Joyous Gard, which was his own castle, that he had won with his own hands. And there Sir Lancelot gave it to them to hold as their own. And believe me, that castle was stocked and furnished for a king and a royal queen to stay in. And Sir Lancelot charged all his people to honour them and love them as they would himself.

So Sir Lancelot went off to King Arthur; and then he told Queen Guinevere that the man who had jousted so well at the last tournament was Sir Tristram. And there he told her how Sir Tristram had Isolde the Fair with him in spite of King Mark, and so Queen Guinevere told all this to King Arthur. When King Arthur knew that Sir Tristram had escaped and come away from King Mark, and had brought Isolde the Fair with him, he was exceedingly glad. So because of Sir Tristram King Arthur had it proclaimed that on May Day there would be a jousting before the castle of Lonazep; and that castle was close by Joyous Gard. And this is how Arthur arranged it: that all the knights of this land, and of Cornwall, and of North Wales, would joust against all these countries, Ireland, Scotland and the rest of Wales, and the country of Gore, and Surluse, and Listinoise, and the men of Northumberland, and all those who held lands of Arthur on this side of the sea. When this proclamation was made many knights were glad and many were not.

"Sir," said Lancelot to Arthur, "by this proclamation you have made, you will put us who are around you in great danger, for there are many knights who are bitterly jealous of us. So when we meet on the day of the jousting there will be hard going among us."

"As for that," said Arthur, "I don't care. There we shall prove who is best with his hands."

So when Sir Lancelot understood why King Arthur was holding this jousting, he made such provision that Isolde the Fair could watch the jousts from a private place that was fitting for her rank.

Now we turn to Sir Tristram and Isolde the Fair, and how they took great joy together every day, with every kind of pleasure they could devise. And every day Sir Tristram would go riding out hunting, for at that time Sir Tristram was called the best huntsman in the world, and the finest blower of a horn in every kind of measure. For as the books report, from Sir Tristram came all the good terms of venery and hunting, and all the lengths and measures of blowing a horn; and from him we first had all the terms of hawking, and which were beasts of the chase and which were beasts of venery, and which were vermin, and all the horn calls that belong to every kind of game: first the call for the uncoupling of the hounds, then for the seeking, the rechate (the call that brings the hounds back), the call for the flight, for the death, and the strake, and many other calls and terms, so that every gentleman has reason, to the world's end, to praise Sir Tristram and to pray for his soul.
