Chapter 53: How Sir Tristram, on the advice of Isolde the Fair, rode out in armour, and how he met Sir Palomides

So one day Isolde the Fair said to Sir Tristram, "I am very surprised," she said, "that you don't keep in mind that you are here in a strange country, and there are many dangerous knights here; and you know well that King Mark is full of treason. If you go riding to chase and hunt unarmed like this, you could be killed."

"My fair lady and my love, I beg your pardon. I will not do it any more."

So from then on Sir Tristram rode hunting every day in armour, with his men carrying his shield and his spear. So one day, a little before the month of May, Sir Tristram was chasing a hart exceedingly eagerly, and the hart ran past a fair spring. And then Sir Tristram got down and took off his helmet to drink of that bubbling water. Just then he heard and saw the Questing Beast come to the spring. When Sir Tristram saw that beast he put on his helmet, for he thought he would hear of Sir Palomides, since that beast was his quest. Just then Sir Tristram saw a knight in armour coming, on a noble warhorse, and he greeted him, and they talked of many things; and this knight's name was Breuse Saunce Pité. And just then the noble knight Sir Palomides came up to them, and each greeted the other, and spoke courteously to the other.

"Fair knights," said Sir Palomides, "I can tell you some news."

"What is that?" said those knights.

"Sirs, believe me, King Mark has been put in prison by his own knights, and it was all for love of Sir Tristram. For King Mark had put Sir Tristram in prison twice, and once Sir Percival freed the noble knight Sir Tristram from prison. And the last time Queen Isolde the Fair freed him, and went clean away with him into this realm; and all this while King Mark, the false traitor, is in prison."

"Is this true?" said Palomides. "Then we shall soon hear of Sir Tristram. And as for saying that I love Isolde the Fair as my lady-love, I dare stand by it that I do, and that she has my service above all other ladies, and will have it for the rest of my life."

And just as they stood talking they saw a knight in full armour coming towards them on a great horse, and one of his men carried his shield, and the other his spear. And as soon as that knight saw them he took his shield and his spear and made ready to joust.

"Fair fellows," said Sir Tristram, "there is a knight over there who will joust with us. Let's see which of us shall meet him, for I can see well that he is of King Arthur's court."

"It won't be long before he is met," said Sir Palomides, "for in my quest of this barking beast I never found a knight who wanted to joust that I refused."

"I could follow that beast as well as you," said Breuse Saunce Pité.

"Then you will fight me," said Palomides.

So Sir Palomides squared up to that other knight, Sir Bleoberis, who was a very noble knight, close kin to Sir Lancelot. And they met so hard that Sir Palomides fell to the ground, horse and all.

Then Sir Bleoberis cried aloud, "Get ready, you false traitor knight, Breuse Saunce Pité! For you may be sure I will fight you to the uttermost, for the noble knights and ladies you have falsely betrayed."

When this false knight and traitor, Breuse Saunce Pité, heard him say so, he took his horse by the bridle and fled as fast as ever his horse could run, for he was badly afraid of him. When Sir Bleoberis saw him flee he followed hard after, through thick and through thin. And by chance, as Sir Breuse fled, he saw just ahead of him three knights of the Round Table, of whom the first was called Sir Ector de Maris, the second Sir Percival de Galis, the third Sir Harry le Fise Lake, a good knight and a bold one. And as for Sir Percival, he was called in his time one of the best knights in the world, and the steadiest. When Breuse saw these knights he rode straight up to them, and cried out to them and begged them to rescue him.

"What do you need?" said Sir Ector.

"Ah, fair knights," said Sir Breuse, "the most treacherous knight there is is following me, the most cowardly and the most villainous; his name is Breuse Saunce Pité, and if he can catch me he will kill me without mercy or pity."

"Stay with us," said Sir Percival, "and we will protect you."

Then they caught sight of Sir Bleoberis, who came riding as fast as he could. Then Sir Ector put himself forward to joust ahead of them all. When Sir Bleoberis saw that they were four knights and he only one, he was in doubt whether to turn back or hold his course.

Then he said to himself, "I am a knight of the Round Table, and rather than shame my oath and my blood I will hold my course, whatever comes of it."

And then Sir Ector lowered his spear, and they struck each other exceedingly hard, but Sir Ector fell to the ground. Sir Percival saw that, and he drove his horse at him as hard as it could go, but Sir Percival took such a stroke that horse and man fell to the ground.

When Sir Harry saw that they were both on the ground, he said to himself, "Breuse was never so strong as this."

So Sir Harry turned his horse, and they met together so strongly that both the horses and the knights fell to the ground, but Sir Bleoberis's horse began to get up again. Breuse saw that, and he came crashing in, and knocked him over and over, and would have killed him as he lay on the ground. Then Sir Harry le Fise Lake got up swiftly, and took the bridle of Sir Breuse's horse, and said, "Shame on you! Never strike a knight when he is on the ground. For this knight cannot be called a shameful knight for his deeds, since, as anyone can see, even lying there on the ground he has fought honourably and got the better of exceedingly good knights."

"I won't stop for that," said Sir Breuse.

"You have no choice," said Sir Harry, "for now."

Then, when Sir Breuse saw that he had no choice and could not have his way, he spoke politely. Then Sir Harry let him go. And then at once he rode his horse over Sir Bleoberis, and dashed him to the ground as if he meant to kill him.

When Sir Harry saw him act so basely he cried, "Traitor knight, stop, for shame!"

And as Sir Harry was getting onto his horse to fight Sir Breuse, Sir Breuse ran at him while he was halfway onto his horse, and struck him down, horse and man, to the ground, and nearly killed Sir Harry, the good knight.

Sir Percival saw that, and then he cried, "Traitor knight, what are you doing?"

And when Sir Percival was on his horse, Sir Breuse turned his horse and fled as fast as ever he could, and Sir Percival and Sir Harry followed hard after him, but the longer they chased the farther behind they were.

Then they turned back and came to Sir Ector de Maris and Sir Bleoberis.

"Ah, fair knights," said Bleoberis, "why have you helped that false knight and traitor?"

"Why," said Sir Harry, "what knight is he? For I know well he is a false knight," said Sir Harry, "and a coward and a wicked knight."

"Sir," said Bleoberis, "he is the most cowardly knight alive, and a devourer of ladies and a destroyer of good knights, and especially of Arthur's."

"What is your name?" said Sir Ector.

"My name is Sir Bleoberis de Ganis."

"Alas, fair cousin," said Ector, "forgive me, for I am Sir Ector de Maris."

Then Sir Percival and Sir Harry rejoiced greatly that they had met Bleoberis, but they were all downcast that Sir Breuse had escaped them, and they grieved greatly over it.
