Chapter 54: Of Sir Palomides, and how he met Sir Bleoberis and Sir Ector, and of Sir Percival

Just as they stood there like this, Sir Palomides came up, and when he saw Bleoberis's shield lying on the ground, Palomides said, "Let the man who owns that shield square up to me, for he struck me down near here, by a spring, and so I will fight him on foot."

"I am ready," said Bleoberis, "to answer you here. For you may be sure, sir knight, it was I, and my name is Bleoberis de Ganis."

"Well met," said Palomides, "and you may be sure my name is Palomides the Saracen."

And each of them hated the other to the death.

"Sir Palomides," said Ector, "you may be sure there is neither you nor any knight alive who kills any of our blood but he shall die for it. So if you want to fight, go and find Sir Lancelot or Sir Tristram, and there you will find your match."

"I have met them," said Palomides, "but I never won any honour from them."

"Was there never any other knight," said Sir Ector, "except those two, who was a match for you?"

"Yes," said Palomides, "there was a third, as good a knight as either of them, and for his age he was the best I ever found. For if he had lived until he was a stronger man, there would be no knight alive now like him; and his name was Sir Lamorak de Galis. And when he had jousted at a tournament, he overthrew me there and thirty knights more, and won the prize. And as he was leaving, Sir Gawain and his brothers met him, and with great effort they killed him treacherously, to the great loss of all good knights."

As soon as Sir Percival heard that his brother Sir Lamorak was dead, he fell swooning over his horse's mane, and there he grieved more than any knight ever grieved.

And when Sir Percival got up he said, "Alas, my good and noble brother Sir Lamorak, now we shall never meet again! And I believe a man could not find in all the wide world such a knight as he was for his age. And it is too much to bear, the death of our father King Pellinore, and now the death of our good brother Sir Lamorak."

Then in the meantime a servant came from King Arthur's court, and told them of the great tournament that was to be held at Lonazep, and how these lands, Cornwall and North Wales, would be against all comers.
