Chapter 55: How Sir Tristram met Sir Dinadan, and of their talk, and what he said to Sir Gawain's brothers

Now we turn to Sir Tristram. As he rode hunting he met Sir Dinadan, who had come into that country to look for Sir Tristram. Then Sir Dinadan told Sir Tristram his name, but Sir Tristram would not tell him his, and that made Sir Dinadan angry.

"I saw a foolish knight like you just today," said Sir Dinadan, "lying by a spring, and he looked as if he were asleep; and there he lay grinning like a fool, and would not speak, and his shield lay beside him, and his horse stood beside him. And I knew well he was a lover."

"Ah, fair sir," said Sir Tristram, "aren't you a lover?"

"Mary, a curse on that trade!" said Sir Dinadan.

"That is badly said," said Sir Tristram, "for a knight can never be a man of prowess unless he is a lover."

"Well said," said Sir Dinadan. "Now tell me your name, since you're a lover, or else I will fight you."

"As for that," said Sir Tristram, "it is no reason to fight me, that I won't tell you my name. And as for my name, you shall not know it this time."

"Shame on you," said Dinadan. "You call yourself a knight and you don't dare tell me your name? Then I'll fight you."

"As for that," said Sir Tristram, "I will think it over, for I will not fight unless I care to. And if I do fight," said Sir Tristram, "you will not be able to stand against me."

"Shame on you, coward," said Sir Dinadan.

And as they sat their horses there, they saw a knight come riding towards them.

"Look," said Sir Tristram, "here comes a knight riding who will joust with you."

As soon as Sir Dinadan looked at him he said, "That is the same moonstruck knight I saw lying by the spring, neither sleeping nor waking."

"Well," said Sir Tristram, "I know that knight well, with the covered shield of azure. He is the son of the King of Northumberland, his name is Epinogris, and he is as great a lover as any I know, and he loves the daughter of the King of Wales, a very beautiful lady. And now I suppose," said Sir Tristram, "if you ask him he will joust with you, and then you will find out whether a lover is the better knight, or you who will not love any lady."

"Well," said Dinadan, "now you'll see what I can do."

With that Sir Dinadan called out loud, "Sir knight, get ready to joust with me, for it is the custom of knights-errant for one to joust with another."

"Sir," said Epinogris, "is that the rule among you knights-errant, to make a knight joust whether he likes it or not?"

"As for that," said Dinadan, "get ready, for here I come."

And with that they spurred their horses and met together so hard that Epinogris struck Sir Dinadan down.

Then Sir Tristram rode up to Sir Dinadan and said, "Well now! It seems to me the lover has done rather well."

"Shame on you, coward," said Sir Dinadan, "and if you're any good as a knight, avenge me."

"No," said Sir Tristram, "I will not joust this time. But get your horse and let us go from here."

"God keep me from your company," said Sir Dinadan, "for I've never had a scrap of luck since I met you." And so they parted.

"Well," said Sir Tristram, "perhaps I could tell you news of Sir Tristram."

"God keep me from your company," said Dinadan, "for Sir Tristram would be a great deal the worse if he were in your company." And then they parted.

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "it may happen yet that I shall meet you in other places."

So Sir Tristram rode to Joyous Gard, and there he heard a great noise and outcry in that town.

"What is this noise?" said Sir Tristram.

"Sir," they said, "there is a knight of this castle who has been with us a long time, and just now he has been killed by two knights, for no other reason than that our knight said Sir Lancelot was a better knight than Sir Gawain."

"That was a poor reason," said Sir Tristram, "to kill a good knight, for speaking well of his master."

"That is little help to us," said the men of the town. "For if Sir Lancelot had been here, we would soon have been avenged on those false knights."

When Sir Tristram heard them say so he sent for his shield and his spear, and swiftly, within a little while, he had overtaken them, and told them to turn and make amends for the wrong they had done.

"What amends do you want?" said one of the knights.

And with that they took their run, and met each other so hard that Sir Tristram struck that knight down over his horse's tail. Then the other knight squared up to Sir Tristram, and he served that knight the same way. And then they got off their horses as best they could, and set their shields and their swords to fight to the uttermost.

"Knights," said Sir Tristram, "you will tell me where you come from, and what your names are. For you might be such men that you would hardly escape my hands; and you might be men of such a country that, for all your evil deeds, you would go free."

"Know this, sir knight," they said, "we are not afraid to tell you our names. For my name is Sir Agravain, and my name is Gaheris, brothers of the good knight Sir Gawain, and we are King Arthur's nephews."

"Well," said Sir Tristram, "for King Arthur's sake I will let you go this time. But it is a shame," said Sir Tristram, "that Sir Gawain and you, who come of such great blood, you four brothers, should have such a name as you have. For you are called the greatest destroyers and murderers of good knights there are now in this realm; for I have heard it said that Sir Gawain and you killed between you a better knight than any of you ever were, the noble knight Sir Lamorak de Galis. If it had pleased God," said Sir Tristram, "I wish I had been beside Sir Lamorak at his death."

"Then you would have gone the same way," said Sir Gaheris.

"Fair knight," said Sir Tristram, "there would have had to be many more knights than you are."

And with that Sir Tristram left them and rode towards Joyous Gard. And when he had gone they took their horses, and one said to the other, "We'll overtake him and take revenge on him, in spite of Sir Lamorak."
