Chapter 56: How Sir Tristram struck down Sir Agravain and Sir Gaheris, and how Sir Dinadan was sent for by Isolde the Fair

So when they had overtaken Sir Tristram, Sir Agravain called to him, "Turn, traitor knight!"

"That is badly said," said Sir Tristram. And with that he drew his sword, and struck Sir Agravain such a blow on the helmet that he tumbled off his horse in a swoon, and he had a grievous wound. And then he turned to Gaheris, and Sir Tristram struck his sword and his helmet together with such force that Gaheris fell out of his saddle. And so Sir Tristram rode to Joyous Gard, and there he got down and took off his armour.

So Sir Tristram told Isolde the Fair all about his adventure, as you have heard before. And when she heard him tell of Sir Dinadan, she said, "Sir, isn't that the man who made the song about King Mark?"

"He is the very man," said Sir Tristram, "for he is the best joker and jester there is, and a noble knight with his hands, and the best companion I know, and all good knights love his company."

"Alas, sir," she said, "why didn't you bring him with you?"

"Don't worry," said Sir Tristram, "for he is riding about this country looking for me, and so he will not leave until he has met me."

And there Sir Tristram told Isolde the Fair how Sir Dinadan held out against all lovers. Just then a servant came in and told Sir Tristram that a knight-errant had come into the town, with such and such colours on his shield.

"That is Sir Dinadan," said Sir Tristram. "Do you know what you should do?" said Sir Tristram. "Send for him, my Lady Isolde, and I will keep out of sight, and you will hear the merriest knight you ever spoke with, and the maddest talker. And I beg you with all my heart to give him a good welcome."

Then at once Isolde the Fair sent into the town, and asked Sir Dinadan to come into the castle and rest there with a lady.

"With all my heart," said Sir Dinadan. And so he mounted his horse and rode into the castle; and there he got down, and his armour was taken off, and he was brought into the castle. At once Isolde the Fair came to him, and each greeted the other; then she asked him where he came from.

"Madam," said Dinadan, "I am of King Arthur's court, and a knight of the Round Table, and my name is Sir Dinadan."

"What are you doing in this country?" said Isolde the Fair.

"Madam," he said, "I am looking for Sir Tristram, the good knight, for I was told that he was in this country."

"That may well be," said Isolde the Fair, "but I know nothing of him."

"Madam," said Dinadan, "I wonder at Sir Tristram and other lovers like him, what is wrong with them that they are so mad and so besotted over women."

"Why," said Isolde the Fair, "are you a knight and not a lover? That's a shame on you. For you cannot be called a good knight unless you take up a quarrel for a lady."

"God keep me from it," said Dinadan, "for the joy of love is too short, and the sorrow of it, and what comes of it, lasts far too long."

"Ah," said Isolde the Fair, "don't say so. For near here was the good knight Sir Bleoberis, who fought three knights at once for a damsel's sake, and won her before the King of Northumberland."

"That's so," said Sir Dinadan, "for I know him well for a good knight and a noble one, and come of noble blood; for they are all noble knights, the family he comes from, that is, Sir Lancelot du Lake's."

"Now tell me, please," said Isolde the Fair, "will you fight for my love against three knights who do me great wrong? And since you are one of King Arthur's knights, I call on you to fight for me."

Then Sir Dinadan said, "I will tell you this: you are as beautiful a lady as I ever saw, and much more beautiful than my lady Queen Guinevere. But believe me, in a word, I will not fight three knights for you, Jesus forbid!"

Then Isolde laughed, and had great fun at his expense. So he had all the welcome she could give him, and he stayed there all that night. And early in the morning Sir Tristram put on his armour, and Isolde the Fair gave him a good helmet; and then he promised her that he would meet Sir Dinadan, and the two of them would ride together to Lonazep, where the tournament was to be. "And there I will make a place ready for you, where you can watch the tournament."

Then Sir Tristram set off with two squires who carried his shield and his spears, which were great and long.
