Chapter 57: How Sir Dinadan met Sir Tristram, and how, in jousting with Sir Palomides, Sir Dinadan recognised him

Then after that Sir Dinadan left, and rode on his way at a great pace until he had overtaken Sir Tristram. And when Sir Dinadan had overtaken him he recognised him at once, and he hated his company above all other knights'.

"Ah," said Sir Dinadan, "are you that coward knight I met yesterday? On guard, for you'll joust with me whether you like it or not."

"Well," said Sir Tristram, "I am unwilling to joust."

And so they let their horses run, and Sir Tristram missed him on purpose, and Sir Dinadan broke a spear on Sir Tristram, and with that Sir Dinadan made ready to draw his sword.

"Not so," said Sir Tristram. "Why are you so angry? I will not fight."

"Shame on you, coward," said Dinadan. "You disgrace all knights."

"As for that," said Sir Tristram, "I don't care, for I will ride in your train and be under your protection; for since you are such a good knight, you can keep me safe."

"The devil rid me of you," said Sir Dinadan, "for you are as fine a man of arms, and as fine in your person, as I ever saw, and the biggest coward I ever saw. What are you going to do with those great spears you carry about with you?"

"I will give them," said Sir Tristram, "to some good knight when I come to the tournament; and if I see you do best, I'll give them to you."

So as they rode along talking like this, they saw a knight-errant coming towards them, who made ready to joust.

"Look," said Sir Tristram, "there's one who wants to joust. Now get ready for him."

"Ah, shame on you," said Sir Dinadan.

"No, not so," said Tristram, "for that knight looks like a nasty piece of work."

"Then I'll do it," said Sir Dinadan.

And so they made ready their shields and their spears, and they met together so hard that the other knight struck Sir Dinadan down off his horse.

"There," said Sir Tristram, "it would have been better if you had left it alone."

"Shame on you, coward," said Sir Dinadan.

Then Sir Dinadan jumped up and took his sword in his hand, and offered to fight on foot.

"In friendship or in anger?" said the other knight.

"Let us fight in friendship," said Sir Dinadan.

"What is your name?" said that knight. "Please tell me."

"Know this, my name is Sir Dinadan."

"Ah, Dinadan," said that knight, "and my name is Gareth, the youngest brother of Sir Gawain."

Then each of them gave the other a warm welcome, for this Gareth was the best knight of all the brothers, and he proved a good knight. Then they took their horses, and there they talked about Sir Tristram, and what a coward he was; and Sir Tristram heard every word and laughed them to scorn.

Then they caught sight of a knight coming towards them, well horsed and well armed, and he made himself ready to joust.

"Fair knights," said Sir Tristram, "decide between you who will joust with that knight, for I warn you I will not fight him."

"Then I will," said Sir Gareth.

And so they met, and there that knight struck Sir Gareth down over his horse's rump.

"Well now," said Sir Tristram to Sir Dinadan, "get ready now and avenge the good knight Gareth."

"That I will not," said Sir Dinadan, "for he has struck down a much bigger knight than I am."

"Ah," said Sir Tristram, "now, Sir Dinadan, I can see and feel well that your heart is failing you. So now you'll see what I can do."

And then Sir Tristram crashed into that knight, and knocked him clean off his horse. And when Sir Dinadan saw that, he marvelled greatly; and then he guessed that it was Sir Tristram.

Then this knight who was on foot drew his sword to fight.

"What is your name?" said Sir Tristram.

"Believe me," said that knight, "my name is Sir Palomides."

"Which knight do you hate most?" said Sir Tristram.

"Sir knight," he said, "I hate Sir Tristram to the death, for if I can meet him, one of us will die."

"Well said," said Sir Tristram, "and believe me, I am Sir Tristram de Liones, and now do your worst."

When Sir Palomides heard him say so he was stunned. And then he said this: "I beg you, Sir Tristram, forgive me all my ill will, and if I live I will serve you above all other knights living. And I deeply regret the ill will I have borne you. I don't know what is wrong with me, for it seems to me that you are a good knight, and no other knight who called himself a good knight ought to hate you. So I beg you, Sir Tristram, take no offence at my unkind words."

"Sir Palomides," said Sir Tristram, "you speak well, and I know well that you are a good knight, for I have seen you proved; and you have taken on many great enterprises, and achieved them well. So," said Sir Tristram, "if you have any ill will towards me, now you can settle it, for I am ready for you."

"Not so, my lord Sir Tristram. I will do you knightly service in everything, as you command."

"And on those terms I will take you," said Sir Tristram.

And so they rode on their way talking of many things.

"O my lord Sir Tristram," said Dinadan, "you have made a fool of me, and badly, for God knows I came into this country for your sake, and on the advice of my lord Sir Lancelot; and yet Sir Lancelot would not tell me for certain where I could find you."

"Truly," said Sir Tristram, "Sir Lancelot knew well where I was, for I was staying in his own castle."
