Chapter 58: How they approached the Castle of Lonazep, and of their further talk about the death of Sir Lamorak

So they rode on until they came in sight of the Castle of Lonazep. And then they saw four hundred tents and pavilions, and marvellously great preparations.

"God help me," said Sir Tristram, "over there I see the greatest preparations that I ever saw."

"Sir," said Palomides, "it seems to me that there were preparations as great at the Castle of Maidens upon the rock, where you won the prize, for I saw with my own eyes where you outjousted thirty knights."

"Sir," said Dinadan, "and at Surluse, at the tournament that Galahalt of the Long Isles held, which lasted seven days, there was as great a gathering as there is here, for there were many nations."

"Who was the best?" said Sir Tristram.

"Sir, it was Sir Lancelot du Lake and the noble knight Sir Lamorak de Galis, and Sir Lancelot won the prize."

"I don't doubt," said Sir Tristram, "that he won the prize, provided he was not overmatched by many knights. And as for the death of Sir Lamorak," said Sir Tristram, "it was too great a pity, for I dare say he was the cleanest in his strength and the best winded man of his age that was alive. For I knew him to be the strongest knight that I ever met with, unless it was Sir Lancelot. Alas," said Sir Tristram, "I am full of grief for his death. And if they were not the cousins of my lord Arthur who killed him, they should die for it, and all those who consented to his death. And it is for such things," said Sir Tristram, "that I am afraid to go to the court of my lord Arthur. I want you to know that," said Sir Tristram to Gareth.

"Sir, I don't blame you," said Gareth, "for I understand very well the vengefulness of my brothers, Sir Gawain, Agravain, Gaheris and Mordred. But as for me," said Sir Gareth, "I don't meddle in their affairs, and that is why there is none of them who loves me. And because I understand that they are murderers of good knights, I left their company. And I wish to God," said Gareth, "that I had been there when the noble knight Sir Lamorak was killed."

"Now, as Jesus is my help," said Sir Tristram, "that is well said of you, for I would rather have been there than have all the gold between here and Rome."

"Indeed," said Palomides, "and so I wish I had been there. And yet I never won the prize at any jousts or tournament where he was, but he got the better of me, whether on foot or on horseback. And on the day that he was killed he did the greatest deeds of arms that I ever saw a knight do in all the days of my life. And when the prize was given to him by my lord Arthur, Sir Gawain and his three brothers, Agravain, Gaheris and Sir Mordred, set upon Sir Lamorak in a secret place, and there they killed his horse. And so they fought with him on foot for more than three hours, both in front of him and behind him; and Sir Mordred gave him his death wound from behind, in his back, and hacked him all to pieces. One of his squires who saw it told me so."

"Shame on treason!" said Sir Tristram. "For it breaks my heart to hear this tale."

"So it does mine," said Gareth. "Brothers of mine as they are, I shall never love them, nor keep company with them, for that deed."

"Now let us speak of other deeds," said Palomides, "and let him be, for you cannot get his life back."

"That is the greater pity," said Dinadan. "For Sir Gawain and his brothers, except you, Sir Gareth, hate most of the good knights of the Round Table. For I know very well that if they could do it secretly, they hate my lord Sir Lancelot and all his kin, and bear him a great secret spite. And my lord Sir Lancelot is well aware of that, and that is why he keeps the good knights of his kin about him."
