Chapter 59: How they came to the bank of the Humber, and how they found a ship there in which lay the body of King Hermance

"Sir," said Palomides, "let us leave this matter, and let us see how we shall do at this tournament. My advice," said Palomides, "is that we four hold together against all who come."

"Not on my advice," said Sir Tristram, "for I can see by their tents that there will be four hundred knights. And have no doubt," said Sir Tristram, "that there will be many good knights among them; and however valiant or strong a man may be, he can still be overmatched. And I have seen that happen to knights many times: when they expected most surely to win honour, they lost it. For valour is worth nothing unless it is mixed with wisdom. And as for me," said Sir Tristram, "it may be that I can keep my own head as well as the next man."

So they rode on until they came to the bank of the Humber, where they heard a cry and a sorrowful sound. Then they saw, coming down the wind, a rich vessel covered over with red silk, and the vessel landed close beside them. With that Sir Tristram dismounted, and his knights too. And so Sir Tristram went ahead and entered the vessel. And when he came inside he saw a fair bed richly covered, and on it lay a dead knight of fine bearing, all armed except for the head, and all bloodied with deadly wounds; and he seemed to have been an exceedingly good knight.

"How can this be," said Sir Tristram, "that this knight has been killed like this?"

Then Sir Tristram noticed a letter in the dead knight's hand.

"Master mariners," said Sir Tristram, "what does that letter mean?"

"Sir," they said, "in that letter you shall hear and learn how he was killed, and for what cause, and what his name was. But, sir," said the mariners, "you may be sure that no man shall take that letter and read it unless he is a good knight, and will faithfully promise to avenge his death. Otherwise no knight shall see that letter opened."

"Believe me," said Sir Tristram, "some of us may avenge his death as well as anyone else; and if it is as you mariners say, his death shall be avenged."

And with that Sir Tristram took the letter out of the knight's hand, and it said this: "I, Hermance, king and lord of the Red City, send my greeting to all knights-errant, commending myself to you noble knights of Arthur's court. I beg them all to find among themselves one knight who will fight for my sake with two brothers whom I raised up from nothing, and who have killed me wickedly and treacherously. And so I beg one good knight to avenge my death. And whoever avenges my death, I will that he shall have my Red City and all my castles."

"Sir," said the mariners, "you may be sure that this king and knight who lies here was a most honourable man and of very great prowess, and he dearly loved all kinds of knights-errant."

"God help me," said Sir Tristram, "this is a pitiful case, and I would very gladly take this enterprise upon myself. But I have made such a promise that I must be at this great tournament, or else I am shamed. For I know well that it was especially for my sake that my lord Arthur had these jousts and this tournament held in this country, and I know well that many honourable people will be at that tournament to see me. And so I am afraid that if I take this enterprise upon myself I shall not come back in time for these jousts."

"Sir," said Palomides, "I beg you, give this enterprise to me, and you shall see me achieve it honourably, or else I shall die in this quarrel."

"Well," said Sir Tristram, "I give you this enterprise, on condition that you are with me at this tournament, which shall be a week from today."

"Sir," said Palomides, "I promise you that I shall be with you by that day, if I am not killed or maimed."
