Chapter 60: How Sir Tristram and his companions came and stayed with a host who afterwards fought with Sir Tristram, and other matters

Then Sir Tristram, Gareth and Sir Dinadan left, and left Sir Palomides in the vessel; and so Sir Tristram watched the mariners as they sailed away along the Humber. And when Sir Palomides was out of their sight they took their horses and looked about them. And then they saw a knight who came riding towards them unarmed, with nothing on him but a sword. And when this knight came near them he greeted them, and they greeted him in return.

"Fair knights," said that knight, "since you are knights-errant, I beg you to come and see my castle, and take such hospitality as you find there. I beg you with all my heart."

And so they rode with him to his castle, and there they were brought into the hall, which was finely furnished. And so they were unarmed there, and seated at a table. And when this knight saw Sir Tristram, he knew him at once. And then this knight grew pale, and angry with Sir Tristram. When Sir Tristram saw his host's face change like that, he marvelled, and said, "Sir, my host, what is the matter with you?"

"Know this," said he, "I am the worse for having you here. For I know you, Sir Tristram de Liones. You killed my brother. And so I give you fair warning: I will kill you if I can ever get you in the open."

"Sir knight," said Sir Tristram, "I have no memory of ever killing any brother of yours. And if you say that I did, I will make amends as far as I can."

"I want no amends," said the knight. "Just watch out for me."

So when he had dined Sir Tristram asked for his armour, and left. And so they rode on their way, and after a while Sir Dinadan saw a knight coming, well armed and well mounted, without a shield.

"Sir Tristram," said Sir Dinadan, "look to yourself, for I dare swear that is your host coming over there, who means to fight you."

"Let him come," said Sir Tristram. "I shall face him as well as I can."

At once the knight, when he came near Sir Tristram, shouted to him and told him to stand and defend himself. So they crashed together, but Sir Tristram struck the other knight so hard that he carried him over his horse's rump. That knight got up quickly and took his horse again, and so rode fiercely at Sir Tristram, and struck him twice, hard, on the helm.

"Sir knight," said Sir Tristram, "I beg you to stop and strike me no more, for I would be loath to fight you if I had the choice, for I have your food and your drink inside me."

For all that, he would not stop. And then Sir Tristram gave him such a blow on the helm that he fell headlong from his horse, so that the blood burst out at the breathing holes of his helm, and so he lay still, likely to be dead.

Then Sir Tristram said, "I regret that I struck that blow so hard, for I think he is dead."

And so they left him and rode on their way.

So they had ridden only a little while when they saw two very fine-looking knights riding towards them, well armed and well mounted, with good servants about them. The one was Berrant le Apres, and he was called the King with the Hundred Knights; and the other was Sir Segwarides; and they were two renowned and noble knights. So as they came alongside each other, the king looked at Sir Dinadan, who at that time had Sir Tristram's helm on his shoulder. The king had seen that helm before in the keeping of the Queen of North Wales, and that queen the king loved as his lady-love; and the Queen of North Wales had given that helm to Isolde the Fair, and Queen Isolde the Fair had given it to Sir Tristram.

"Sir knight," said Berrant, "where did you get that helm?"

"What do you want to know for?" said Sir Dinadan.

"Because I will fight you," said the king, "for the love of her who owned that helm. And so defend yourself."

So they parted and came together with all the might of their horses, and there the King with the Hundred Knights struck Sir Dinadan to the ground, horse and all. And then he commanded his servant, "Go and take his helm off, and keep it."

So the servant went to unbuckle his helm.

"What, the helm? What do you think you are doing?" said Sir Tristram. "Leave that helm alone."

"For what purpose, sir knight," said the king, "will you meddle with that helm?"

"Believe me," said Sir Tristram, "that helm shall not part from me until it has been more dearly paid for."

"Then make ready," said Sir Berrant to Sir Tristram.

So they crashed together, and there Sir Tristram struck him down over his horse's tail. And then the king got up quickly, and quickly got back on his horse. And then he struck fiercely at Sir Tristram with many great strokes. And then Sir Tristram gave Sir Berrant such a blow on the helm that he fell down from his horse, badly stunned.

"Look," said Dinadan, "that helm brings bad luck to the two of us. I took a fall for it, and now, sir king, you have taken another."

Then Segwarides asked, "Who will joust with me?"

"I beg you," said Sir Gareth to Dinadan, "let me have this joust."

"Sir," said Dinadan, "I beg you, take it, as far as I'm concerned."

"That isn't fair," said Tristram, "for this joust should be yours."

"In a word," said Dinadan, "I want no part of it."

Then Gareth squared up to Sir Segwarides, and there Sir Segwarides struck Gareth and his horse to the ground.

"Now," said Sir Tristram to Dinadan, "joust with that knight there."

"I want no part of it," said Dinadan.

"Then I will," said Sir Tristram.

And then Sir Tristram rode at him and gave him a fall. And so they left them on foot, and Sir Tristram rode to Joyous Gard. And there Sir Gareth, out of his courtesy, would not have gone into this castle, but Sir Tristram would not allow him to leave. And so they dismounted and unarmed, and were warmly entertained. But when Dinadan came before Isolde the Fair he cursed the time that he ever carried Sir Tristram's helm, and there he told her how Sir Tristram had made a fool of him. Then there was such laughing and joking at Sir Dinadan's expense that they did not know what to do with him.
