Chapter 61: How Palomides went to fight two brothers for the death of King Hermance

Now we will leave them merry inside Joyous Gard, and speak of Sir Palomides. Sir Palomides sailed along the Humber to the coast of the sea, where there was a fair castle. And at that time it was early in the morning, before daybreak. Then the mariners went to Sir Palomides, who was fast asleep.

"Sir knight," said the mariners, "you must get up, for here is a castle that you must go into."

"I agree," said Sir Palomides; and with that he went ashore. And then he blew the horn that the mariners had given him. And when the people inside the castle heard that horn they sent out many knights; and there they stood on the walls, and said with one voice, "Welcome to this castle!"

And then it grew full daylight, and Sir Palomides entered the castle. And within a while he was served with many different dishes. Then Sir Palomides heard much weeping and great grief all about him.

"What can this mean?" said Sir Palomides. "I do not like to hear such sorrow, and I would gladly know what it means."

Then there came before him a man whose name was Sir Ebel, who said this: "Believe me, sir knight, this grief and sorrow is made here every day, and for this reason. We had a king who was called Hermance, and he was King of the Red City; and this king who was our lord was a noble knight, generous and free in his spending. And in all the world he loved nothing so much as the knights-errant of King Arthur's court, and all jousting, hunting and every kind of knightly sport. For so kind a king and knight never had the rule of poor people as he was; and because of his goodness and his nobility we mourn for him, and always shall. And all kings and great lords may take warning by our lord, for he was destroyed through his own fault. For if he had cherished those of his own blood he would still be alive, with great riches and in peace. But all great lords may take warning by our king. And alas," said Ebel, "that we must give warning to all others by his death!"

"Tell me," said Palomides, "in what way your lord was killed, and by whom."

"Sir," said Sir Ebel, "our king brought up two men from childhood who are now dangerous knights. And our king held these two knights so dear that he loved no man and trusted no man of his own blood, nor anyone else who was about him. And our king was governed by these two knights, and so they ruled him and his lands without challenge, and they would never allow any of his blood to have any say with our king. And besides, he was so generous and so noble, and they so false and deceitful, that they ruled him without challenge. And the lords of our king's blood saw that, and left him and went to their own estates. Then when these two traitors understood that they had driven all the lords of his blood away from him, they were not content with that rule, but then they meant to have more. For as the old saying has always gone: 'Give a peasant rule, and it will never be enough for him.' For whoever is ruled by a man born a peasant, though the lord of the land is born a gentleman, that same peasant will destroy all the gentlemen about him. And so, all great men and lords, beware whom you take about you. And if you are a knight of King Arthur's court, remember this tale, for this is the end and conclusion of it. My lord and king rode into the forest near here on the advice of these traitors, and there he hunted the red deer, armed at all points, just like a good knight. And so with the exertion he grew thirsty, and then he dismounted and drank at a spring. And when he had dismounted, by the agreement of these two traitors, the one who is called Helius suddenly struck our king through the body with a spear, and so they left him there. And when they had gone, then by chance I came to the spring, and found my lord and king wounded to the death. And when I heard his complaint, I had him brought to the waterside, and I put him in that same ship alive. And when my lord King Hermance was in that vessel, he required me, by the true faith I owed him, to write a letter in this form."
