Chapter 62: The text of the letter written asking for vengeance for the king's death, and how Sir Palomides strove to win the right to fight the battle

And the letter, Sir Ebel went on, said this: "Commending myself to King Arthur and to all his knights-errant, I beg them all, since I, King Hermance, King of the Red City, have been killed in this way by wickedness and treason, through two knights of my own, of my own bringing up and of my own making, that some honourable knight will avenge my death, since I have always been, as far as I could, well disposed towards Arthur's court. And whoever will risk his life against these two traitors for my sake in single battle, I, King Hermance, King of the Red City, freely give him all the lands and rents that I ever held in my life."

"This letter," said Ebel, "I wrote at my lord's command, and then he received his Creator in the sacrament. And when he was dead, he had commanded me, before he was cold, to put that letter firmly in his hand. And then he commanded me to send that same vessel off down the Humber, and to give these mariners orders never to stop until they came to Logres, where all the noble knights will gather at this time. 'And there some good knight will have pity on me and avenge my death, for there was never king or lord more falsely or more treacherously killed than I am here, to my death.' That was the complaint of our King Hermance. Now," said Sir Ebel, "you know everything, how our lord was betrayed. We ask you, for God's sake, have pity on his death, and avenge it honourably, and then you may hold all these lands. For we all know well that if you can kill these two traitors, the Red City and all who are in it will take you for their lord."

"Truly," said Sir Palomides, "it grieves my heart to hear you tell this sorrowful tale. And to tell the truth, I saw the very letter that you speak of, and one of the best knights on earth read that letter to me, and at his command I came here to avenge your king's death. And so be done, and let me know where I shall find those traitors, for I shall never be at ease in my heart until I am at grips with them."

"Sir," said Sir Ebel, "then take your ship again, and that ship must bring you to the Delectable Isle, close by the Red City, and we in this castle shall pray for you and wait for your return. For this same castle, if you succeed, must be yours, for our King Hermance had this castle built for love of the two traitors; and so we have held it by strong hand, and so we are hard threatened."

"Do you know what you shall do?" said Sir Palomides. "Whatever becomes of me, see that you keep this castle well. For if I have the misfortune to be killed in this quest, I am sure that one of the best knights in the world will come to avenge my death, and that is Sir Tristram de Liones, or else Sir Lancelot du Lake."

Then Sir Palomides left that castle. And as he came near the city, there came out of a ship a fine-looking knight, armed, to meet him, with his shield on his shoulder and his hand on his sword. And as soon as he came near Sir Palomides he said, "Sir knight, what are you looking for here? Give up this quest, for it is mine, and it was mine before ever it was yours, and so I will have it."

"Sir knight," said Palomides, "it may well be that this quest was yours before it was mine. But when the letter was taken out of the dead king's hand, at that time, by all likelihood, there was no knight who had undertaken to avenge the death of the king. And so at that time I promised to avenge his death, and so I shall, or else I am shamed."

"You speak well," said the knight, "but believe me, then I will fight you, and whichever of us two is the better knight, let him take the battle in hand."

"I agree," said Sir Palomides.

And then they set their shields and pulled out their swords, and laid into each other with many heavy blows, like men of might. And this fighting went on for more than an hour; but at last Sir Palomides grew stronger and had the better wind, so that he struck that knight such a blow that he made him go down on his knees. Then that knight spoke aloud and said, "Noble knight, hold your hand!"

Sir Palomides was courteous, and held back his hand. Then this knight said, "Believe me, knight, you are worthier to have this battle than I am. And I ask you, by your knighthood, tell me your name."

"Sir, my name is Palomides, a knight of King Arthur's and of the Round Table, and I came here to avenge the death of this dead king."
