Chapter 63: Of the preparations of Sir Palomides and of the two brothers who were to fight him

"Well met," said the knight to Palomides, "for of all the knights alive, except three, you are the one I would most gladly have. The first is Sir Lancelot du Lake, and Sir Tristram de Liones, and the third is my near cousin, Sir Lamorak de Galis. And I am the brother of King Hermance who is dead, and my name is Sir Herminde."

"You speak well," said Sir Palomides, "and you shall see how I fare. And if I am killed there, go to my lord Sir Lancelot, or else to my lord Sir Tristram, and beg them to avenge my death. For as for Sir Lamorak, you will never see him in this world."

"Alas," said Sir Herminde, "how can that be?"

"He has been killed," said Sir Palomides, "by Sir Gawain and his brothers."

"God help me," said Herminde, "it was not one against one that killed him."

"That is the truth," said Sir Palomides, "for it was four dangerous knights who killed him, that is, Sir Gawain, Sir Agravain, Sir Gaheris and Sir Mordred; but Sir Gareth, the fifth brother, was away, the best knight of them all."

And so Sir Palomides told Herminde the whole story, and how they had killed Sir Lamorak by nothing but treason.

So Sir Palomides took his ship, and landed at the Delectable Isle. And in the meantime Sir Herminde, who was the king's brother, landed at the Red City, and there he told them how a knight of King Arthur's had come to avenge King Hermance's death: "And his name is Sir Palomides, the good knight, who for the most part follows the beast Glatisant, the Questing Beast."

Then the whole city rejoiced greatly, for they had heard much of Sir Palomides and of his noble prowess. So they appointed a messenger, and sent him to the two brothers, and told them to make ready, for a knight had come who would fight them both. So the messenger went to them where they were, at a castle close by, and there he told them how a knight had come from King Arthur's court to fight them both at once.

"He is welcome," they said. "But tell us, we beg you, whether it is Sir Lancelot or any of his blood."

"He is none of that blood," said the messenger.

"Then we care the less," said the two brothers, "for we have no wish to fight with any of the blood of Sir Lancelot."

"Believe me," said the messenger, "his name is Sir Palomides, who is still unchristened, a noble knight."

"Well," they said, "if he is unchristened now, he will never be christened."

So they agreed to be at the city within two days.

And when Sir Palomides came to the city they rejoiced exceedingly over him, and then they looked him over, and saw that he was well made, clean-limbed and big, and sound in all his limbs, and neither too young nor too old. And so all the people praised him. And though he was not christened, yet he believed in the best manner, and was very faithful and true to his promise, and of good character. And he was unchristened because he had made his vow that he would never be christened until he had achieved the beast Glatisant, which was a very wonderful beast, and of great meaning, for Merlin prophesied much about that beast. And Sir Palomides had also vowed never to take full Christianity until he had fought seven battles within the lists.

So on the third day these two brothers came to the city, one called Helius and the other called Helake, who were men of great prowess. For all that they were false and full of treason, and only poor men by birth, yet they were noble knights with their hands. And they brought forty knights with them, so that they would be strong enough for the Red City. So the two brothers came with great boastfulness and pride, for they had put the Red City in fear and done it harm. Then they were brought to the lists, and Sir Palomides came into the place and said this: "Are you the two brothers, Helius and Helake, who killed your king and lord, Sir Hermance, by wickedness and treason, the king for whom I have come here to avenge his death?"

"Know this," said Sir Helius and Sir Helake, "we are the same knights who killed King Hermance. And know this too, Palomides the Saracen: we will handle you so before you leave that you'll wish you'd been christened."

"That may well be," said Sir Palomides, "for I would not wish to die before I was christened. And yet I am not afraid of the two of you, but I trust in God that I shall die a better Christian man than either of you. And have no doubt," said Sir Palomides, "either you or I shall be left dead in this place."
