Chapter 64: Of the battle between Sir Palomides and the two brothers, and how the two brothers were slain

Then they drew apart, and the two brothers came against Sir Palomides, and he against them, as fast as their horses could run. And by chance Sir Palomides struck Helake through his shield and through the breast, more than a fathom deep. All this while Sir Helius held his spear upright, and out of pride and arrogance he would not strike Sir Palomides with his spear. But when he saw his brother lying on the ground, and saw that he could not help himself, then he said to Sir Palomides, "Defend yourself!"

And with that he came crashing at Sir Palomides with his spear, and struck him clean out of his saddle. Then Sir Helius rode over Sir Palomides two or three times. And at that Sir Palomides was ashamed, and caught Sir Helius's horse by the bridle; and with that the horse reared, and Sir Palomides heaved after it, and so they both fell to the ground. But Sir Helius leapt up quickly at once, and there he struck Sir Palomides a great blow on the helm, so that he went down on one knee. Then they laid into each other with many heavy blows, and circled and sidestepped, now backward, now sideways, crashing together like two boars, and at that same moment they both fell flat on the ground.

So they went on fighting for two hours without any rest, and never stopped for breath. And then Sir Palomides grew faint and weary, and Sir Helius grew exceedingly strong, and doubled his strokes, and drove Sir Palomides across and along the whole field, so that the people of the city, when they saw Sir Palomides in this state, wept and cried out, and grieved greatly, and the other side rejoiced just as much.

"Alas," said the men of the city, "that this noble knight should be killed like this for our king's sake!"

And as they were weeping and crying out like this, Sir Palomides, who had taken a hundred blows, so that it was a wonder he stood on his feet, at last looked as well as he could at the common people, and saw how they wept for him. And then he said to himself, "Ah, shame on you, Sir Palomides! Why do you hang your head so low?"

And with that he raised his shield, and looked Sir Helius in the face, and he struck him a great blow on the helm, and after that another, and another. And then he struck Sir Helius with such might that he fell flat on the ground. And then he tore his helm off his head, and there he struck him such a blow that he cut his head from his body. And then the people of the city were the most joyful people there could be. So they brought him to his lodging with great ceremony, and there all the people became his men. And then Sir Palomides begged them all to take care of all the lordship of King Hermance: "For, fair sirs, believe me, I cannot stay with you at this time, for I must be with my lord King Arthur in all haste at the Castle of Lonazep, as I have promised."

Then the people were very downcast at his leaving, for the whole city offered Sir Palomides a third part of their goods if he would stay with them; but at that time he would not stay on any account.

And so Sir Palomides left, and so he came to the castle where Sir Ebel was lieutenant. And when the people in the castle knew how Sir Palomides had fared, there was a joyful household. And so Sir Palomides left, and came to the castle of Lonazep. And when he learned that Sir Tristram was not there, he took his way over the Humber, and came to Joyous Gard, where Sir Tristram and Isolde the Fair were. Sir Tristram had commanded that whatever knight-errant came within Joyous Gard, that is, into the town, they should warn Sir Tristram. So a man of the town came and told Sir Tristram how there was a knight in the town, an exceedingly fine-looking man.

"What kind of man is he," said Sir Tristram, "and what device does he bear?"

So the man told Sir Tristram all the signs of him.

"That is Palomides," said Dinadan.

"It may well be," said Sir Tristram. "Go to him," said Sir Tristram to Dinadan.

So Dinadan went to Sir Palomides, and there each greeted the other with great joy, and so they lodged together that night. And early in the morning Sir Tristram and Sir Gareth came and caught them in their beds, and so they got up and had breakfast.
