Chapter 65: How Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides met Breuse Saunce Pité, and how Sir Tristram and Isolde the Fair went to Lonazep

And then Sir Tristram asked Sir Palomides to ride out into the fields and woods. So they agreed to take their ease in the forest. And when they had amused themselves a long while they rode to a fair spring; and at once they saw an armed knight who came riding towards them, and they greeted each other. Then this armed knight spoke to Sir Tristram, and asked who these knights were who were lodged in Joyous Gard.

"I don't know who they are," said Sir Tristram.

"What knights are you?" said that knight. "For it seems to me you are no knights-errant, since you ride unarmed."

"Whether we are knights or not, we don't care to tell you our names."

"You won't tell me your name?" said that knight. "Then defend yourself, for you'll die by my hands."

And with that he took his spear in his hands, and would have run Sir Tristram through. Sir Palomides saw that, and struck his horse slantwise in the middle of the side, so that man and horse fell to the ground. And with that Sir Palomides dismounted and pulled out his sword to kill him.

"Let him be," said Sir Tristram. "Don't kill him. The knight is only a fool, and it would be a shame to kill him. But take away his spear," said Sir Tristram, "and let him take his horse and go where he likes."

So when this knight got up he groaned badly from the fall, and so he took his horse, and when he was mounted he turned his horse, and asked Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides to tell him who they were.

"Now believe me," said Sir Tristram, "my name is Sir Tristram de Liones, and this knight's name is Sir Palomides."

When he knew who they were he put the spurs to his horse, so that they should not ask him his name, and so rode fast away through thick and thin. Then a knight came by them with a shield crossed by a blue band, whose name was Epinogris, and he came towards them at a great gallop.

"Where are you riding?" said Sir Tristram.

"My fair lords," said Epinogris, "I am following the falsest knight alive. And so I beg you to tell me whether you have seen him, for he bears a shield with a red cover over it."

"God help me," said Tristram, "such a knight left us not a quarter of an hour ago. We beg you, tell us his name."

"Alas," said Epinogris, "why did you let him escape from you? He is such a great enemy to all knights-errant. His name is Breuse Saunce Pité."

"Ah, shame on it!" said Sir Palomides. "Alas that he ever escaped my hands, for he is the man in the world I hate most."

Then each knight lamented greatly to the other; and so Epinogris left and followed the chase after him.

Then Sir Tristram and his three companions rode to Joyous Gard; and there Sir Tristram talked with Sir Palomides about his battle, how he had fared at the Red City, and it had ended just as you have heard before.

"Truly," said Sir Tristram, "I am glad you have fared well, for you have done honourably. Well," said Sir Tristram, "we must set out tomorrow."

And then he planned how it should be done; and Sir Tristram arranged to send his two tents to be pitched close by the spring of Lonazep, and in them the queen, Isolde the Fair, would stay.

"That is well said," said Sir Dinadan.

But when Sir Palomides heard of that, his heart was carried away beyond measure; even so he said very little. So when they came to Joyous Gard Sir Palomides would not have gone into the castle, but Sir Tristram took him by the finger and led him into the castle. And when Sir Palomides saw Isolde the Fair he was so carried away that he could scarcely speak. So they went to supper, but Palomides could not eat, and there was all the welcome that could be had. And in the morning they were made ready to ride towards Lonazep.

So Sir Tristram had three squires, and Isolde the Fair had three gentlewomen, and both the queen and they were richly dressed; and they had no other people with them but servants to carry their shields and their spears. And so they rode on. So as they rode they saw a band of knights ahead of them; it was the knight Galihodin, with twenty knights with him.

"Fair companions," said Galihodin, "four knights are coming over there, and a rich and very fair lady. I have a mind to take that lady from them."

"That is not the best advice," said one of Galihodin's men. "But send to them, and find out what they will say."

And so it was done. A squire came to Sir Tristram, and asked them whether they would joust or else lose their lady.

"Not so," said Sir Tristram. "Tell your lord I bid him come, as many of you as there are of us, and win her and take her."

"Sir," said Palomides, "if it please you, let me have this deed, and I will take on all four of them."

"I am willing that you have it," said Sir Tristram, "as you please. Now go and tell your lord Galihodin that this same knight will meet him and his companions."
