Chapter 66: How Sir Palomides jousted with Sir Galihodin, and afterwards with Sir Gawain, and struck them down

Then this squire left and told Galihodin; and then Galihodin set his shield and took up a spear, and Sir Palomides another; and there Sir Palomides struck Galihodin so hard that he struck both horse and man to the ground. And he had a terrible fall there. And then another knight came, and he served him the same way; and so he served the third and the fourth, knocking them over their horses' rumps, and all the while Sir Palomides' spear stayed whole. Then six more of Galihodin's knights came, and wanted to be avenged on Sir Palomides.

"Leave it," said Sir Galihodin. "Don't you dare. Not one of you is to meddle with this knight, for he is a man of great goodness and honour, and if he wished it, you would none of you be able to stand against him."

And at that they held still. And Sir Palomides was ready to joust all the while; and when he saw they would joust no more, he rode back to Sir Tristram.

"You have done very well," said Sir Tristram, "and honourably you have done, as a good knight should."

This Galihodin was a near cousin of Galahalt, the high prince; and this Galihodin was a king in the country of Surluse.

So as Sir Tristram, Sir Palomides and Isolde the Fair rode together, they saw four knights ahead of them, and every man had his spear in his hand: the first was Sir Gawain, the second Sir Uwain, the third Sir Sagramore le Desirous, and the fourth was Dodinas le Savage. When Sir Palomides saw that the four knights were ready to joust, he begged Sir Tristram to give him leave to fight them all, for as long as he could keep himself on horseback. "And if I am struck down, I beg you, avenge me."

"Well," said Sir Tristram, "I will do as you wish; and you are not so eager to win honour but that I am just as eager to increase your honour."

And with that Sir Gawain put out his spear, and Sir Palomides another; and they came together so fiercely that Sir Palomides struck Sir Gawain to the ground, horse and all; and in the same way he served Uwain, Sir Dodinas and Sagramore. All four of these knights Sir Palomides struck down, with several spears. And then Sir Tristram went on toward Lonazep.

And when they had gone, Galihodin came up with his ten knights to Sir Gawain, and there he told him all about how he had fared.

"I wonder," said Sir Gawain, "what knights they are, who are dressed like that in green."

"And that knight on the white horse struck me down," said Galihodin, "and my three companions."

"And he did the same to me," said Gawain. "And I know very well," said Sir Gawain, "that the man on the white horse is either Sir Tristram or else Sir Palomides, and that finely dressed lady is Queen Isolde."

So they talked of one thing and another.

And meanwhile Sir Tristram rode on until he came to the spring where his two tents were pitched; and there they dismounted, and there they saw many tents and great splendour. Then Sir Tristram left Sir Palomides and Sir Gareth there with Isolde the Fair, and Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan rode to Lonazep to listen for news; and Sir Tristram rode on Sir Palomides' white horse. And when he came into the castle, Sir Dinadan heard a great horn blow, and many knights gathered to the horn.

Then Sir Tristram asked a knight, "What does the blast of that horn mean?"

"Sir," said that knight, "it is for all those who will hold against King Arthur at this tournament. The first is the King of Ireland, and then the King of Surluse, the King of Listinoise, the King of Northumberland, and the King of the best part of Wales, with many other countries. And they are gathering in council, to decide what order they will keep."

But the King of Ireland, whose name was Marhalt, and who was father to the good knight Sir Marhaus whom Sir Tristram killed, did all the speaking, so that Sir Tristram could hear it. He said, "Lords and companions, let us look to ourselves, for you may be sure King Arthur is certain of many good knights, or else he would not fight us with so few knights. So my advice is this: let every king have a standard and a badge of his own, so that every knight rallies to his own rightful lord, and then every king and captain can help his knights if they have need."

When Sir Tristram had heard all their counsel, he rode to King Arthur to hear his counsel.
