Chapter 67: How Sir Tristram and his companions came to the tournament at Lonazep, and of several jousts and matters

But Sir Tristram had no sooner come into the place than Sir Gawain and Sir Galihodin went to King Arthur and told him, "That same green knight in the green armour, with the white horse, struck the two of us down, and six of our companions, this very day."

"Well," said Arthur.

And then he called Sir Tristram and asked him what his name was.

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "you must hold me excused for the present, for you shall not know my name."

And with that Sir Tristram turned back and rode away.

"I am amazed," said Arthur, "that that knight will not tell me his name. But go, Griflet le Fise de Dieu, and ask him to speak with me privately, between the two of us."

Then Sir Griflet rode after him and overtook him, and told him that King Arthur asked him to speak with him secretly, apart.

"On this condition," said Sir Tristram, "I will speak with him: I will turn back if you will guarantee me that he will not ask to hear my name."

"I will undertake," said Sir Griflet, "that he will not press you hard for it."

So they rode together until they came to King Arthur.

"Fair sir," said King Arthur, "why is it you will not tell me your name?"

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "I do not hide my name without a reason."

"Which side will you take?" said King Arthur.

"Truly, my lord," said Sir Tristram, "I do not know yet which side I will be on, until I come to the field; and wherever my heart leads me, there I will hold. But tomorrow you will see and find out which side I come in on."

And with that he turned back and went to his tents.

And in the morning they all armed themselves in green and came into the field; and there young knights began to joust, and did many honourable deeds. Then Gareth spoke to Sir Tristram, and begged him for leave to break his spear, for he thought it a shame to carry his spear back whole. When Sir Tristram heard him say so, he laughed and said, "Please, do your best."

Then Sir Gareth got a spear and offered to joust. A knight saw that who was nephew to the King with the Hundred Knights; his name was Selises, and he was a good man of arms. So this knight Selises squared up to Sir Gareth, and the two of them met so hard that each struck the other down to the ground, horse and all, so that they were both bruised and hurt; and there they lay until the King with the Hundred Knights helped Selises up, and Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides helped Gareth up again. And so they rode with Sir Gareth to their tents, and then they pulled off his helm.

And when Isolde the Fair saw Sir Gareth bruised in the face, she asked him what was wrong with him.

"Madam," said Sir Gareth, "I took a great blow, and I believe I gave one back; but none of my companions, God thank them, would come to my rescue."

"Truly," said Palomides, "it was not the place of any of us to joust today, for no proven knights have jousted today, and you would joust, of your own choosing. And when the other side saw you offer yourself to joust, they sent one against you who is an exceedingly good knight for his age, for I know him well; his name is Selises. And you met him honourably, and neither of you is dishonoured; and so rest yourself, so that you will be ready and sound to joust tomorrow."

"As for that," said Gareth, "I will not fail you, if I can sit astride my horse."
