Chapter 68: How Sir Tristram and his companions jousted, and of the noble feats they did in that tournament

"Now which side," said Tristram, "is it best for us to be on tomorrow?"

"Sir," said Palomides, "my advice is that you be against King Arthur tomorrow, for on his side will be Sir Lancelot and many good knights of his blood with him. And the more men of honour there are, the more honour we shall win."

"That is very knightly spoken," said Sir Tristram, "and just as you advise me, so we will do."

"In the name of God," they all said.

So that night they were lodged with the best. And in the morning, when it was day, they were all arrayed in green trappings, shields and spears, and Isolde the Fair in the same colour, and her three damsels. And so these four knights came into the field, from one end to the other. And so they led Isolde the Fair to the place where she was to stand and watch all the jousts, in a bay window; but she was always veiled, so that no one could see her face. And then these three knights rode straight to the side of the King of Scots.

When King Arthur had seen them do all this, he asked Sir Lancelot who these knights and that queen were.

"Sir," said Lancelot, "I cannot tell you for certain; but if Sir Tristram is in this country, or Sir Palomides, you may be sure it is certainly they, and Isolde the Fair."

Then Arthur called Sir Kay to him and said, "Go quickly and find out how many knights of the Round Table are missing here, for you can tell by the seats."

So Sir Kay went, and saw by the names written on the seats that ten knights were missing. And these are the names of those who were not there: Sir Tristram, Sir Palomides, Sir Percival, Sir Gaheris, Sir Epinogris, Sir Mordred, Sir Dinadan, Sir La Cote Male Taile, and Sir Pelleas the noble knight.

"Well," said Arthur, "some of these, I dare say, are here today against us."

Then two brothers came in, cousins of Sir Gawain; the one was called Sir Edward, the other Sir Sadok, and they were two good knights. And they asked King Arthur that they might have the first jousts, because they were of Orkney.

"I am pleased," said King Arthur.

Then Sir Edward met the King of Scots, on whose side were Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides; and Sir Edward struck the King of Scots clean off his horse, and Sir Sadok struck down the King of North Wales and gave him a tremendous fall, so that there was a great cry on King Arthur's side, and that made Sir Palomides exceedingly angry. And so Sir Palomides set his shield and his spear, and with all his might he met Sir Edward of Orkney, and struck him so hard that his horse could not stay on its feet, and so they crashed to the ground; and then with the same spear Sir Palomides struck down Sir Sadok over his horse's rump.

"Oh, Jesus," said Arthur, "what knight is that, dressed all in green? He jousts mightily."

"Believe me," said Sir Gawain, "he is a good knight, and you will see him joust better yet before he goes. And you will see yet," said Sir Gawain, "another, bigger knight in the same colour than he is; for that same knight," said Sir Gawain, "who just now struck down my four cousins, struck me down within these two days, and seven companions besides."

Meanwhile, as they stood there talking, Sir Tristram came into the place on a black horse, and before he stopped he struck down with one spear four good knights of Orkney who were of Sir Gawain's kin; and Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan each struck down a good knight.

"Jesus," said Arthur, "that knight on the black horse is doing mightily and marvellously well."

"Wait," said Sir Gawain. "That knight with the black horse hasn't even begun yet."

Then Sir Tristram put back on their horses the two kings whom Edward and Sadok had unhorsed at the beginning. And then Sir Tristram drew his sword and rode into the thickest of the fighting against the men of Orkney; and there he struck down knights, and tore off helms, and pulled away their shields, and knocked down many knights. He bore himself so that Sir Arthur and all the knights were amazed when they saw one knight do such great deeds of arms. And Sir Palomides did not fail on the other side, but did so marvellously well that everyone wondered at it. For there King Arthur likened Sir Tristram, who was on the black horse, to a mad lion, and likened Sir Palomides on the white horse to a mad leopard, and Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan to eager wolves. But the custom among them was such that none of the kings would help another, but all the company of each standard helped one another as they could. But all the while Sir Tristram did so many deeds of arms that the men of Orkney grew weary of him, and so they withdrew to Lonazep.
