Chapter 69: How Sir Tristram was unhorsed and struck down by Sir Lancelot, and how afterwards Sir Tristram struck down King Arthur

Then came the cry of the heralds and of all the common people: "The Green Knight has done marvellously, and beaten all the men of Orkney!"

And there the heralds counted that Sir Tristram, who sat on the black horse, had struck down thirty knights with spear and sword, and Sir Palomides had struck down twenty knights; and most of these fifty knights were of King Arthur's household, and proven knights.

"So help me God," said Arthur to Sir Lancelot, "this is a great shame to us, to see four knights beat so many knights of mine. So make yourself ready, for we will fight them."

"Sir," said Lancelot, "believe me, there are two exceedingly good knights there, and it would be no great honour to us to fight them now, for they have laboured hard today."

"As for that," said Arthur, "I will be avenged. So take with you Sir Bleoberis and Sir Ector, and I will be the fourth," said Arthur.

"Sir," said Lancelot, "you will find me ready, and my brother Sir Ector, and my cousin Sir Bleoberis."

And so when they were ready and on horseback, Sir Arthur said to Sir Lancelot, "Now choose which of them you will meet."

"Sir," said Lancelot, "I will meet the green knight on the black horse" (that was Sir Tristram), "and my cousin Sir Bleoberis shall match the green knight on the white horse" (that was Sir Palomides), "and my brother Sir Ector shall match the green knight on the white horse" (that was Sir Gareth).

"Then I must fight," said Sir Arthur, "the green knight on the grey horse," and that was Sir Dinadan.

"Now let every man take heed of his opponent," said Sir Lancelot.

And so they trotted on together, and there Sir Lancelot met Sir Tristram. So Sir Lancelot struck Sir Tristram so hard on the shield that he bore horse and man to the ground; but Sir Lancelot thought it had been Sir Palomides, and so he rode on. And then Sir Bleoberis met Sir Palomides, and struck him so hard on the shield that Sir Palomides and his white horse went crashing to the ground. Then Sir Ector de Maris struck Sir Gareth so hard that down he fell off his horse. And the noble King Arthur met Sir Dinadan, and struck him clean out of his saddle. And then for a while the talk went round that the green knights had been beaten down.

When the King of North Wales saw that Sir Tristram had had a fall, he remembered what great deeds of arms Sir Tristram had done. Then he made many knights ready, for the custom and the proclamation were such that any knight who was struck down and could not be horsed again by his companions, or by his own strength, should be prisoner for that day to the side that had struck him down. So the King of North Wales came in, and rode straight to Sir Tristram; and when he came near him he quickly dismounted and handed Sir Tristram his horse, and said this: "Noble knight, I do not know you, or what country you are from; but for the noble deeds you have done today, take my horse there, and let me do as well as I can; for, so help me Jesus, you are more worthy to have my horse than I am myself."

"Many thanks," said Sir Tristram, "and if I can, I will repay you. See that you do not go far from us, and I expect I will win you another horse."

And with that Sir Tristram mounted his horse, and there he met King Arthur, and gave him such a blow on the helm with his sword that King Arthur had no power to keep his saddle. And then Sir Tristram gave the King of North Wales King Arthur's horse. Then there was a great crush around King Arthur to horse him again; but Sir Palomides would not let King Arthur be horsed again, but all the while Sir Palomides struck out mightily on the right hand and on the left, like a noble knight. And meanwhile Sir Tristram rode through the thickest of the crowd, and struck down knights on the right hand and on the left, and tore off helms, and so went on out to his tents, and left Sir Palomides on foot; and Sir Tristram changed his horse and disguised himself all in red, horse and armour.
