Chapter 70: How Sir Tristram changed his armour and it was all red, and how he bore himself, and how Sir Palomides killed Lancelot's horse

And when the queen, Isolde the Fair, saw that Sir Tristram was unhorsed, and did not know where he was, she wept bitterly. But Sir Tristram, when he was ready, came dashing swiftly into the field, and then Isolde the Fair spotted him. And so he did great deeds of arms; with one spear, and a great one, Sir Tristram struck down five knights before he stopped. Then Sir Lancelot quickly saw that it was Sir Tristram, and then he regretted that he had struck him down; and so Sir Lancelot went out of the thick of the fighting to rest, and soon he came back again. And now when Sir Tristram came into the crowd, by his great strength he put Sir Palomides back on his horse, and Sir Gareth, and Sir Dinadan, and then they began to do marvellously. But neither Sir Palomides nor either of his two companions knew who had helped them back on horseback. But all the while Sir Tristram was near them and came to their aid, and they did not know him, because he had changed into red armour; and all this while Sir Lancelot was away.

So when Isolde the Fair recognised Sir Tristram on horseback again, she was exceedingly glad, and then she laughed and looked happy. And as it happened, Sir Palomides looked up toward her where she was in the window, and saw how she laughed; and with that he took such joy in it that he struck down, with spear and with sword, every man he met. For through the sight of her he was so lost in love of her that it seemed to him at that time that if both Sir Tristram and Sir Lancelot had been against him, they would have won no honour from him. And in his heart, as the book says, Sir Palomides wished that he might fight Sir Tristram, with honour, in front of everyone, because of Isolde the Fair. Then Sir Palomides began to double his strength, and he did so marvellously that everyone wondered at him, and all the while he cast his eyes up to Isolde the Fair. And when he saw her look so happy, he bore himself like a lion, so that no man could stand against him.

And then Sir Tristram watched how Sir Palomides was laying about him, and he said to Sir Dinadan, "So help me God, Sir Palomides is an exceedingly good knight, and one who lasts well; but I never saw him do such deeds, nor ever heard tell that he did so much in one day."

"It is his day," said Dinadan; and he would say no more to Sir Tristram. But to himself he said, "If only you knew for whose love he is doing all these deeds of arms! Sir Tristram would soon cut his courage down to size."

"Alas," said Sir Tristram, "that Sir Palomides is not christened."

So said King Arthur, and so said all those who watched him. Then all the people gave him the prize, as the best knight that day, saying he outdid Sir Lancelot or Sir Tristram.

"Well," said Dinadan to himself, "all this honour Sir Palomides has here today he can thank Queen Isolde for; for if she had been away today, Sir Palomides would not have won the prize today."

Just then Sir Lancelot du Lake came into the field, and saw and heard the shouting and the cry, and the great honour Sir Palomides had won. He squared up to Sir Palomides with a great, mighty, long spear, and meant to strike him down. And when Sir Palomides saw Sir Lancelot coming at him so fast, he rode at Sir Lancelot as fast as he could, with his sword; and as Sir Lancelot was about to strike him, he knocked his spear aside and cut it in two with his sword. And Sir Palomides rushed at Sir Lancelot, meaning to put him to shame; and with his sword he struck the neck of the horse Sir Lancelot was riding, and then Sir Lancelot fell to the ground.

Then the cry was huge and loud: "See how Sir Palomides the Saracen has struck down Sir Lancelot's horse!"

At once there were many knights angry with Sir Palomides because he had done that deed; and so many knights there held that it was an unknightly thing to do in a tournament, to kill a horse on purpose, unless it had been done in real battle, life for life.
