Chapter 71: What Sir Lancelot said to Sir Palomides, and how the prize for that day was given to Sir Palomides

When Sir Ector de Maris saw his brother Sir Lancelot suffer such an insult, and set on foot like that, he took a spear in a fury and rode against Sir Palomides, and struck him so hard that he bore him clean off his horse. Sir Tristram saw that, who was in red armour, and he struck Sir Ector de Maris clean off his horse.

Then Sir Lancelot set his shield on his shoulder, with his sword naked in his hand, and so came straight at Sir Palomides, fiercely, and said, "Know this: today you have done me the greatest insult that any honourable knight ever did me in tournament or in jousts, and I will be avenged on you for it. So look to yourself."

"Ah, mercy, noble knight," said Palomides, "and forgive me my unworthy deeds, for I have neither the power nor the strength to stand against you; and I have done so much today that I know very well I never did so much before, and never will again in all my days. And so, most noble knight, I beg you, spare me for today, and I promise you I will always be your knight while I live. If you rob me of my honour now, you rob me of the greatest honour I ever had, or ever will have, in all my days."

"Well," said Sir Lancelot, "I see, to tell you the truth, that you have done marvellously well today; and I partly understand for whose love you do it, and I know very well that love is a great mistress. And if my lady were here, as she is not, believe me," said Sir Lancelot, "you would not carry off the honour. But beware that your love is not found out, for if Sir Tristram comes to know it, you will regret it. And since my quarrel is not here, you shall have the honour today, as far as I am concerned; considering the great toil and pain you have had today, it would be no honour to me to take it from you."

And with that Sir Lancelot let Sir Palomides go.

Then Sir Lancelot, by great force and strength, got his own horse back in spite of twenty knights. So when Sir Lancelot was on horseback, he did many marvels, and so did Sir Tristram, and Sir Palomides likewise. Then Sir Lancelot struck down with a spear Sir Dinadan, and the King of Scotland, and the King of Wales, and the King of Northumberland, and the King of Listinoise. So then Sir Lancelot and his companions struck down a good forty knights. Then the King of Ireland and the King of the Straight Marches came to the rescue of Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides. A great fight began there, and many knights were struck down on both sides; and all the while Sir Lancelot spared Sir Tristram, and he spared him. And Sir Palomides would not meddle with Sir Lancelot, and so there was crashing here and there. And then King Arthur sent out many knights of the Round Table; and Sir Palomides was always in the very front, and Sir Tristram did so mightily well that the king and everyone else marvelled.

And then the king had the end of the day sounded; and because Sir Palomides began first, and never once walked or rode out of the field to rest, but was always doing marvellously well, either on foot or on horseback, and lasted longest, King Arthur and all the kings gave Sir Palomides the honour and the prize for that day.

Then Sir Tristram ordered Sir Dinadan to fetch the queen, Isolde the Fair, and bring her to his two tents that stood by the spring. And so Dinadan did as he was ordered. But when Sir Palomides understood and learned that Sir Tristram was the one in the red armour, on a red horse, you may be sure he was glad, and so were Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan, for they had all thought that Sir Tristram had been taken prisoner. And then every knight went off to his lodging.

And then King Arthur and every knight talked of those knights; but above all men they gave Sir Palomides the prize, and all the knights who knew Sir Palomides wondered at his deeds.

"Sir," said Sir Lancelot to Arthur, "as for Sir Palomides, if he is the green knight, I dare say he is the most worthy to have the prize for today, for he never rested, and never changed his gear, and he began first and held on longest. And yet I know very well," said Sir Lancelot, "that there was a better knight than he, and that will be proved before we leave, on my life."

So they talked on both sides; and so Sir Dinadan jeered at Sir Tristram and said, "What the devil has got into you today? For Sir Palomides' strength never flagged once today, but all the while he doubled it."
