Chapter 72: How Sir Dinadan goaded Sir Tristram into doing well

"And you, Sir Tristram," Dinadan went on, "have gone about all day as if you were asleep, and so I call you a coward."

"Well, Dinadan," said Sir Tristram, "I was never called a coward before by any knight on earth, in all my life. And know this, sir: I count myself not one bit more a coward because Sir Lancelot gave me a fall, for I except him from all other knights. And make no mistake, Sir Dinadan, if Sir Lancelot has a good quarrel, he is far too good for any knight now living; and still, for his patience, his generosity, his goodness and his courtesy, I call him the knight without a peer."

And so Sir Tristram was more or less angry with Sir Dinadan. But Sir Dinadan said all these words because he wanted to anger Sir Tristram, to make him rouse his spirits and get angry; for Sir Dinadan knew well that if Sir Tristram were thoroughly angry, Sir Palomides would not win the prize in the morning. And it was for this purpose that Sir Dinadan said all this jeering and all these words against Sir Tristram.

"Truly," said Sir Palomides, "as for Sir Lancelot, for noble knighthood, courtesy, prowess and gentleness, I know no one his equal; for today," said Sir Palomides, "I behaved most discourteously toward Sir Lancelot, and most unknightly, and he behaved most knightly and courteously to me in return; for if he had been as ill-bred toward me as I was toward him, I would have won no honour today. And so," said Palomides, "I will be Sir Lancelot's knight as long as my life lasts."

This talk went on in the lodgings of the kings. But all the kings, lords and knights said that for true knighthood, and for sheer strength, for goodness and for courtesy, Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram carried the prize above all the knights who ever were in Arthur's days. And there were never knights in Arthur's days who did half so many deeds as they did; as the book says, ten knights together did not do half the deeds that they did. And there was never a knight in their days who asked Sir Lancelot or Sir Tristram to undertake any quest, so long as it was not to their shame, but they did what he wished.
