Chapter 73: How King Arthur and Sir Lancelot came to see Isolde the Fair, and how Palomides struck down King Arthur

So in the morning Sir Lancelot left, and Sir Tristram was ready, and Isolde the Fair with Sir Palomides and Sir Gareth. And so they rode, all in green, very finely dressed, to the forest. And Sir Tristram left Sir Dinadan asleep in his bed. And as they rode, it happened that the king and Lancelot were standing in a window, and saw Sir Tristram and Isolde ride by.

"Sir," said Lancelot, "there rides the most beautiful lady in the world, except your queen, Dame Guinevere."

"Who is that?" said Sir Arthur.

"Sir," he said, "it is Queen Isolde, who, my lady your queen excepted, is without equal."

"Take your horse," said Arthur, "and arm yourself completely, as I will do; and I promise you," said the king, "I will see her."

Then at once they were armed and horsed, and each took a spear and rode to the forest.

"Sir," said Lancelot, "it is not good for you to go too near them, for believe me, there are two knights there as good as any now living; and so, sir, I beg you, do not be too hasty. For perhaps some knights will be displeased if we come upon them suddenly."

"As for that," said Arthur, "I will see her, for I care nothing for whom I offend."

"Sir," said Lancelot, "you are putting yourself in great danger."

"As for that," said the king, "we will take our chance."

So at once the king rode right up to her, and greeted her, and said, "God save you."

"Sir," she said, "you are welcome."

Then the king gazed at her, and liked her wonderfully well.

With that Sir Palomides came up to Arthur and said, "Discourteous knight, what are you looking for here? It is discourteous of you to come upon a lady like this, without warning. So take yourself off."

Sir Arthur paid no attention to Sir Palomides' words, but went on looking at Queen Isolde. Then Sir Palomides grew angry, and with that he took a spear and came crashing down on King Arthur, and struck him down with the spear.

When Sir Lancelot saw that insult from Sir Palomides, he said to himself, "I am loath to fight that knight, and not for his own sake but for Sir Tristram's. And one thing I am sure of: if I strike down Sir Palomides, I must fight Sir Tristram, and that would be too much for me, to match them both, for they are two noble knights. Nevertheless, whether I live or die, I must avenge my lord, and so I will, whatever becomes of me."

And with that Sir Lancelot cried to Sir Palomides, "Guard yourself against me!"

And then Sir Lancelot and Sir Palomides rushed together with two spears, mightily, but Sir Lancelot struck Sir Palomides so hard that he went clean out of his saddle and had a great fall.

When Sir Tristram saw Sir Palomides take that fall, he said to Sir Lancelot, "Sir knight, guard yourself, for I must joust with you."

"As for jousting with me," said Sir Lancelot, "I will not fail you, for I have no fear of you. But I would be loath to fight you if I had the choice, for I want you to know that I must avenge my particular lord, who was unhorsed without warning and in an unknightly way. And so, though I have avenged that fall, take no offence at it, for he is such a friend to me that I cannot see him shamed."

At once Sir Tristram understood, by his bearing and by his knightly words, that it was Sir Lancelot du Lake, and Sir Tristram truly judged that it was King Arthur whom Sir Palomides had struck down. And then Sir Tristram put his spear from him, and put Sir Palomides back on horseback, and Sir Lancelot put King Arthur on horseback, and so they departed.

"So help me God," said Sir Tristram to Palomides, "you did not act honourably when you struck down that knight so suddenly as you did. And believe me, you did yourself great shame, for the knights came here out of their good breeding to see a beautiful lady; and that is every good knight's part, to look upon a beautiful lady; and you had no business showing off such feats of strength in front of my lady. Mark my words, it will turn to anger, for the one you struck down was King Arthur, and the other was the good knight Sir Lancelot. But I will not forget the words of Sir Lancelot when he called him a man of great honour; by that I knew it was King Arthur. And as for Sir Lancelot, if there had been five hundred knights in the meadow, he would not have refused them, and yet he said he would refuse me. By that, again, I knew it was Sir Lancelot, for he always spares me wherever we meet, and shows me great kindness; and of all knights, I except none, let men say what they will, he bears the flower of all chivalry, let anyone tell him so who will. If he is truly angered, and chooses to do his utmost without any favour, I know of no man alive whom Sir Lancelot is not too hard for, be it on horseback or on foot."

"I can never believe," said Palomides, "that King Arthur would ride about so secretly, like a poor knight-errant."

"Ah," said Sir Tristram, "you do not know my lord Arthur, for all knights can learn how to be a knight from him. And so you may well be sorry," said Sir Tristram, "for your unworthy deeds to so noble a king."

"And a thing that is done cannot be undone," said Palomides.

Then Sir Tristram sent Queen Isolde to her lodging in the priory, to watch all the tournament from there.
