Chapter 74: How on the second day Palomides deserted Sir Tristram and went over to the opposite side against him

Then a proclamation was made to all the knights that when they heard a horn blow, they should joust as they had done the first day. And just as the brothers Sir Edward and Sir Sadok began the jousts the first day, Sir Uwain, the son of King Uriens, and Sir Lucan the butler began the jousts the second day. And at the first encounter Sir Uwain struck down the King of Scots' son; and Sir Lucan rode against the King of Wales, and they broke their spears all to pieces; and they were both so fierce that they crashed together so that both fell to the ground. Then the men of Orkney horsed Sir Lucan again. And then Sir Tristram de Liones came in; and then Sir Tristram struck down Sir Uwain and Sir Lucan; and Sir Palomides struck down two other knights, and Sir Gareth struck down two other knights.

Then Sir Arthur said to Sir Lancelot, "See how well those three knights are doing, and especially the first who jousted."

"Sir," said Lancelot, "that knight has not even begun yet; but you will see him do marvellously today."

And then the duke's son of Orkney came into the place, and then they began to do many deeds of arms.

When Sir Tristram saw them begin like that, he said to Palomides, "How do you feel? Can you do today as you did yesterday?"

"No," said Palomides, "I feel so weary, and so badly bruised from the deeds of yesterday, that I cannot hold out as I did yesterday."

"I am sorry for that," said Sir Tristram, "for I shall miss you today."

Sir Palomides said, "Do not rely on me, for I cannot do as I did."

All these words Palomides said to deceive Sir Tristram.

"Sir," said Sir Tristram to Sir Gareth, "then I must rely on you; and so I beg you, do not be far from me, so that you can come to my rescue."

"If need be," said Sir Gareth, "I will not fail you in anything I can do."

Then Sir Palomides rode off by himself; and then, to spite Sir Tristram, he put himself in the thickest of the crowd among the men of Orkney, and there he did such marvellous deeds of arms that everyone wondered at him, for no one could stand a single stroke from him.

When Sir Tristram saw Sir Palomides do such deeds, he marvelled, and said to himself, "He is weary of my company."

So Sir Tristram watched him a long while and did little else, for the shouting and the cry were so huge and loud that Sir Tristram wondered where the strength came from that Sir Palomides had there in the field.

"Sir," said Sir Gareth to Sir Tristram, "do you not remember the words Sir Dinadan said to you yesterday, when he called you a coward? Truly, sir, he meant no harm by it, for you are the man he loves most in the world, and all that he said was for your honour. And so," said Sir Gareth to Sir Tristram, "let me see today what you are made of; and do not stand gaping at Sir Palomides like that, for he is straining to win all the glory and honour away from you."

"I can well believe it," said Sir Tristram. "And since I understand his ill will and his envy, you will see, if I exert myself, that the acclaim that is on him now will be gone."

Then Sir Tristram rode into the thickest of the crowd, and then he did so marvellously well, and did such great deeds of arms, that everyone said Sir Tristram did twice as many deeds of arms as Sir Palomides had done before. And then the acclaim passed clean away from Sir Palomides, and all the people cried out for Sir Tristram.

"Oh, Jesus," said the people, "see how Sir Tristram strikes down so many knights with his spear! And see," they all said, "how many knights he strikes down with his sword, and how many knights' helms and shields he has torn off!"

And so he drove all the men of Orkney before him.

"How now?" said Sir Lancelot to King Arthur. "I told you that today a knight would put on a fine show. There rides a knight, you can see, who does knightly, for he has strength and wind."

"So help me God," said Arthur to Lancelot, "you are right, for I never saw a better knight, for he far surpasses Sir Palomides."

"Sir, believe me," said Lancelot, "it must be so, by right, for it is the man himself, that noble knight Sir Tristram."

"I can well believe it," said Arthur.

But when Sir Palomides heard that the shouting and the cry had turned away from him, he rode out to one side and watched Sir Tristram. And when Sir Palomides saw Sir Tristram do so marvellously well, he wept exceedingly bitterly from sheer vexation, for he knew well he would win no honour that day; for Sir Palomides knew well that when Sir Tristram chose to put forth his strength and his manhood, he himself would get but little honour that day.
