Chapter 75: How Sir Tristram left the field, and woke Sir Dinadan, and changed into black

Then came King Arthur, and the King of North Wales, and Sir Lancelot du Lake; and Sir Bleoberis, Sir Bors de Ganis and Sir Ector de Maris, these three knights came into the field with Sir Lancelot. And then Sir Lancelot with the three knights of his kin did such great deeds of arms that all the acclaim began to turn to Sir Lancelot. And so they beat the King of Wales and the King of Scots far back, and made them withdraw from the field; but Sir Tristram and Sir Gareth stayed on in the field and withstood everything that came at them, so that all men wondered that any knight could withstand so many blows. But all the while Sir Lancelot, and his three kinsmen at Sir Lancelot's command, held back from Sir Tristram.

Then said Sir Arthur, "Is that Sir Palomides who holds out so well?"

"No," said Sir Lancelot, "believe me, it is the good knight Sir Tristram, for you can see Sir Palomides over there, watching and waiting and doing little or nothing. And sir, you should understand that Sir Tristram expects this day to beat us all out of the field. And as for me," said Sir Lancelot, "I will not beat him, let whoever will beat him. Sir," said Lancelot to Arthur, "you can see how Sir Palomides waits over there as though he were in a dream; believe me, he is very downcast that Tristram does such deeds of arms."

"Then he is nothing but a fool," said Arthur, "for Sir Palomides never was, and never will be, of such prowess as Sir Tristram. And if he has any envy of Sir Tristram, and has come in with him on his side, he is a false knight."

As the king and Sir Lancelot were talking like this, Sir Tristram rode quietly out of the thick of the fighting, so that no one saw him but Isolde the Fair and Sir Palomides, for those two would not take their eyes off Sir Tristram. And when Sir Tristram came to his tents he found Sir Dinadan in his bed asleep.

"Wake up," said Tristram. "You ought to be ashamed to sleep like this when knights are fighting in the field."

Then Sir Dinadan got up quickly and said, "What do you want me to do?"

"Get yourself ready," said Sir Tristram, "to ride with me into the field."

So when Sir Dinadan was armed he looked at Sir Tristram's helmet and at his shield, and when he saw so many dents of blows on his helmet and on his shield he said, "It's a good thing I was asleep, then, for if I had been with you I would have had to follow you out of shame; more out of shame than out of any prowess there is in me. I can see well enough now from those dents that I would have been well and truly beaten, as I was yesterday."

"Stop your joking," said Sir Tristram, "and come on, so that we can get back into the field."

"What," said Sir Dinadan, "is your blood up? Yesterday you went about as though you were dreaming."

So then Sir Tristram was dressed in black armour.

"Oh, Jesus," said Dinadan, "what's got into you today? You seem to me wilder than you were yesterday."

Then Sir Tristram smiled and said to Dinadan, "Keep close to me; if you see me overmatched, make sure you are always behind me, and I will clear the way for you, by God's grace."

So Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan took their horses. Sir Palomides saw all this, both their going and their coming, and so did Isolde the Fair, for she knew Sir Tristram above all others.
