Chapter 76: How Sir Palomides changed his shield and his armour in order to hurt Sir Tristram, and what Sir Lancelot did to Sir Tristram

Then when Sir Palomides saw that Sir Tristram was disguised, he thought he would do him a shameful turn. So Sir Palomides rode to a knight who was badly wounded, who sat by a fair spring away from the field.

"Sir knight," said Sir Palomides, "I beg you to lend me your armour and your shield, for mine is too well known in this field, and that has done me great harm; and you shall have my armour and my shield, which are as sound as yours."

"Gladly," said the knight, "you shall have my armour and my shield, if they can be of any use to you."

So Sir Palomides armed himself hastily in that knight's armour and with his shield, which shone like any crystal or silver, and so he came riding into the field. And then neither Sir Tristram nor anyone of King Arthur's party knew Sir Palomides. And just as Sir Palomides came into the field, Sir Tristram struck down three knights, right in front of Sir Palomides. And then Sir Palomides rode against Sir Tristram, and they met each other with great spears, so that the spears burst in their hands. And then they dashed together eagerly with swords. Then Sir Tristram wondered what knight this was who fought so knightly with him. Then Sir Tristram was angry, for he felt him to be exceedingly strong, so that he judged he would not be able to deal with the rest of the knights, because of the strength of Sir Palomides. So they laid into each other and gave each other many heavy blows, and many knights wondered what knight this could be who matched himself so against the black knight, Sir Tristram. Isolde the Fair knew very well that it was Sir Palomides fighting with Sir Tristram, for she had seen it all from her window where she stood, as Sir Palomides changed armour with the wounded knight. And then she began to weep so bitterly at the malice of Sir Palomides that she fainted where she stood.

Then Sir Lancelot came in with the knights of Orkney. And when the other party saw Sir Lancelot, they cried, "Turn back, turn back, here comes Sir Lancelot du Lake!"

So knights came and said, "Sir Lancelot, you must fight with that knight over there in the black armour" (that was Sir Tristram), "for he has almost overcome that good knight with the silver shield who is fighting with him" (that was Sir Palomides).

Then Sir Lancelot rode between Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides, and Sir Lancelot said to Palomides, "Sir knight, let me have the fight, for you are in need of rest."

Sir Palomides knew Sir Lancelot well, and so did Sir Tristram; but because Sir Lancelot was a far bolder knight than himself, Palomides was glad, and let Sir Lancelot fight with Sir Tristram. For he knew well that Sir Lancelot did not know Sir Tristram, and he hoped that Sir Lancelot would beat or shame Sir Tristram, which would have made Sir Palomides very glad. And so Sir Lancelot gave Sir Tristram many heavy blows, for Sir Lancelot did not know Sir Tristram, but Sir Tristram knew Sir Lancelot well. And so they fought together a long time, so that Isolde the Fair was nearly out of her mind with sorrow.

Then Sir Dinadan told Sir Gareth that the knight in the black armour was Sir Tristram: "And that is Lancelot fighting with him, who is bound to get the better of him, for Sir Tristram has had too much hard work today."

"Then let us strike him down," said Sir Gareth.

"It is better that we do," said Sir Dinadan, "than that Sir Tristram should be shamed, for the strong knight with the silver shield is waiting over there to fall on Sir Tristram if he gets the chance."

Then at once Gareth rushed at Sir Lancelot, and gave him such a great blow on his helmet that he was stunned. And then Sir Dinadan came with a spear, and he struck Sir Lancelot such a blow that horse and all fell to the ground.

"Oh, Jesus," said Sir Tristram to Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan, "shame on you, why did you strike down so good a knight as he is, and above all when I was fighting with him? Now you have done yourselves great shame, and him no dishonour; for I was keeping him reasonably busy, even without your help."

Then Sir Palomides, who was disguised, came and struck Sir Dinadan down from his horse. Then Sir Lancelot, because Sir Dinadan had struck him down before, attacked Sir Dinadan exceedingly hard, and Sir Dinadan defended himself mightily. But Sir Tristram understood well that Sir Dinadan could not hold out against Sir Lancelot, and he was sorry for it. Then Sir Palomides came fresh at Sir Tristram. And when Sir Tristram saw him coming, he thought to be rid of him at once, because he wanted to help Sir Dinadan, who stood in great danger from Sir Lancelot. Then Sir Tristram crashed into Sir Palomides and gave him a great blow, and then Sir Tristram got hold of Sir Palomides and pulled him down underneath him. And so Sir Tristram fell with him; and Sir Tristram leapt up quickly and left Sir Palomides, and went between Sir Lancelot and Dinadan, and then those two began to fight together.

Just then Sir Dinadan got hold of Sir Tristram's horse, and called out loudly so that Sir Lancelot could hear it, "My lord Sir Tristram, take your horse."

And when Sir Lancelot heard him name Sir Tristram, "Oh, Jesus," said Lancelot, "what have I done? I am dishonoured. Ah, my lord Sir Tristram," said Lancelot, "why were you disguised? You have put yourself in great danger today; but I beg you, noble knight, to pardon me, for if I had known you we would never have fought this fight."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "this is not the first kindness you have shown me."

So they were both on horseback again.

Then all the people on the one side gave Sir Lancelot the honour and the prize, and on the other side all the people gave the honour and the prize to the noble knight Sir Tristram. But Lancelot refused it: "For I am not worthy to have this honour, for I appeal to every knight here that Sir Tristram has been longer in the field than I have, and he has struck down many more knights today than I have. And therefore I will give Sir Tristram my voice and my name, and I beg all my lords and companions to do the same."

Then there was the whole voice of dukes and earls, barons and knights, that Sir Tristram had this day proved himself the best knight.
