Chapter 77: How Sir Tristram left with Isolde the Fair, and how Palomides followed and made his excuses

Then they sounded the end of the day, and Queen Isolde was led to her tents. But you may be sure she was angry beyond measure with Sir Palomides, for she had seen all his treachery from beginning to end. And all this while neither Sir Tristram, nor Sir Gareth, nor Dinadan knew anything of the treachery of Sir Palomides; but afterwards you will hear how there arose the greatest quarrel between Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides that could be.

So when the tournament was over, Sir Tristram, Gareth and Dinadan rode with Isolde the Fair to those tents. And all the while Sir Palomides rode with them in their company, disguised as he was. But when Sir Tristram had made him out to be the same knight with the silver shield who had pressed him so hard that day, "Sir knight," said Sir Tristram, "believe me, there is no one here who has any need of your company, and therefore I ask you to leave us."

Sir Palomides answered as though he had not known Sir Tristram: "Believe me, sir knight, I will never leave this company, for one of the best knights in the world commanded me to be in this company, and until he releases me from my service I will not be released."

By that Sir Tristram knew that it was Sir Palomides.

"Ah, Sir Palomides," said the noble knight Sir Tristram, "is that the kind of knight you are? You have been wrongly named, for you have long been called a courteous knight, and this day you have shown me great discourtesy, for you nearly brought me to my death. But as for you, I think I would have done well enough; it was Sir Lancelot together with you that was too much for me. For I know no knight living for whom Sir Lancelot is not too good, if he does his utmost."

"Alas," said Sir Palomides, "are you my lord Sir Tristram?"

"Yes, sir, and you know that well enough."

"On my knighthood," said Palomides, "until now I did not know you; I thought you were the King of Ireland, for I know very well you bore his arms."

"His arms I bore," said Sir Tristram, "and I will stand by that, for I won them once in the field from a most noble knight; his name was Sir Marhaus. And with great pain I won against that knight, for there was no other way out; but Sir Marhaus died through bad doctoring, and he never yielded to me."

"Sir," said Palomides, "I thought you had gone over to Sir Lancelot's party, and that is what made me turn."

"Well said," said Sir Tristram, "and I take it so, and I forgive you."

So then they rode to their tents; and when they had dismounted they unarmed, and washed their faces and hands, and so went in to eat, and sat down at their table. But when Isolde saw Sir Palomides her colour changed, and for anger she could not speak. At once Sir Tristram noticed her face and said, "Madam, why do you look at us like that? We have worked hard today."

"My own lord," said Isolde the Fair, "for God's sake do not be displeased with me, for I can do no other; for I saw this day how you were betrayed and nearly brought to your death. Truly, sir, I saw every bit of it, how and in what way, and so, sir, how could I bear such a wicked traitor as Sir Palomides in your presence? For I saw him with my own eyes, how he watched you when you went out of the field. For all the time he waited there on his horse until he saw you coming back in. And then at once I saw him ride to the wounded knight and change armour with him, and then straight away I saw how he rode into the field. And as soon as he had found you he came at you, and so Sir Palomides fought with you on purpose. And as for him, sir, I was not greatly afraid, but I was badly afraid of Lancelot, who did not know you."

"Madam," said Palomides, "you may say whatever you like, I cannot contradict you, but on my knighthood I did not know Sir Tristram."

"Sir Palomides," said Sir Tristram, "I will accept your excuse, but I know well that you spared me very little; but all is pardoned on my side."

Then Isolde the Fair hung her head and said no more at that time.
