Chapter 78: How King Arthur and Sir Lancelot came to Sir Tristram's tent while they sat at supper, and of Sir Palomides

And with that two armed knights came to the tent, and there they both dismounted, and came in armed from head to foot.

"Fair knights," said Sir Tristram, "you are to blame to come in on me armed from head to foot like this while we are at our meal; if you wanted anything of us, you could have eased your hearts when we were in the field."

"Not so," said one of those knights. "We have not come with that intent, but believe me, Sir Tristram, we have come here as your friends. And I have come here," said the one, "to see you, and this knight has come to see Isolde the Fair."

Then said Sir Tristram, "I ask you to take off your helmets, so that I can see you."

"We will do that, as you wish," said the knights.

And when their helmets were off, Sir Tristram thought he ought to know them.

Then Sir Dinadan said quietly to Sir Tristram, "Sir, the one who spoke to you first is Sir Lancelot du Lake, and the other is my lord King Arthur."

Then Sir Tristram said to Isolde the Fair, "Madam, get up, for here is my lord, King Arthur."

Then the king and the queen kissed, and Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram embraced each other, and then there was joy beyond measure; and at the request of Isolde the Fair, King Arthur and Lancelot were unarmed, and then there was merry talk.

"Madam," said Sir Arthur, "it is many a day since I first wanted to see you, for you have been praised so far and wide; and now I dare say you are the most beautiful lady I ever saw, and Sir Tristram is as handsome and as good a knight as any I know; so it seems to me you are well matched."

"Sir, God thank you," said the noble knight Sir Tristram, and Isolde with him. "In your great goodness and generosity you have no equal."

So they talked of many things, and of the whole of the jousts.

"But why," said King Arthur, "were you against us, Sir Tristram? You are a knight of the Round Table; by right you should have been with us."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "Dinadan here, and Sir Gareth your own nephew, made me be against you."

"My lord Arthur," said Gareth, "I can well bear the blame, but it was Sir Tristram's own doing."

"I may well regret it," said Dinadan, "for this ill-starred Sir Tristram brought us to this tournament, and got us a great many hard knocks."

Then the king and Lancelot laughed so hard they could not keep their seats.

"Who was that knight," said Arthur, "who pressed you so hard, the one with the silver shield?"

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "he is sitting here at this table."

"What," said Arthur, "was it Sir Palomides?"

"Believe me, it was he," said Isolde the Fair.

"God help me," said Arthur, "that was an unknightly thing to do, for so good a knight as you, for I have heard many people call you a courteous knight."

"Sir," said Palomides, "I did not know Sir Tristram, for he was so disguised."

"God help me," said Lancelot, "that may well be, for I did not know Sir Tristram either; but I wonder why you turned to our party."

"That was done for the same reason," said Palomides.

"As for that," said Sir Tristram, "I have pardoned him, and I would be very unwilling to lose his company, for I love his company very well."

So they left that and talked of other things.

And in the evening King Arthur and Sir Lancelot went off to their lodging; but you may be sure Sir Palomides was eaten up with envy, for all that night he never had any rest in his bed, but wailed and wept beyond measure. So in the morning Sir Tristram, Gareth and Dinadan got up early, and then they went to Sir Palomides' room, and there they found him fast asleep, for he had lain awake all night, and it could be seen on his cheeks that he had wept very hard.

"Say nothing," said Sir Tristram, "for I am sure he has taken anger and sorrow from the rebuke that I gave him, and Isolde the Fair with me."
