Chapter 79: What Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides did the next day, and how King Arthur was unhorsed

Then Sir Tristram had Sir Palomides called, and told him to make ready, for it was time to go to the field. When they were ready they were armed, and dressed all in red, both Isolde and all of them; and so they led her very briskly through the field to the priory where she was lodged. And then they heard three trumpet blasts, and every king and knight made his way to the field. And the first who were ready to joust were Sir Palomides and Sir Kainus le Strange, a knight of the Round Table. And so the two of them met, but Sir Palomides struck Sir Kainus so hard that he knocked him clean over his horse's rump. And at once Sir Palomides struck down another knight, and then broke his spear, and pulled out his sword and did wonderfully well. And then the acclaim began loudly for Sir Palomides.

"Look," said King Arthur, "Palomides over there is starting to put on his show. God help me," said Arthur, "he is an exceedingly good knight."

And just as they stood talking like this, in came Sir Tristram like thunder, and he met Sir Kay the Seneschal, and there he struck him clean down from his horse; and with that same spear Sir Tristram struck down three more knights, and then he pulled out his sword and did marvellously. Then the acclaim and the cry changed from Sir Palomides and turned to Sir Tristram, and all the people cried, "Oh, Tristram! Oh, Tristram!" And then Sir Palomides was clean forgotten.

"How about that?" said Lancelot to Arthur. "There rides a knight who puts on a show."

"God help me," said Arthur to Lancelot, "you will see today that those two knights will do wonders here today."

"Sir," said Lancelot, "the one knight keeps watching the other, and strives out of envy to outdo the noble knight Sir Tristram, and Tristram knows nothing of the secret envy that Sir Palomides has for him; for all that the noble Sir Tristram does is done out of pure knighthood."

And then Sir Gareth and Dinadan did wonderfully great deeds of arms, as two noble knights, so that King Arthur spoke of them with great honour and praise; and the kings and knights on Sir Tristram's side did exceedingly well, and held together staunchly. Then Sir Arthur and Sir Lancelot took their horses and made ready, and got into the thickest of the crowd. And there Sir Tristram, not knowing him, struck down King Arthur, and then Sir Lancelot would have rescued him, but there were so many on Sir Lancelot that they pulled him down from his horse. And then the King of Ireland and the King of Scots with their knights did their utmost to take King Arthur and Sir Lancelot prisoner. When Sir Lancelot heard them say so, he went at them like a hungry lion, for he fought so that no knight dared come near him.

Then Sir Ector de Maris came, and he rode with a spear against Sir Palomides, and burst it on him all to splinters. And then Sir Ector came back and gave Sir Palomides such a stroke with a sword that he bent down over his saddlebow. And at once Sir Ector pulled Sir Palomides down under his feet; and then Sir Ector de Maris got a horse for Sir Lancelot du Lake, and brought it to him, and told him to mount it; but Sir Palomides leapt in ahead, and got the horse by the bridle, and leapt into the saddle.

"God help me," said Lancelot, "you are more worthy to have that horse than I am."

Then Sir Ector brought Sir Lancelot another horse.

"Many thanks," said Lancelot to his brother.

And so when he was on horseback again, with one spear he struck down four knights. And then Sir Lancelot brought King Arthur one of the best of the four horses. Then Sir Lancelot, with King Arthur and a few knights of Sir Lancelot's kin, did marvellous deeds; for at that time, as the book records, Sir Lancelot struck down and pulled down thirty knights. Even so, the other party held together so firmly that King Arthur and his knights were overmatched. And when Sir Tristram saw that, how hard King Arthur and his knights laboured, and above all the noble deeds that Sir Lancelot did with his own hands, he marvelled greatly.
