Chapter 80: How Sir Tristram went over to King Arthur's side, and how Palomides would not

Then Sir Tristram called Sir Palomides, Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan to him, and spoke to them like this: "My good companions, you may be sure that I will go over to King Arthur's party, for I never saw so few men do so well, and it will be a shame to us knights of the Round Table to see our lord King Arthur, and that noble knight Sir Lancelot, dishonoured."

"It will be well done," said Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan.

"Do your best," said Palomides, "for I will not change from the party I came in with."

"That is because of me," said Sir Tristram. "God speed you on your way."

And so Sir Palomides left them. Then Sir Tristram, Gareth and Dinadan turned to join Sir Lancelot. And then Sir Lancelot struck the King of Ireland clean off his horse; and so Sir Lancelot struck down the King of Scots, and the King of Wales; and then Sir Arthur rode at Sir Palomides and struck him clean off his horse; and then Sir Tristram bore down everyone he met. Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan did there as noble knights; then all the other parties began to flee.

"Alas," said Palomides, "that I should ever see this day, for now I have lost all the honour I won."

And then Sir Palomides went his way wailing, and so he took himself off until he came to a spring, and there he turned his horse loose, and took off his armour, and wailed and wept like a madman. Then many knights gave the prize to Sir Tristram, and there were many who gave the prize to Sir Lancelot.

"Fair lords," said Sir Tristram, "I thank you for the honour you would give me, but I beg you with all my heart to give your voice to Sir Lancelot, for by my faith," said Sir Tristram, "I will give Sir Lancelot my voice."

But Sir Lancelot would not have it, and so the prize was divided between the two of them.

Then every man rode to his lodging, and Sir Bleoberis and Sir Ector rode with Sir Tristram and Isolde the Fair to their tents. Then, as Sir Palomides was at the spring wailing and weeping, the Kings of Wales and of Scotland came by him in flight, and they saw Sir Palomides in that frenzy.

"Alas," they said, "that so noble a man as you should be in such a state."

And then those kings got Sir Palomides' horse back for him, and made him arm himself and mount his horse, and so he rode with them, grieving greatly. So when Sir Palomides came near the tents where Sir Tristram and Isolde the Fair were, Sir Palomides asked the two kings to wait for him there while he spoke with Sir Tristram. And when he came to the entrance of the tents, Sir Palomides called out loudly, "Where are you, Sir Tristram de Liones?"

"Sir," said Dinadan, "that is Palomides."

"What, Sir Palomides," said Sir Tristram, "won't you come in here among us?"

"Shame on you, traitor," said Palomides, "for believe me, if it were daylight, as it is night, I would kill you with my own hands. And if I can ever get at you," said Palomides, "you'll die for this day's work."

"Sir Palomides," said Sir Tristram, "you blame me wrongly, for if you had done as I did, you would have won honour. But since you give me such fair warning, I will be well on my guard against you."

"Shame on you, traitor," said Palomides, and with that he left.

Then in the morning Sir Tristram, Bleoberis and Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan, partly by water and partly by land, brought Isolde the Fair to Joyous Gard, and there they rested for a week, and made all the merriment and entertainment they could devise. And King Arthur and his knights went back to Camelot, and Sir Palomides rode with the two kings; and all the while he grieved more than any man could imagine, for he was not only grieved to be parted from Isolde the Fair, but he was in part just as sorrowful to be parted from the fellowship of Sir Tristram; for Sir Tristram was so kind and so courteous that whenever Sir Palomides remembered it he could never be merry.
