Chapter 81: How Sir Bleoberis and Sir Ector told Queen Guinevere about the beauty of Isolde the Fair

So at the end of the week Sir Bleoberis and Sir Ector took their leave of Sir Tristram and of the queen; and these two good knights were given great gifts; and Sir Gareth and Sir Dinadan stayed with Sir Tristram. And when Sir Bleoberis and Sir Ector came to where Queen Guinevere was lodged, in a castle by the seaside (and by the grace of God the queen had recovered from her illness), she asked the two knights where they had come from. They said that they came from Sir Tristram and from Isolde the Fair.

"How is Sir Tristram," said the queen, "and Isolde the Fair?"

"Truly," said those two knights, "he does as a noble knight should do; and as for Queen Isolde, she has no equal among all ladies; for, to speak of her beauty, her goodness of heart, and her gaiety, and of her virtue, we never saw her match, as far as we have ridden and walked."

"Oh, Jesus have mercy," said Queen Guinevere, "so say all the people who have seen her and spoken with her. I wish to God I had a share of her qualities. And it was my misfortune to be ill while that tournament lasted. And I suppose I shall never see in all my life such a gathering of knights and ladies as you have seen."

Then the knights told her how Palomides won the prize on the first day with great nobility; and on the second day Sir Tristram won the prize; and on the third day Sir Lancelot won the prize.

"Well," said Queen Guinevere, "who did best over all three days?"

"God help us," said these knights, "Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram had the least dishonour. And believe me, Sir Palomides did exceedingly well and mightily; but he turned against the party he came in with, and that made him lose a great part of his honour, for it seemed that Sir Palomides is exceedingly envious."

"Then he will never win honour," said Queen Guinevere, "for if it happens that an envious man once wins honour, he will be dishonoured twice over for it; and for this reason all men of honour hate an envious man, and will show him no favour; and he who is courteous, and kind, and gracious, finds favour everywhere."
