Chapter 82: How Epinogris lamented by a spring, and how Sir Palomides came and found him, and of the sorrows of them both

Now we leave this matter and turn to Sir Palomides, who rode off and lodged with the two kings, which made the kings downcast. Then the King of Ireland sent a man of his to Sir Palomides, and gave him a great warhorse, and the King of Scotland gave him great gifts; and they would gladly have had Sir Palomides stay with them, but he would not stay on any account; and so he left, and rode wherever chance led him, until it was near noon. And then, in a forest, by a spring, Sir Palomides saw a fine knight lying wounded, with his horse tied up beside him; and that knight was grieving more than he had ever heard any man grieve, for he wept without stopping, and sighed as though he would die.

Then Sir Palomides rode up to him and greeted him gently and said, "Fair knight, why are you lamenting like this? Let me lie down and lament with you, for you can be sure I am much more heavy-hearted than you are; for I dare say," said Palomides, "that my sorrow is a hundred times greater than yours, and so let us each pour out our grief to the other."

"First," said the wounded knight, "I ask you to tell me your name, for if you are not one of the noble knights of the Round Table, you will never know my name, whatever becomes of me."

"Fair knight," said Palomides, "such as I am, for better or for worse, you may know that my name is Sir Palomides, son and heir of King Astlabor, and Sir Safere and Sir Segwarides are my two brothers; and know, too, that as for myself I was never christened, but my two brothers are truly christened."

"Oh, noble knight," said that knight, "how glad I am that I have met you; and you may know that my name is Epinogris, son of the King of Northumberland. Now sit down," said Epinogris, "and let us each pour out our grief to the other."

Then Sir Palomides began his lament.

"Now I will tell you," said Palomides, "what pain I suffer. I love the most beautiful queen and lady who was ever alive, and you should know her name is Isolde the Fair, the wife of King Mark of Cornwall."

"It is great folly," said Epinogris, "to love Queen Isolde, for one of the best knights in the world loves her, and that is Sir Tristram de Liones."

"That is true," said Palomides, "for no man knows that better than I do, for I have been in Sir Tristram's company this past month, and with Isolde the Fair as well. And alas," said Palomides, "unlucky man that I am, now I have lost the fellowship of Sir Tristram for ever, and the love of Isolde the Fair for ever, and I am never likely to see her again, and Sir Tristram and I are mortal enemies to each other."

"Well," said Epinogris, "since you loved Isolde the Fair, did she ever love you back, by any sign you could think of or know of? Or did you ever have any pleasure of her?"

"No, on my knighthood," said Palomides, "I never saw any sign that she loved me any more than the rest of the world, and I never had any pleasure of her; but the other day she gave me the worst rebuke I ever had, which will never leave my heart. And yet I fully deserved that rebuke, for I did not act like a knight, and so I have lost her love and Sir Tristram's for ever; and many times I have pushed myself to do many deeds for the sake of Isolde the Fair, and she was the reason I won my honour. Alas," said Sir Palomides, "now I have lost all the honour I ever won, for I will never again have such prowess as I had in the fellowship of Sir Tristram."
