Chapter 83: How Sir Palomides brought Sir Epinogris his lady, and how Sir Palomides and Sir Safere were attacked

"No, no," said Epinogris, "your sorrow is a trifle beside my sorrow; for I had my joy of my lady and won her with my own hands, and lost her again: alas that day! This is how I first won her," said Epinogris. "My lady was an earl's daughter, and as the earl and two knights were coming from the tournament of Lonazep, for her sake I set upon this earl and his two knights, with my lady there present; and so by fortune I killed the earl there, and one of the knights, and the other knight fled, and so that night I had my lady. And in the morning, as she and I were resting here beside this well, there came to me a knight-errant, Sir Helior le Preuse by name, a bold knight, and this Sir Helior challenged me to fight for my lady. And then we fought, first on horseback and then on foot, but in the end Sir Helior wounded me so that he left me for dead, and so he took my lady with him. And so my sorrow is greater than yours, for I have had my joy, and you never had yours."

"That is true," said Palomides, "but since I can never recover from mine, I promise you that if I can meet with Sir Helior I will get your lady back for you, or else he will beat me."

Then Sir Palomides made Sir Epinogris take his horse, and so they rode to a hermitage, and there Sir Epinogris rested. And in the meantime Sir Palomides walked quietly out to rest under the trees, and nearby he saw a knight come riding with a shield that he had seen Sir Ector de Maris carry before; and about ten knights came after him, and these ten knights waited under the trees because of the heat. And soon after there came a knight with a green shield bearing a white lion, leading a lady on a palfrey. Then the knight with Sir Ector's shield, who seemed to be the master of the ten knights, rode fiercely after this knight, Sir Helior, for it was he who had wounded Sir Epinogris. And when he came near Sir Helior he told him to defend his lady.

"I will defend her," said Helior, "as well as I can."

And so they charged together so mightily that each of these knights struck the other to the ground, horse and all; and then they got up quickly and drew their swords and took their shields, and laid into each other mightily for more than an hour. Sir Palomides saw and watched all this, but in the end the knight with Sir Ector's shield was the stronger, and at last this knight struck Sir Helior down, and then that knight unlaced his helmet to strike off his head. And then Helior begged for mercy, and begged him to spare his life, and told him to take his lady. Then Sir Palomides got to his feet, because he knew well that this same lady was Epinogris' lady, and he had promised to help him.

Then Sir Palomides went straight to that lady, and took her by the hand, and asked her whether she knew a knight called Epinogris.

"Alas," she said, "that he ever knew me or I him, for for his sake I have lost my honour, and the loss of his life grieves me most of all."

"Not so, lady," said Palomides. "Come with me, for Epinogris is here in this hermitage."

"Ah, how glad I am," said the lady, "if he is alive!"

"Where are you going with that lady?" said the knight with Sir Ector's shield.

"I will do with her whatever I please," said Palomides.

"Believe me," said that knight, "you talk too big, though you think you have the advantage of me, because you have just seen me fight. Do you expect, sir knight, to take that lady away from me so easily? No, never think it; even if you were as good a knight as Sir Lancelot, or Sir Tristram, or Sir Palomides, you'll pay dearer for her than I ever did."

And so they went to battle on foot, and there they gave many heavy blows, and each wounded the other exceedingly badly, and so they fought on for more than an hour. Then Sir Palomides wondered what knight this could be who was so strong and had such good wind to keep it up, and so Palomides said, "Knight, I ask you to tell me your name."

"Believe me," said that knight, "I dare tell you my name, provided you will tell me yours."

"I will," said Palomides.

"Truly," said that knight, "my name is Safere, son of King Astlabor, and Sir Palomides and Sir Segwarides are my brothers."

"Now, believe me, my name is Sir Palomides."

Then Sir Safere knelt down on his knees, and begged his forgiveness; and then they unlaced their helmets and kissed each other, weeping. And in the meantime Sir Epinogris got up out of his bed, and heard them by the sound of the blows, and so he armed himself to help Sir Palomides if there was need.
