Chapter 84: How Sir Palomides and Sir Safere escorted Sir Epinogris to his castle, and of other adventures

Then Sir Palomides took the lady by the hand and brought her to Sir Epinogris, and there was great joy between them, for each of them fainted for joy. When they had come together again, "Fair knight and lady," said Sir Safere, "it would be a pity to part you. Jesus send you joy of each other."

"Many thanks, noble knight," said Epinogris, "and many more thanks to my lord Sir Palomides, who has won me back my lady like this by his prowess."

Then Sir Epinogris asked Sir Palomides and Sir Safere, his brother, to ride with them to his castle, for the safety of his person.

"Sir," said Palomides, "we will be ready to escort you, because you are badly wounded."

And so Epinogris and his lady were mounted, and his lady behind him on a soft-paced ambling horse. And then they rode to his castle, where they had a welcome and as great joy as Sir Palomides and Sir Safere had ever had in all the days of their lives.

So in the morning Sir Safere and Sir Palomides left, and rode on all day until after noon. And at last they heard a great weeping and a great noise down in a manor house.

"Sir," said Sir Safere then, "let us find out what this noise is."

"Gladly," said Sir Palomides.

And so they rode on until they came to a fair gate of a manor, and there sat an old man saying his prayers and telling his beads. Then Sir Palomides and Sir Safere dismounted and left their horses, and went in through the gates, and there they saw a great many fine men weeping.

"Fair sirs," said Palomides, "why are you weeping and making this sorrow?"

At once one of the knights of the castle looked at Sir Palomides and knew him, and then he went to his companions and said, "Fair companions, believe me, all of you, we have in this castle the very knight who killed our lord at Lonazep, for I know him well: it is Sir Palomides."

Then they went to arm themselves, all who could bear armour, some on horseback and some on foot, to the number of sixty. And when they were ready they came briskly at Sir Palomides and at Sir Safere with a great noise, and said this: "Defend yourself, Sir Palomides, for you are known, and by right you must die, for you killed our lord. And so, believe us, we will kill you. So defend yourself!"

Then Sir Palomides and Sir Safere set their backs to each other, and gave many great strokes, and took many great strokes; and so they fought against some twenty knights and forty gentlemen and yeomen for nearly two hours. But at last, much against their will, Sir Palomides and Sir Safere were taken and made to yield, and were put in a strong prison. And within three days twelve knights sat in judgement on them, and they found Sir Palomides guilty, and Sir Safere not guilty, of their lord's death. And when Sir Safere was to be set free there was great grief between Sir Palomides and him, and Sir Safere made so many pitiful laments at his parting that no poet could tell the tenth part of them.

"Fair brother," said Palomides, "leave off your grief and your sorrow. And if I am fated to die a shameful death, let it be welcome. But if I had known of this death that I am sentenced to, I would never have yielded."

So Sir Safere parted from his brother with the greatest grief and sorrow that ever a knight showed.

And in the morning the people of the castle appointed twelve knights to ride with Sir Palomides to the father of the same knight that Sir Palomides had killed; and so they bound his legs under an old horse's belly. And then they rode with Sir Palomides towards a castle by the seaside, which was called Pellounes, and there Sir Palomides was to have justice. That was what they had ordained; and so they rode with Sir Palomides close by the castle of Joyous Gard. And as they passed by that castle there came riding out of it past them a knight who knew Sir Palomides. And when that knight saw Sir Palomides bound on a broken-down old warhorse, the knight asked Sir Palomides why he was being led like that.

"Ah, my fair companion and knight," said Palomides, "I am riding towards my death for the killing of a knight at a tournament at Lonazep. And if I had not left my lord Sir Tristram, as I ought not to have done, I might now have been sure of having my life saved. But I beg you, sir knight, commend me to my lord Sir Tristram, and to my lady, Queen Isolde, and tell them that if I ever wronged them, I ask their forgiveness. And I also beg you to commend me to my lord King Arthur, and to all the fellowship of the Round Table, as best I may."

Then that knight wept for pity of Sir Palomides; and with that he rode to Joyous Gard as fast as his horse could run, and the knight quickly got down off his horse and went to Sir Tristram, and there he told him everything, just as you have heard, and all the while the knight wept as if he had gone mad.
