Chapter 85: How Sir Tristram made ready to rescue Sir Palomides, but Sir Lancelot rescued him before he arrived

When Sir Tristram heard how Sir Palomides was going to his death, he was grieved to hear it, and said, "Although I am angry with Sir Palomides, all the same I will not allow him to die so shameful a death, for he is a very noble knight."

And then at once Sir Tristram was armed, and took his horse and two squires with him, and rode at a great pace towards the castle of Pellounes, where Sir Palomides was condemned to death. And these twelve knights who were leading Sir Palomides passed by a spring where Sir Lancelot was. He had dismounted there, and had tied his horse to a tree, and taken off his helmet to drink from that spring; and when he saw these knights, Sir Lancelot put on his helmet and let them pass by him. And then he became aware of Sir Palomides, bound, and led shamefully to his death.

"O Jesus," said Lancelot, "what misfortune has befallen him, that he is being led to his death like this? Truly," said Lancelot, "it would be a shame to me to let this noble knight die like this if I could help him. So I will help him, whatever comes of it, or else I shall die for Sir Palomides' sake."

And then Sir Lancelot mounted his horse, and took his spear in his hand, and rode after the twelve knights who were leading Sir Palomides.

"Fair knights," said Sir Lancelot, "where are you taking that knight? It ill becomes him to ride bound."

Then these twelve knights suddenly turned their horses and said to Sir Lancelot, "Sir knight, we advise you not to meddle with this knight, for he has deserved death, and to death he is condemned."

"I am sorry," said Lancelot, "that I cannot have him released by fair means, for he is too good a knight to die such a shameful death. And so, fair knights," said Sir Lancelot, "defend yourselves as well as you can, for I will rescue that knight or die for it."

Then they began to lower their spears, and Sir Lancelot struck the foremost down, horse and man, and he served three more the same way with one spear. And then that spear broke, and with that Sir Lancelot drew his sword, and then he struck out on the right hand and on the left hand. Then within a while he had left none of those twelve knights standing, but he had laid them all on the ground, and most of them were badly wounded. And then Sir Lancelot took the best horse that he found, and untied Sir Palomides and set him on that horse; and so they turned back towards Joyous Gard. And then Sir Palomides saw Sir Tristram, how he came riding. And when Sir Lancelot saw him he knew him well, but Sir Tristram did not know him, because Sir Lancelot had a golden shield on his shoulder. So Sir Lancelot made ready to joust with Sir Tristram, so that Sir Tristram would not guess that he was Sir Lancelot.

Then Sir Palomides cried aloud to Sir Tristram, "O my lord, I beg you, do not joust with this knight, for this good knight has saved me from my death."

When Sir Tristram heard him say so, he came towards them at a gentle trot.

And then Sir Palomides said, "My lord Sir Tristram, I am much beholden to you for your great goodness, that you would offer your noble body to rescue me when I did not deserve it, for I have greatly offended you. Nevertheless," said Sir Palomides, "here we met with this noble knight, who rescued me honourably and like a man from twelve knights, and struck them all down and wounded them badly."
