Chapter 86: How Sir Tristram and Lancelot came with Palomides to Joyous Gard, and of Palomides and Sir Tristram

"Fair knight," said Sir Tristram to Sir Lancelot, "where are you from?"

"I am a knight-errant," said Sir Lancelot, "who rides out to seek many adventures."

"What is your name?" said Sir Tristram.

"Sir, at this time I will not tell you."

Then Sir Lancelot said to Sir Tristram and to Palomides, "Now that you two have met, I will leave you."

"Not so," said Sir Tristram. "I beg you, by your knighthood, to ride with me to my castle."

"Believe me," said Sir Lancelot, "I cannot ride with you, for I have many deeds to do in other places, so that at this time I cannot stay with you."

"Ah, Jesus have mercy," said Sir Tristram, "I beg you, as you are a knight true to the order of knighthood, stay and take your ease with me tonight."

Then Sir Tristram had his request granted by Sir Lancelot. And yet even if he had not asked him, Lancelot would have ridden with them, or else have come after them soon; for Sir Lancelot had come into that country for no other reason than to see Sir Tristram. And when they had come into Joyous Gard they dismounted, and their horses were led into a stable; and then they took off their armour. And when Sir Lancelot's helmet was off, Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides knew him. Then Sir Tristram took Sir Lancelot in his arms, and so did Isolde the Fair; and Palomides knelt down on his knees and thanked Sir Lancelot. When Sir Lancelot saw Sir Palomides kneel, he quickly raised him up and said this: "Believe me, Sir Palomides, I, and any knight of honour in this land, ought by every right to help and rescue so noble a knight as you are, proven and renowned throughout all this realm, from end to end and from side to side."

And then there was joy among them; but the more often Sir Palomides saw Isolde the Fair, the more downcast he grew, day by day.

Then within three or four days Sir Lancelot left, and Sir Ector de Maris rode with him; and Dinadan and Sir Palomides were left there with Sir Tristram for two months and more. But all the while Sir Palomides wasted and grieved, so that everyone wondered why he was wasting away like that. So one day, at dawn, Sir Palomides went into the forest by himself alone; and there he found a spring, and then he looked into the spring, and in the water he saw his own face, how it was troubled and faded, nothing like what it used to be.

"What can this mean?" said Sir Palomides, and this is what he said to himself: "Ah, Palomides, Palomides, why are you so faded, you who used to be called one of the handsomest knights in the world? I will lead this life no longer, for I love what I can never get or win."

And with that he lay down by the spring. And then he began to make a song in rhyme about Isolde the Fair and himself.

And meanwhile Sir Tristram had ridden into the forest that same day to hunt the hart in its fat season; but Sir Tristram would never again go hunting unarmed, because of Sir Breuse Saunce Pité. And so as Sir Tristram rode up and down in that forest, he heard someone singing wonderfully loud, and that was Sir Palomides, who lay by the spring. And then Sir Tristram rode quietly towards it, for he thought there was some knight-errant at the spring. And when Sir Tristram came near him he got down from his horse and tied his horse fast to a tree, and then he came near him on foot. And soon he saw where Sir Palomides lay by the spring and sang loudly and merrily; and all the laments were about that noble queen, Isolde the Fair, and they were wonderfully and marvellously well put, and very sorrowfully and pitifully made. And the noble knight Sir Tristram heard the whole song from the beginning to the end, and it grieved and troubled him badly.

But then at last, when Sir Tristram had heard all Sir Palomides' laments, he was angry beyond measure, and thought to kill him where he lay. Then Sir Tristram reminded himself that Sir Palomides was unarmed, and of the noble name that Sir Palomides had, and the noble name that he had himself, and so he held back his anger. And so he went up to Sir Palomides at a slow pace and said, "Sir Palomides, I have heard your lament, and of the treason you have been hiding from me for so long; and know this: for it you shall die. And if it were not for the shame to knighthood, you would not escape my hands, for now I know well that you have been lying in wait for me with treason. Tell me," said Sir Tristram, "how will you clear yourself?"

"Sir," said Palomides, "this is how I will clear myself. As for Queen Isolde the Fair, you may know well that I love her above all other ladies in this world; and I know well it will happen to me, for her love, as it happened to the noble knight Sir Kehydius, who died for the love of Isolde the Fair. And now, Sir Tristram, I want you to know that I have loved Isolde the Fair for many a day, and she has been the cause of my honour, and otherwise I would have been the most worthless knight in the world. For by her, and because of her, I have won the honour that I have; for when I remembered Isolde the Fair I won honour wherever I came, for the most part. And yet I never had reward or kindness from her in all the days of my life, and yet I have been her knight without reward. And so, Sir Tristram, as for death, I do not fear it, for I would as soon die as live. And if I were armed as you are, I would gladly do battle with you."

"You have spoken your treason well enough," said Tristram.

"I have done you no treason," said Palomides, "for love is free for all men; and though I have loved your lady, she is my lady as well as yours. Even so, the wrong is mine, if there is any wrong, for you make her glad, and have your desire of her, and that I never had, and never am likely to have; and yet I shall love her to the last days of my life, as well as you."
