Chapter 87: How a day was set for Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides to fight, and how Sir Tristram was wounded

Then Sir Tristram said, "I will fight with you to the uttermost."

"I agree," said Palomides, "for I could never hope to fight in a better quarrel. For if I die at your hands, I could not be killed at the hands of a better knight. And since I understand that I shall never have the joy of Isolde the Fair, I am as willing to die as to live."

"Then set a day," said Sir Tristram, "when we shall do battle."

"A fortnight from today," said Palomides, "I will meet you near here, in the meadow below Joyous Gard."

"Shame on you," said Sir Tristram, "will you set so long a day? Let us fight tomorrow."

"Not so," said Palomides, "for I am thin, and have been long sick for the love of Isolde the Fair, and so I will rest until I have my strength again."

So then Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides promised faithfully to meet at the spring a fortnight from that day.

"I remember," said Sir Tristram to Palomides, "that you broke a promise to me once, when I rescued you from Breuse Saunce Pité and nine knights; and then you promised to meet me at the stone monument by the tomb beside Camelot, and at that time you failed to keep your promise."

"Believe me," said Palomides to Sir Tristram, "I was in prison on that day, so that I could not keep my promise."

"So help me God," said Sir Tristram, "if you had kept your promise, this business would not be here now at this time."

At that Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides parted. And so Sir Palomides took his horse and his armour, and he rode to King Arthur's court; and there Sir Palomides got himself four knights and four sergeants-at-arms, and so he went back again towards Joyous Gard. And meanwhile Sir Tristram chased and hunted at every kind of game; and about three days before the battle was to be, as Sir Tristram chased a hart, an archer shot at the hart, and by mischance he struck Sir Tristram in the thick of the thigh, and the arrow killed Sir Tristram's horse and wounded him. When Sir Tristram was hurt like this he was exceedingly downcast, and you may be sure he bled badly. And then he took another horse, and rode to Joyous Gard with great heaviness of heart, more for the promise he had made to Sir Palomides, to do battle with him within three days after, than for any hurt to his thigh. And so there was neither man nor woman who could cheer him with anything they could do for him, not even Queen Isolde the Fair; for all the while he thought that Sir Palomides had caused him to be struck, so that he would not be able to do battle with him on the day set.
