Chapter 88: How Sir Palomides kept his appointment to fight, but Sir Tristram could not come, and other things

But there was no knight at all around Sir Tristram who would believe that Sir Palomides would ever hurt Sir Tristram, either by his own hands or by anyone else's with his consent. Then, when the fifteenth day had come, Sir Palomides came to the spring with four knights of Arthur's court with him, and three sergeants-at-arms. And Sir Palomides brought the knights and the sergeants-at-arms with him for this purpose, that they should bear witness to the battle between Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides. And one sergeant carried in his helmet, the second his spear, the third his sword. So in this way Palomides came into the field, and there he waited nearly two hours; and then he sent a squire to Sir Tristram, and asked him to come into the field to keep his promise.

When the squire had come to Joyous Gard, as soon as Sir Tristram heard of his coming he gave orders that the squire should be brought before him where he lay in his bed.

"My lord Sir Tristram," said Palomides' squire, "believe me, my lord Palomides is waiting for you in the field, and he would like to know whether you will do battle or not."

"Ah, my fair brother," said Sir Tristram, "believe me, I am very sorry for this news. So tell Sir Palomides that if I were well I would not lie here, and he would have no need to send for me if I could either ride or walk. And so that you can say I am no liar..." And Sir Tristram showed him his thigh, and the wound was six inches deep. "And now that you have seen my hurt, tell your lord that this is no pretence, and tell him that I would rather be whole than have all the gold of King Arthur. And tell Palomides that as soon as I am whole I shall seek him the length and breadth of the land, and that I promise you as I am a true knight; and if ever I can meet with him, he shall have his fill of battle from me."

And with this the squire left; and when Palomides knew that Tristram was hurt, he was glad and said, "Now I am sure I shall come to no shame, for I know well I would have had hard handling from him, and in all likelihood I must have had the worse of it, for he is the hardest knight in battle now living, except Sir Lancelot."

And then Sir Palomides went off wherever fortune led him, and within a month Sir Tristram was healed of his hurt. And then he took his horse, and rode from country to country, and he achieved every strange adventure wherever he rode; and he always asked after Sir Palomides, but in all that season of summer Sir Tristram could never meet with Sir Palomides. But as Sir Tristram sought and asked after Sir Palomides in this way, Sir Tristram won many great battles, through which all the fame fell to Sir Tristram, and it faded from Sir Lancelot. And so Sir Lancelot's brothers and his kinsmen would have killed Sir Tristram because of his fame. But when Sir Lancelot knew how his kinsmen were set, he said to them openly, "Believe me, if the envy of any of you is so bold as to lie in wait for my lord Sir Tristram to do him any hurt, shame or wrong, as I am a true knight I shall kill the best of you with my own hands. Alas, shame on you! Would you lie in wait to kill him for his noble deeds? Jesus forbid," said Lancelot, "that any noble knight such as Sir Tristram should ever be destroyed by treason."

The news and fame of this spread into Cornwall, and among the people of Liones, and they were exceedingly glad of it, and rejoiced greatly. And then the people of Liones sent letters of greeting to Sir Tristram, and many great gifts to maintain Sir Tristram's estate; and every so often, in between, Sir Tristram went back to Joyous Gard, where Isolde the Fair was, who loved him as her life.

Here ends the tenth book, which is of Sir Tristram. And here follows the eleventh book, which is of Sir Lancelot.
