Chapter 1: How Sir Lancelot rode out on his adventure, and how he helped a sorrowful lady out of her pain, and how he fought with a dragon

Now we leave Sir Tristram de Liones, and speak of Sir Lancelot du Lake, and of Sir Galahad, Sir Lancelot's son, how he was fathered, and in what manner, as the French book tells it. Before the time that Sir Galahad was fathered or born, a hermit came in to King Arthur on Whitsunday, as the knights sat at the Round Table. And when the hermit saw the Siege Perilous, he asked the king and all the knights why that seat was empty.

Sir Arthur and all the knights answered, "No one shall ever sit in that seat but one, unless he is destroyed."

Then the hermit said, "Do you know who he is?"

"No," said Arthur and all the knights, "we do not know who it is that shall sit in it."

"Then I know," said the hermit, "for the man who shall sit there is unborn and not yet fathered, and this same year he shall be fathered who shall sit there in that Siege Perilous, and he shall win the Holy Grail."

When this hermit had said this, he left the court of King Arthur.

And then after this feast Sir Lancelot rode out on his adventure, until one day by chance he crossed over the bridge of Corbin; and there he saw the fairest tower that he had ever seen, and below it was a fair town full of people. And all the people, men and women, cried out at once, "Welcome, Sir Lancelot du Lake, the flower of all knighthood, for by you we shall all be helped out of danger!"

"What do you mean," said Sir Lancelot, "crying out to me like this?"

"Ah, fair knight," they all said, "here in this tower there is a sorrowful lady who has been in pain there for many winters and days, for she is forever boiling in scalding water. And only lately," said all the people, "Sir Gawain was here, and he could not help her, and so he left her in pain."

"Then I may," said Sir Lancelot, "leave her in pain as well as Sir Gawain did."

"No," said the people, "we know well that it is Sir Lancelot who shall free her."

"Well," said Lancelot, "then show me what I must do."

Then they brought Sir Lancelot into the tower; and when he came to the room where this lady was, the iron doors unlocked and unbolted themselves. And so Sir Lancelot went into the room, which was as hot as any steam bath. And there Sir Lancelot took by the hand the fairest lady that he had ever seen, and she was as naked as a needle. By enchantment Queen Morgan le Fay and the Queen of North Wales had put her there in that pain, because she was called the fairest lady of that country; and there she had been five years, and she could never be freed from her great pain until the best knight in the world had taken her by the hand. Then the people brought her clothes. And when she was dressed, Sir Lancelot thought she was the fairest lady in the world, unless it were Queen Guinevere.

Then this lady said to Sir Lancelot, "Sir, if you please, will you go with me to a chapel near here, so that we may give praise and thanks to God?"

"Madam," said Sir Lancelot, "come with me; I will go with you."

So when they came there and gave thanks to God, all the people, both learned and ignorant, gave thanks to God and to him, and said, "Sir knight, since you have freed this lady, you shall free us from a serpent that is here in a tomb."

Then Sir Lancelot took his shield and said, "Take me there, and whatever I can do to please God and you, I will do."

So when Sir Lancelot came there he saw written on the tomb, in letters of gold, these words: "Here shall come a leopard of king's blood, and he shall kill this serpent, and this leopard shall father a lion in this foreign country, and that lion shall surpass all other knights." So then Sir Lancelot lifted up the tomb, and out came a horrible and fiendish dragon, spitting fire from its mouth. Then Sir Lancelot drew his sword and fought with the dragon for a long time, and at last, with great effort, Sir Lancelot killed that dragon. With that King Pelles came, the good and noble knight, and greeted Sir Lancelot, and Lancelot greeted him in return.

"Fair knight," said the king, "what is your name? I ask you, by your knighthood, tell me!"
