Chapter 2: How Sir Lancelot came to Pelles, and of the Holy Grail, and of Elaine, King Pelles' daughter

"Sir," said Lancelot, "you may be sure my name is Sir Lancelot du Lake."

"And my name," said the king, "is Pelles, king of the foreign country, and a close kinsman of Joseph of Arimathea."

And then each of them made much of the other, and so they went into the castle to take their meal. And at once a dove came in at a window, and in her mouth there seemed to be a little censer of gold. And with that there was such a fragrance as if all the spices of the world had been there. And immediately there was on the table every kind of food and drink that they could think of. Then in came a damsel, exceedingly fair and young, and she carried a vessel of gold between her hands; and the king knelt to it devoutly, and said his prayers, and so did all who were there.

"O Jesus," said Sir Lancelot, "what can this mean?"

"This is," said the king, "the richest thing that any man living has. And when this thing goes about, the Round Table shall be broken. And believe me," said the king, "this is the Holy Grail that you have seen here."

So the king and Sir Lancelot spent most of that day together. And King Pelles would gladly have found the means to have Sir Lancelot lie with his daughter, the fair Elaine. And this was his purpose: the king knew well that Sir Lancelot would father a child on his daughter, who would be named Sir Galahad the good knight, by whom all the foreign country would be brought out of danger, and by him the Holy Grail would be achieved.

Then a lady called Dame Brisen came forward, and she said to the king, "Sir, believe me, Sir Lancelot loves no lady in the world but Queen Guinevere alone. And so work by my advice, and I shall make him lie with your daughter, and he shall not know but that he is lying with Queen Guinevere."

"O fair lady, Dame Brisen," said the king, "do you hope to bring this about?"

"Sir," she said, "on pain of my life, leave it to me." For this Brisen was one of the greatest enchantresses then living in the world.

Then at once, by Dame Brisen's cunning, she had someone whom Lancelot knew well come to him. And this man brought him a ring from Queen Guinevere, as if it had come from her, and just like the one she usually wore. And when Sir Lancelot saw that token, believe me, he was never so glad.

"Where is my lady?" said Sir Lancelot.

"In the Castle of Case," said the messenger, "only five miles from here."

Then Sir Lancelot meant to be there that same night. And then this Brisen, at the command of King Pelles, had Elaine sent to this castle, with twenty-five knights, to the Castle of Case. Then towards night Sir Lancelot rode to that castle, and there he was at once received honourably by people who seemed to him to be Queen Guinevere's own close household.

So when Sir Lancelot had dismounted, he asked where the queen was. And Dame Brisen said she was in her bed; and then the people were sent away, and Sir Lancelot was led to his room. And then Dame Brisen brought Sir Lancelot a cup full of wine; and as soon as he had drunk that wine he was so besotted and mad that he could make no delay, but without any hindrance he went to bed; and he believed that the maiden Elaine was Queen Guinevere. You may be sure that Sir Lancelot was glad, and so was that lady Elaine, that she had Sir Lancelot in her arms. For she knew well that on that same night Galahad would be fathered on her, who would prove the best knight in the world. And so they lay together until mid-morning; and all the windows and openings of that room were stopped up so that no daylight at all could be seen. And then Sir Lancelot came to himself, and he got up and went to the window.
