Chapter 3: How Sir Lancelot was displeased when he learned that he had slept with Dame Elaine, and how she gave birth to Galahad

And as soon as he had opened the window the enchantment was gone; then he knew for himself that he had done wrong.

"Alas," he said, "that I have lived so long! Now I am shamed."

So then he took his sword in his hand and said, "You traitress, who are you that I have lain with all this night? You'll die right here at my hands!"

Then this fair lady Elaine leapt out of her bed, quite naked, and knelt down before Sir Lancelot, and said, "Fair courteous knight, born of king's blood, I beg you to have mercy on me. And as you are renowned as the noblest knight in the world, do not kill me, for I have in my womb a child by you who shall be the noblest knight in the world."

"Ah, false traitress," said Sir Lancelot, "why have you betrayed me? Tell me at once who you are."

"Sir," she said, "I am Elaine, the daughter of King Pelles."

"Well," said Sir Lancelot, "I will forgive you this deed." And with that he took her up in his arms and kissed her, for she was as fair a lady, and as lively and young, and as wise, as any then living. "So help me God," said Sir Lancelot, "I cannot blame you for this. But the woman who worked this enchantment on me, as between you and me, if I can find her, that same Lady Brisen, she shall lose her head for witchcraft, for there was never a knight deceived as I have been this night."

And so Sir Lancelot dressed, and armed himself, and took his leave gently of the young lady Elaine, and so he left.

Then she said, "My lord Sir Lancelot, I beg you, see me as soon as you can, for I have submitted myself to the prophecy that my father told me. And at his command, to fulfil this prophecy, I have given the greatest riches and the fairest flower that I ever had, and that is my maidenhood, which I shall never have again. And so, noble knight, you owe me your good will."

And so Sir Lancelot dressed and was armed, and took his leave gently of the young lady Elaine; and so he left, and rode until he came to the Castle of Corbin, where her father was. And as soon as her time came she gave birth to a fair child, and they christened him Galahad. And you may be sure that child was well cared for and well brought up. And he was named Galahad because Sir Lancelot had been given that name at the font when he was christened; and afterwards the Lady of the Lake confirmed him as Sir Lancelot du Lake.

Then, after this lady had given birth and been churched, as new mothers were, a knight came to her whose name was Sir Bromel la Pleche, who was a great lord. And he had loved that lady for a long time, and he was always wanting to marry her; and she could find no way to put him off, until one day she said to Sir Bromel, "Believe me, sir knight, I will not love you, for my love is set on the best knight in the world."

"Who is he?" said Sir Bromel.

"Sir," she said, "it is Sir Lancelot du Lake that I love and no other, and so woo me no longer."

"Very well," said Sir Bromel, "and since you have told me so much, you shall have little joy of Sir Lancelot, for I shall kill him wherever I meet him."

"Sir," said the Lady Elaine, "do him no treacherous harm."

"You may be sure, my lady," said Bromel, "and I promise you this: for a twelvemonth I shall hold the bridge of Corbin for Sir Lancelot's sake, so that he shall neither come to you nor go from you, but I shall meet with him."
