Chapter 4: How Sir Bors came to Dame Elaine and saw Galahad, and how he was fed by the Holy Grail

Then, as it happened by fortune and chance, Sir Bors de Ganis, who was Sir Lancelot's nephew, came over that bridge; and there Sir Bromel and Sir Bors jousted, and Sir Bors struck Sir Bromel such a blow that he carried him over his horse's rump. And then Sir Bromel, as a bold knight, pulled out his sword and set his shield to do battle with Sir Bors. And then Sir Bors dismounted and got clear of his horse, and there they dealt each other many heavy strokes; and they fought like this a long time, until at last Sir Bromel was laid on the ground, and there Sir Bors began to unlace his helmet to kill him. Then Sir Bromel begged Sir Bors for mercy, and yielded to him.

"On this condition you shall have your life," said Sir Bors, "that you go to Sir Lancelot on the next Whitsunday, and yield yourself to him as a recreant knight."

"I will do it," said Sir Bromel, and he swore it on the crossguard of the sword. And so Sir Bors let him go, and rode to King Pelles, who was in Corbin.

And when the king and Elaine his daughter knew that Sir Bors was Sir Lancelot's nephew, they gave him a warm welcome.

Then Dame Elaine said, "We wonder where Sir Lancelot is, for he never came here but once."

"Don't wonder at it," said Sir Bors, "for this half year he has been in prison with Queen Morgan le Fay, King Arthur's sister."

"Alas," said Dame Elaine, "I am sorry for that."

And all the while Sir Bors looked at the child in her arms, and all the while it seemed to him that it was exceedingly like Sir Lancelot.

"Truly," said Elaine, "you may be sure he fathered this child on me."

Then Sir Bors wept for joy, and he prayed to God that it might prove as good a knight as its father was. And then a white dove came in, and she carried a little censer of gold in her mouth, and there was every kind of food and drink; and a maiden carried the Holy Grail, and she said openly, "Believe me, Sir Bors, this child is Galahad, who shall sit in the Siege Perilous and achieve the Holy Grail, and he shall be much better than Sir Lancelot du Lake ever was, who is his own father."

And then they knelt down and made their devotions, and there was such a fragrance as if all the spices in the world had been there. And when the dove took flight, the maiden vanished with the Holy Grail as she had come.

"Sir," said Sir Bors to King Pelles, "this castle may be named the Castle Adventurous, for there are many strange adventures here."

"That is true," said the king, "for this place may well be called the place of adventures, since few knights come here who go away with any honour. However strong he may be, here he may be tested; and only lately Sir Gawain, the good knight, won little honour here. For I tell you," said King Pelles, "no knight shall win any honour here unless he is a man of honour himself and of good living, one who loves God and fears God; otherwise he wins no honour here, however bold he may be."

"That is a marvellous thing," said Sir Bors. "What you mean in this country I don't know, for you have many strange adventures, and so I will lie in this castle tonight."

"You shall not do so," said King Pelles, "if you take my advice, for you will hardly escape without shame."

"I shall take whatever adventure befalls me," said Sir Bors.

"Then I advise you," said the king, "to make a clean confession."

"As for that," said Sir Bors, "I will make my confession gladly."

So Sir Bors was confessed. And as for all women, Sir Bors was a virgin, except for one, who was the daughter of King Brangoris, and on her he fathered a child called Elaine; and except for her Sir Bors was entirely chaste.

And so Sir Bors was led to bed in a fine large room, and many doors were shut around the room. When Sir Bors saw all those doors, he sent all the people away, for he would have nobody with him; but on no account would Sir Bors take off his armour, and so he lay down on the bed just as he was. And just then he saw a light come in, by which he could clearly see a spear, great and long, that came straight at him, aimed at him, and it seemed to Sir Bors that the head of the spear burned like a candle. And at once, before Sir Bors knew it, the spearhead struck him in the shoulder a hand's breadth deep, and that wound pained Sir Bors exceedingly. And then he lay down again for the pain; and immediately after that a knight came in, armed, with his shield on his shoulder and his sword in his hand, and he said to Sir Bors, "Get up, sir knight, and fight with me."

"I am badly hurt," he said, "but all the same I shall not fail you."

And then Sir Bors leapt up and set his shield; and then they laid into each other mightily for a long while. And at last Sir Bors drove him backward until he came to a chamber door, and there that knight went into that chamber and rested a long while. And when he had rested he came out again fresh, and began the fight with Sir Bors anew, mightily and strongly.
