Chapter 5: How Sir Bors made Sir Pedivere surrender to him, and of the marvellous adventures he had, and how he achieved them

Then Sir Bors thought that the knight should not go into that chamber to rest again, and so Sir Bors placed himself between the knight and that chamber door, and there Sir Bors struck him down, and then that knight yielded to him.

"What is your name?" said Sir Bors.

"Sir," he said, "my name is Pedivere of the Straight Marches."

So Sir Bors made him swear to be at the court of King Arthur at the next Whitsunday, and to yield himself there as a prisoner, as a knight overcome by the hands of Sir Bors. So Sir Pedivere of the Straight Marches left. And then Sir Bors lay down to rest, and then he heard and felt a great noise in that room. And then Sir Bors saw, coming in (he did not know whether by the doors or the windows), a shower of arrows and crossbow bolts so thick that he marvelled, and many fell on him and wounded him in the places where he was not covered.

And then Sir Bors became aware of a hideous lion coming in; so Sir Bors squared up to the lion, and at once the lion tore his shield from him, and with his sword Sir Bors struck off the lion's head. Just then Sir Bors saw a dragon in the courtyard, exceedingly horrible, and there seemed to be letters of gold written on its forehead; and Sir Bors thought that the letters signified King Arthur. Just then there came a horrible leopard, an old one, and there they fought for a long time, and did great battle together. And at last the dragon spat out of its mouth what seemed to be a hundred dragons; and swiftly all the small dragons killed the old dragon and tore him all to pieces.

Immediately after that an old man came into the hall, and he sat down in a fine chair, and there seemed to be two adders around his neck. And then the old man had a harp, and there he sang an old song of how Joseph of Arimathea came into this land. Then, when he had sung, the old man told Sir Bors to go away from there. "For here you shall have no more adventures; and you have done most honourably, and you shall do better hereafter." And then it seemed to Sir Bors that the whitest dove came in, with a little golden censer in her mouth. And at once the storm, which before had been marvellous to hear, ceased and passed. Then all that court was full of sweet fragrances. Then Sir Bors saw four children carrying four fair candles, and an old man in the middle of the children with a censer in one hand and a spear in his other hand, and that spear was called the Spear of Vengeance.
