Chapter 6: How Sir Bors left, and how Sir Lancelot was rebuked by Queen Guinevere, and of his excuse

"Now," said that old man to Sir Bors, "go to your cousin, Sir Lancelot, and tell him of this adventure, which would have been the most fitting for him of all earthly knights. But sin is so foul in him that he cannot achieve such holy deeds; for had it not been for his sin, he would have surpassed all the knights that ever were in his days. And tell Sir Lancelot that in all worldly adventures he surpasses all others in manhood and prowess, but in these spiritual matters he shall have many his betters."

And then Sir Bors saw four gentlewomen come past him, finely dressed; and he saw them go into a room where there was a great light, like a summer's light. And the women knelt down before an altar of silver with four pillars, and something like a bishop knelt down before that table of silver. And as Sir Bors looked above his head he saw a sword like silver, naked, hovering over his head, and the brightness of it struck his eyes so that for that time Sir Bors was blind. And there he heard a voice that said, "Go away from here, Sir Bors, for you are not yet worthy to be in this place."

And then he went back to his bed until the morning. And in the morning King Pelles rejoiced greatly over Sir Bors; and then he left and rode to Camelot, and there he found Sir Lancelot du Lake, and told him of the adventures that he had seen with King Pelles at Corbin.

So the rumour spread through Arthur's court that Lancelot had fathered a child on Elaine, the daughter of King Pelles. At this Queen Guinevere was angry, and gave Sir Lancelot many rebukes, and called him a false knight. And then Sir Lancelot told the queen everything, and how he had been made to lie with Elaine by enchantment, in the likeness of the queen. So the queen held Sir Lancelot excused. And as the book says, King Arthur had been in France, and had made war on the mighty King Claudas, and had won much of his lands. And when the king had come home again, he had a great feast proclaimed, so that all the lords and ladies of all England should be there, except those who were in rebellion against him.
