Chapter 7: How Dame Elaine, Galahad's mother, came in great state to Camelot, and how Sir Lancelot behaved there

And when Dame Elaine, the daughter of King Pelles, heard of this feast, she went to her father and asked him to give her leave to ride to that feast.

The king answered, "I am well content that you go there. But whatever you do, as you love me and want my blessing, see that you are dressed and equipped in the richest way; and see that you spare no cost. Ask and you shall have everything you need."

Then, on the advice of Dame Brisen, her maid, everything was made ready for the purpose, so that there was never a lady more richly equipped. So she rode with twenty knights, and ten ladies, and gentlewomen, to the number of a hundred horses. And when she came to Camelot, King Arthur and Queen Guinevere said, and all the knights too, that Dame Elaine was the fairest and the best-arrayed lady that had ever been seen in that court. And as soon as King Arthur knew that she had come, he met her and greeted her, and so did most of the knights of the Round Table, Sir Tristram, Sir Bleoberis, and Sir Gawain, and many more that I will not list. But when Sir Lancelot saw her he was so ashamed, because he had drawn his sword on her the morning after he had lain with her, that he would not greet her or speak to her; and yet Sir Lancelot thought she was the fairest woman he had ever seen in all the days of his life.

But when Dame Elaine saw that Sir Lancelot would not speak to her, she was so downcast that she thought her heart would burst; for you may be sure she loved him beyond measure.

And then Elaine said to her woman, Dame Brisen, "Sir Lancelot's unkindness is all but killing me."

"Ah, hush, madam," said Dame Brisen. "I will undertake that this night he shall lie with you, if you will keep quiet."

"I would rather have that," said Dame Elaine, "than all the gold there is above the earth."

"Leave it to me," said Dame Brisen.

So when Elaine was brought to Queen Guinevere, each gave the other a friendly face, but nothing from the heart. But all the men and women spoke of the beauty of Dame Elaine, and of her great riches.

Then, at night, the queen commanded that Dame Elaine should sleep in a room near her own room, and all under one roof; and so it was done as the queen commanded. Then the queen sent for Sir Lancelot and told him to come to her room that night. "Or else I am sure," said the queen, "that you will go to your lady's bed, Dame Elaine, by whom you fathered Galahad."

"Ah, madam," said Sir Lancelot, "never say so, for what I did was against my will."

"Then," said the queen, "see that you come to me when I send for you."

"Madam," said Lancelot, "I shall not fail you, but I shall be ready at your command."

This bargain was soon struck and made between them, but Dame Brisen knew of it by her arts, and told it to her lady, Dame Elaine.

"Alas," she said, "what shall I do?"

"Leave it to me," said Dame Brisen, "for I shall bring him by the hand right to your bed, and he shall think that I am Queen Guinevere's messenger."

"Now I am happy," said Dame Elaine, "for in all the world I love nothing so much as I do Sir Lancelot."
