Chapter 8: How Dame Brisen by enchantment brought Sir Lancelot to Dame Elaine's bed, and how Queen Guinevere rebuked him

So when the time came that everyone was in bed, Dame Brisen came to Sir Lancelot's bedside and said, "Sir Lancelot du Lake, are you asleep? My lady, Queen Guinevere, is lying waiting for you."

"O my fair lady," said Sir Lancelot, "I am ready to go with you wherever you want me."

So Sir Lancelot threw a long gown over himself, with his sword in his hand; and then Dame Brisen took him by the finger and led him to her lady's bed, Dame Elaine's; and then she went away and left them in bed together. You may be sure the lady was glad, and so was Sir Lancelot, for he thought that he had another woman in his arms.

Now we leave them kissing and embracing, as was a natural thing; and now we speak of Queen Guinevere, who sent one of her women to Sir Lancelot's bed; and when she came there she found the bed cold, and he was gone; so she came back to the queen and told her everything.

"Alas," said the queen, "where has that false knight gone?"

Then the queen was nearly out of her wits, and she writhed and tossed like a madwoman, and could not sleep for four or five hours. Now Sir Lancelot had a habit that he had always had: he would chatter in his sleep, and speak often of his lady, Queen Guinevere. So when Sir Lancelot had stayed awake as long as it pleased him, then in the course of nature he slept, and Dame Elaine too. And in his sleep he talked and chattered like a jay, about the love that had been between Queen Guinevere and him. And because he talked so loud, the queen heard him where she lay in her room; and when she heard him chatter like that she was nearly mad and out of her mind, and for anger and pain she did not know what to do. And then she coughed so loud that Sir Lancelot woke, and he knew her way of clearing her throat. And then he knew well that he was not lying beside the queen; and with that he leapt out of his bed like a madman, in his shirt, and the queen met him on the floor, and this is what she said:

"False traitor knight that you are, see that you never stay in my court! Get out of my room, and don't you dare, you false traitor knight that you are, ever come into my sight again!"

"Alas," said Sir Lancelot; and with that he took such a heartfelt sorrow at her words that he fell down on the floor in a faint. And with that Queen Guinevere went away. And when Sir Lancelot came out of his faint, he leapt out of a bay window into a garden, and there the thorns scratched him all over his face and his body; and so he ran off he did not know where, and was as wildly mad as any man ever was; and so he ran for two years, and no man ever had the good fortune to recognise him.
