Chapter 9: How Dame Elaine was ordered by Queen Guinevere to leave the court, and how Sir Lancelot went mad

Now we turn to Queen Guinevere and to the fair Lady Elaine. When Dame Elaine heard the queen rebuke Sir Lancelot like that, and saw too how he fainted, and how he leapt out of the bay window, then she said to Queen Guinevere, "Madam, you are greatly to blame for Sir Lancelot, for now you have lost him; for I saw and heard by his face that he is mad for ever. Alas, madam, you commit a great sin, and do yourself great dishonour, for you have a lord of your own, and so it is your part to love him; for there is no queen in this world who has another king such as you have. And if it were not for you, I might have the love of my lord Sir Lancelot; and I have cause to love him, for he took my virginity, and by him I have borne a fair son, and his name is Galahad, and in his time he shall be the best knight in the world."

"Dame Elaine," said the queen, "when it is daylight I charge you and command you to leave my court; and for the love you owe to Sir Lancelot, do not give away his secrets, for if you do, it will be his death."

"As for that," said Dame Elaine, "I dare say he is ruined for ever, and you have done that; for neither you nor I are likely ever to bring him joy again. For he made the most pitiful groans when he leapt out of that bay window that I ever heard a man make."

"Alas," said fair Elaine; and "Alas," said Queen Guinevere, "for now I know well that we have lost him for ever."

So in the morning Dame Elaine took her leave to go, and would stay no longer. Then King Arthur escorted her on her way through a forest with more than a hundred knights. And on the way she told Sir Bors de Ganis everything that had happened that same night, and how Sir Lancelot had leapt out of a window, raging out of his wits.

"Alas," said Sir Bors, "where has my lord, Sir Lancelot, gone?"

"Sir," said Elaine, "I have no idea."

"Alas," said Sir Bors, "between the two of you, you have destroyed that good knight."

"As for me," said Dame Elaine, "I never said or did anything that could displease him in any way. But at the rebuke that Queen Guinevere gave him I saw him faint to the ground; and when he came to, he took his sword in his hand, naked except for his shirt, and leapt out of a window with the most terrible groan that I ever heard a man make."

"Now farewell, Dame Elaine," said Sir Bors, "and keep my lord Arthur talking as long as you can, for I will turn back to Queen Guinevere and give her a piece of my mind. And I beg you, as you ever hope to have my service, keep a good watch and look out in case you ever see my lord Sir Lancelot."

"Truly," said fair Elaine, "I shall do all that I can, for I would be as glad to know where he has gone as you would, or any of his kin, or Queen Guinevere; and I have cause enough for it, as much as anyone else. And believe me," said fair Elaine to Sir Bors, "I would rather lose my life than have him hurt; but alas, I expect never to see him again, and the chief cause of this is Dame Guinevere."

"Madam," said Dame Brisen, who had worked the enchantment between Sir Lancelot and her earlier, "I beg you with all my heart, let Sir Bors go, and let him hurry with all his might as fast as he can to look for Sir Lancelot. For I warn you, he is clean out of his mind; and yet he will be well cured, though only by a miracle."

Then Dame Elaine wept, and so did Sir Bors de Ganis; and so they parted, and Sir Bors rode straight to Queen Guinevere. And when she saw Sir Bors she wept as if she were mad.

"Shame on your weeping," said Sir Bors de Ganis, "for you never weep except when it is too late to help. Alas," said Sir Bors, "that Sir Lancelot's kin ever set eyes on you! For now you have lost the best knight of our blood, the one who was our leader and our support; and I dare say, and will prove it, that no king, Christian or heathen, can find such a knight, for his nobility and courtesy, with his good looks and his gentleness. Alas," said Sir Bors, "what shall we do, we who are of his blood?"

"Alas," said Sir Ector de Maris.

"Alas," said Lionel.
