Chapter 10: What sorrow Queen Guinevere felt for Sir Lancelot, and how knights of his kin went looking for him

And when the queen heard them say this she fell to the ground in a dead faint. And then Sir Bors lifted her up and revived her; and when she had come to, she knelt before the three knights, and held up both her hands, and begged them to look for him: "And spare no expense until he is found, for I know he is out of his mind."

And Sir Bors, Sir Ector and Sir Lionel left the queen, for they could not stay any longer for sorrow. And then the queen sent them money enough for their expenses, and so they took their horses and their armour, and set off. And then they rode from country to country, in forests, and in wilderness, and in wastelands; and all the time, as they rode, they kept watch in the forests and among all kinds of people, to listen and ask after him, as a man who was naked, in his shirt, with a sword in his hand. And so they rode for nearly a quarter of a year, up and down and across, in many places, forests and wilderness, and often had poor lodging for his sake; and yet for all their labour and searching they could never hear word of him. And you may be sure these three knights were exceedingly sorry.

Then at last Sir Bors and his companions met a knight called Sir Melion de Tartare.

"Now, fair knight," said Sir Bors, "where are you going?" For they knew each other from before.

"Sir," said Melion, "I am on my way to the court of King Arthur."

"Then we beg you," said Sir Bors, "to tell my lord Arthur, and my lady, Queen Guinevere, and all the fellowship of the Round Table, that we cannot in any way hear tell where Sir Lancelot has gone."

Then Sir Melion left them, and said that he would tell the king, and the queen, and all the fellowship of the Round Table, as they had asked him. So when Sir Melion came to the court of King Arthur he told the king, and the queen, and all the fellowship of the Round Table, what Sir Bors had said about Sir Lancelot. Then Sir Gawain, Sir Uwain, Sir Sagramore le Desirous, Sir Aglovale and Sir Percival de Galis undertook, at the great desire of King Arthur, and above all of the queen, to search throughout all England, Wales and Scotland to find Sir Lancelot; and eighteen more knights rode with them to keep them company. And believe me, they lacked no money for their expenses; and so they were twenty-three knights.

Now we turn to Sir Lancelot, and speak of his trouble and woe, and what pain he endured there; for of cold, hunger and thirst he had plenty. And so, as these noble knights rode together, they agreed to split up, and then they rode in twos, in threes, in fours and in fives, and always they arranged where they should meet. And so Sir Aglovale and Sir Percival rode together to their mother, who was a queen in those days. And when she saw her two sons, she wept tenderly for joy. And then she said, "Ah, my dear sons, when your father was killed he left me four sons, of whom two are now killed. And for the death of my noble son, Sir Lamorak, my heart shall never be glad."

And then she knelt down on her knees before Aglovale and Sir Percival, and begged them to stay at home with her.

"Ah, sweet mother," said Sir Percival, "we cannot, for we come of king's blood on both sides, and so, mother, it is our nature to follow arms and noble deeds."

"Alas, my sweet sons," she said then, "for your sakes I shall lose all my joy and delight, and then I cannot endure wind and weather, what with the death of your father, King Pellinore, who was shamefully killed by the hands of Sir Gawain and his brother, Sir Gaheris: and they did not kill him like men, but by treachery. Ah, my dear sons, this is a pitiful grief for me, your father's death, and the death too of Sir Lamorak, who in knighthood had few equals. Now, my dear sons, keep this in your minds."

Then there was nothing but weeping and sobbing in the court when they were to leave, and she fell into a faint in the middle of the court.
