Chapter 12: How Sir Percival left his brother in secret, and how he freed a knight bound with a chain, and of other doings

And when this was done they rode into many countries, always asking after Sir Lancelot, but they could never hear of him; and at last they came to a castle called Cardican, and there Sir Percival and Sir Aglovale were lodged together. And secretly, about midnight, Sir Percival came to Aglovale's squire and said, "Get up and make yourself ready, for you and I are going to ride away secretly."

"Sir," said the squire, "I would very gladly ride with you wherever you want me to; but if my lord, your brother, catches me, he will kill me."

"Don't you worry about that, for I shall be your protection."

And so Sir Percival rode until it was past noon, and then he came to a bridge of stone, and there he found a knight who was bound with a chain fast around the waist to a pillar of stone.

"O fair knight," said the bound knight, "I beg you, free me from my bonds."

"What knight are you," said Sir Percival, "and why are you bound like this?"

"Sir, I shall tell you," said the knight. "I am a knight of the Round Table, and my name is Sir Persides; and I came this way by chance, and lodged here in this castle at the foot of the bridge, and in it lives a discourteous lady. And because she offered herself to me as my lover, and I refused her, she set her men on me suddenly, before I could get to my weapon; and so they bound me, and here I know well I shall die, unless some man of honour breaks my bonds."

"Cheer up," said Sir Percival, "and because you are a knight of the Round Table as well as I am, I trust to God to break your bonds."

And with that Sir Percival drew his sword and struck at the chain with such force that he cut the chain in two, and through Sir Persides' hauberk too, and hurt him a little.

"O Jesus," said Sir Persides, "that was as mighty a stroke as I ever felt, for if it had not been for the chain you would have killed me."

And with that Sir Persides saw a knight coming out of a castle as fast as ever he could gallop. "Watch out, sir," said Sir Persides, "here comes a man who wants to fight you."

"Let him come," said Sir Percival.

And so he met that knight in the middle of the bridge; and Sir Percival gave him such a blow that he knocked him clean off his horse and over a section of the bridge, so that if there had not been a little boat under the bridge, that knight would have drowned. And then Sir Percival took the knight's horse and had Sir Persides mount it; and so they rode to the castle, and told the lady to release Sir Persides' servants, or else he would kill every one he found; and so for fear she released them all. Then Sir Percival noticed a lady who stood in that tower.

"Ah, madam," said Sir Percival, "what kind of practice and custom is that for a lady, to destroy good knights unless they will be your lovers? Truly, this is a shameful custom for a lady, and if I did not have a great matter in hand I would put an end to your evil customs."

And so Sir Persides brought Sir Percival to his own castle, and there he gave him a warm welcome all that night. And in the morning, when Sir Percival had heard mass and broken his fast, he told Sir Persides to ride to King Arthur: "And tell the king how you met me; and tell my brother, Sir Aglovale, how I rescued you; and tell him not to look for me, for I am on the quest to find Sir Lancelot du Lake, and though he looks for me he shall not find me; and tell him I will never see him, or the court, until I have found Sir Lancelot. Also tell Sir Kay the Seneschal, and Sir Mordred, that I trust to Jesus to be of as great worth as either of them; for tell them I shall never forget the mockery and scorn they gave me the day that I was made knight. And tell them I will never see that court until men speak more honour of me than they ever did of either of them."

And so Sir Persides left Sir Percival, and then he rode to King Arthur, and told there about Sir Percival. And when Sir Aglovale heard him speak of his brother Sir Percival, he said, "He left me unkindly."
