Chapter 13: How Sir Percival met Sir Ector, and how they fought a long time, and each had nearly killed the other

"Sir," said Sir Persides, "on my life, he will prove as noble a knight as any now living."

And when he saw Sir Kay and Sir Mordred, Sir Persides said this: "My fair lords both, Sir Percival greets you both well, and he sent you word by me that he trusts to God, before he ever comes to the court again, to be of as great nobility as ever you both were, and to have more men speak of his nobility than ever did of you."

"That may well be," said Sir Kay and Sir Mordred, "but at the time when he was made knight he looked very unlikely to prove a good knight."

"As for that," said King Arthur, "he is bound to prove a good knight, for his father and his brothers were noble knights."

And now we will turn to Sir Percival, who rode a long way; and in a forest he met a knight with a broken shield and a broken helmet. And as soon as each saw the other they quickly made ready to joust, and so crashed together with all the might of their horses, and met so hard that Sir Percival was struck to the ground. And then Sir Percival got up swiftly, and threw his shield onto his shoulder and drew his sword, and said to the other knight, "Dismount, and let us fight to the uttermost."

"Do you want more?" said that knight.

And with that he dismounted, and sent his horse away from him; and then they came together at an easy pace, and there they laid into each other with noble swords, and sometimes they struck and sometimes they thrust, and each gave the other many great wounds. So they fought for nearly half a day, and never rested except very little, and neither of them had fewer than fifteen wounds, and they bled so much that it was a marvel they could stand on their feet. But this knight who fought with Sir Percival was a proven knight and a skilful fighter, and Sir Percival was young and strong, and not as knowing in fighting as the other was.

Then Sir Percival spoke first, and said, "Sir knight, hold your hand a while, for we have fought too long over a trivial matter and quarrel; and so I beg you, tell me your name, for I was never matched before this time."

"God help me," said that knight, "and never before this time was there any knight who wounded me as badly as you have done, and yet I have fought in many battles. And now you shall know that I am a knight of the Round Table, and my name is Sir Ector de Maris, brother of the good knight Sir Lancelot du Lake."

"Alas," said Sir Percival, "and my name is Sir Percival de Galis, who have taken up my quest to look for Sir Lancelot, and now I am sure that I shall never finish my quest, for you have killed me with your hands."

"It is not so," said Sir Ector, "for I am killed by your hands, and cannot live. So I beg you," said Sir Ector to Sir Percival, "ride from here to a priory near by, and bring me a priest so that I may receive my Saviour, for I cannot live. And when you come to the court of King Arthur, do not tell my brother, Sir Lancelot, how you killed me, for then he would be your mortal enemy; but you may say that I was killed on my quest as I looked for him."

"Alas," said Sir Percival, "you are asking what can never be, for I am so faint from bleeding that I can scarcely stand. How then should I get on my horse?"
