Chapter 1: How Sir Lancelot in his madness took a sword and fought with a knight, and leapt into a bed

And now we leave Sir Ector and Sir Percival for a while, and speak of Sir Lancelot, who suffered and endured many hard trials, who ran stark mad from place to place all the while, and lived on fruit and whatever he could get, and drank water, for two years; and he had little other clothing but his shirt and his breeches. So, as Sir Lancelot wandered here and there, he came into a fair meadow where he found a tent; and close by, on a tree, there hung a white shield, and two swords hung beside it, and two spears leaned against a tree there. And when Sir Lancelot saw the swords, at once he leapt to one of them, and took it in his hand, and drew it out. And then he hacked at the shield, so that the whole meadow rang with the blows, and he made as much noise as if ten knights had been fighting together.

Then a dwarf came out, and leapt at Sir Lancelot, and tried to get the sword out of his hand. And then Sir Lancelot took him by both shoulders and threw him to the ground on his neck, so that he nearly broke his neck; and with that the dwarf cried for help. Then out came a fine-looking knight, handsomely dressed in scarlet trimmed with ermine. And as soon as he saw Sir Lancelot he judged that he must be out of his wits. And then he spoke to him kindly: "Good man, put down that sword, for it seems to me you have more need of sleep and of warm clothes than of swinging that sword."

"As for that," said Sir Lancelot, "don't come too near, for if you do, believe me, I will kill you."

And when the knight of the tent saw that, he leapt back inside the tent. And then the dwarf quickly armed him; and so the knight meant to take the sword from Sir Lancelot by force and strength, and so he came stepping out. And when Sir Lancelot saw him coming so, fully armed, with his sword in his hand, then Sir Lancelot flew at him with such force, and hit him such a blow on the helm, that the stroke stunned his brains, and with that the sword broke in three. And the knight fell to the earth as if he were dead, the blood bursting out of his mouth, his nose and his ears. And then Sir Lancelot ran into the tent, and rushed straight into the warm bed; and there was a lady in that bed, and she grabbed her shift and ran out of the tent. And when she saw her lord lying on the ground as if dead, she cried and wept as if she had gone mad. Then with her noise the knight woke out of his faint, and looked up weakly; and then he asked her where that madman was who had given him such a blow: "For I never had such a blow from any man's hand."

"Sir," said the dwarf, "there is no honour in hurting him, for he is a man out of his wits. And have no doubt, he has been a man of great honour, and has gone mad from some sorrow he has taken to heart. And it seems to me," said the dwarf, "he looks very like Sir Lancelot, for I saw him at the great tournament near Lonazep."

"Jesus forbid," said the knight, "that the noble knight Sir Lancelot should ever be in such a state! But whoever he is," said the knight, "I will do him no harm." And this knight's name was Bliant. Then he said to the dwarf, "Ride fast to my brother Sir Selivant, who is at the Castle Blank, and tell him what has happened to me, and tell him to bring a horse-litter with him, and then we will carry this knight to my castle."
