Chapter 2: How Sir Lancelot was carried in a horse litter, and how Sir Lancelot rescued Sir Bliant, his host

So the dwarf rode fast, and he came back and brought Sir Selivant with him, and six men with a horse-litter; and so they picked up the feather bed with Sir Lancelot on it, and carried the whole thing away with them to the Castle Blank, and he never woke until he was inside the castle. And then they bound his hands and his feet, and gave him good food and good drink, and brought him back to his strength and his good looks; but they could not bring him back to his wits, nor to knowing himself. So Sir Lancelot was there more than a year and a half, decently clothed and well cared for.

Then one day the lord of that castle, Sir Bliant, took up his arms, on horseback, with a spear, to look for adventures. And as he rode in a forest two knights-errant met him; one was Breuse Saunce Pité, and the other his brother, Sir Bertelot. And these two both charged Sir Bliant at once, and broke their spears on his body. And then they drew their swords and fought a great fight, and fought together for a long time. But at last Sir Bliant was badly wounded, and felt himself growing faint; and then he fled on horseback toward his castle. And as they came rushing under the castle, where Sir Lancelot lay at a window, he saw how two knights were laying into Sir Bliant with their swords. And when Sir Lancelot saw that, mad as he was, he was sorry for his lord, Sir Bliant. And then Sir Lancelot broke the chains off his legs and his arms, and in breaking them he hurt his hands badly. And so Sir Lancelot ran out by a back gate, and there he met the two knights who were chasing Sir Bliant; and there he pulled Sir Bertelot down from his horse with his bare hands, and with that he wrenched his sword out of his hand. And so he leapt at Sir Breuse, and gave him such a blow on the head that he tumbled backward over his horse's rump. And when Sir Bertelot saw his brother take such a fall, he got a spear in his hand, and would have run Sir Lancelot through; Sir Bliant saw that, and struck off Sir Bertelot's hand. And then Sir Breuse and Sir Bertelot got to their horses and fled.

When Sir Selivant came and saw what Sir Lancelot had done for his brother, he thanked God, and so did his brother, that they had ever done him any good. But when Sir Bliant saw that Sir Lancelot was hurt from breaking his irons, he was sorry that he had ever bound him.

"Bind him no more," said Sir Selivant, "for he is lucky to have about, and gracious."

Then they rejoiced greatly over Sir Lancelot, and they bound him no more; and so he stayed there half a year and more. And early one morning Sir Lancelot saw a great boar coming near him with many hounds. But the boar was so big that no hounds could pull him down; and the hunters came after, blowing their horns, some on horseback and some on foot. And then Sir Lancelot saw one of them dismount and tie his horse to a tree, and lean his spear against the tree.
