Chapter 3: How Sir Lancelot fought against a boar and slew it, and how he was hurt and brought to a hermitage

So Sir Lancelot came and found the horse tied to a tree, and a spear leaning against a tree, and a sword tied to the saddlebow; and then Sir Lancelot leapt into the saddle and got the spear in his hand, and then he rode after the boar. And then Sir Lancelot saw where the boar had set his rump hard against a tree close by a hermitage. Then Sir Lancelot ran at the boar with his spear, and with that the boar turned nimbly, and ripped out the lungs and the heart of the horse, so that Lancelot fell to the earth; and before Sir Lancelot could get clear of the horse, the boar ripped him through the brawn of the thigh right up to the back of the knee. And then Sir Lancelot was angry, and up he got onto his feet, and drew his sword, and he struck off the boar's head at one stroke. And with that the hermit came out, and saw that he had such a wound. Then the hermit came to Sir Lancelot and pitied him, and wanted to take him home to his hermitage; but when Sir Lancelot heard him speak, he was so angry with his wound that he ran at the hermit to kill him, and the hermit ran away. And when Sir Lancelot could not catch him, he threw his sword after him, for Sir Lancelot could go no further for bleeding. Then the hermit turned back, and asked Sir Lancelot how he had been hurt.

"Fellow," said Sir Lancelot, "this boar has bitten me badly."

"Then come with me," said the hermit, "and I will heal you."

"Go away," said Sir Lancelot, "and leave me alone."

Then the hermit ran off, and there he met a good knight with many men.

"Sir," said the hermit, "close by my place here is the handsomest man I ever saw, and he is badly wounded by a boar, and yet he has killed the boar. But I know well," said the hermit, "that if he is not helped, that fine man will die of that wound, and that would be a great pity."

Then at the hermit's request that knight got a cart, and in that cart the knight put the boar and Sir Lancelot, for Sir Lancelot was so weak that they could handle him very easily. And so Sir Lancelot was brought to the hermitage, and there the hermit healed him of his wound. But the hermit could not provide Sir Lancelot's keep, and so he declined and grew weak, both in body and in mind: for lack of food he grew madder than he had been before.

And then one day Sir Lancelot ran off into the forest; and by chance he came to the city of Corbin, where Dame Elaine was, who bore Galahad, Sir Lancelot's son. And so when he had come into the town he ran through the town to the castle; and then all the young men of that city ran after Sir Lancelot, and there they threw clods of turf at him, and gave him many heavy blows. And whenever Sir Lancelot could reach any of them, he threw them so hard that they never wanted to come into his hands again; for he broke the legs and the arms of some of them. And so he fled into the castle; and then knights and squires came out and rescued Sir Lancelot. And when they looked at him and saw his person, they thought they had never seen so handsome a man. And when they saw so many wounds on him, they all judged that he had been a man of honour. And then they had clothes provided for his body, and straw under him, and a little hut. And then every day they would throw him food, and set drink down for him, but there were few who would bring food to his hands.
