Chapter 4: How Sir Lancelot was recognised by Dame Elaine, and was carried into a chamber and afterwards healed by the Holy Grail

So it happened that King Pelles had a nephew, whose name was Castor; and he asked the king to make him a knight, and so at Castor's request the king made him a knight at the feast of Candlemas. And when Sir Castor was made a knight, that same day he gave away many gowns. And then Sir Castor sent for the fool, who was Sir Lancelot. And when he had come before Sir Castor, he gave Sir Lancelot a robe of scarlet and everything that went with it. And when Sir Lancelot was dressed like a knight in this way, he was the handsomest man in all the court, and none was so well made. So when he saw his chance he went into the garden, and there Sir Lancelot lay down by a spring and slept. And so in the afternoon Dame Elaine and her maidens came into the garden to amuse themselves; and as they strolled up and down, one of Dame Elaine's maidens noticed a handsome man lying asleep by the spring, and at once pointed him out to Dame Elaine.

"Hush," said Dame Elaine, "and say not a word."

And then the maiden brought Dame Elaine to where he lay. And when she looked at him, at once she remembered him, and knew him truly for Sir Lancelot; and with that she began weeping so bitterly that she sank right down to the earth. And when she had wept like this for a long while, she got up and called her maidens and said she was sick.

And so she went out of the garden, and she went straight to her father, and there she took him aside by himself; and then she said, "Oh, father, now I need your help, and unless you help me, farewell to my good days for ever."

"What is it, daughter?" said King Pelles.

"Sir," she said, "it is this: I went into your garden to amuse myself, and there, by the spring, I found Sir Lancelot du Lake asleep."

"I can't believe that," said King Pelles.

"Sir," she said, "truly he is there, and it seems to me he must be driven out of his wits."

"Then keep quiet," said the king, "and let me handle it."

Then the king called to him the people he trusted most, four of them, and Dame Elaine, his daughter. And when they came to the spring and looked at Sir Lancelot, at once Dame Brisen recognised him.

"Sir," said Dame Brisen, "we must be careful how we handle him, for this knight is out of his mind, and if we wake him roughly, none of us knows what he will do. But you wait, and I will cast such an enchantment on him that he will not wake for the space of an hour."

And so she did. Then a little while after, the king commanded that everyone should clear away, so that no one would be on the path where the king was coming. And so when this was done, these four men and these ladies laid hands on Sir Lancelot, and so they carried him into a tower, and so into a chamber where the holy vessel of the Holy Grail was; and Sir Lancelot was laid beside that holy vessel by force. And a holy man came and uncovered the vessel, and so by miracle and by the power of that holy vessel Sir Lancelot was healed and recovered. And when he woke he groaned and sighed, and complained greatly that he was in terrible pain.
