Chapter 5: How Sir Lancelot, once he was whole and in his right mind, was ashamed, and how Elaine asked for a castle for him

And when Sir Lancelot saw King Pelles and Elaine, he grew ashamed and said this: "O Lord Jesus, how did I come here? For God's sake, my lord, let me know how I came here."

"Sir," said Dame Elaine, "you came into this country like a madman, clean out of your wits, and here you have been kept as a fool; and no one here knew who you were, until by luck a maiden of mine brought me to you where you lay sleeping by a spring, and as soon as I looked at you properly I knew you. And then I told my father, and so you were brought before this holy vessel, and by its power you were healed like this."

"O Jesus have mercy," said Sir Lancelot. "If this is true, how many people there must be who know of my madness!"

"So help me God," said Elaine, "no one but my father, and I, and Dame Brisen."

"Now for the love of Christ," said Sir Lancelot, "keep it secret, and let no one in the world know of it, for I am deeply ashamed that I have gone so far astray; for I am banished out of the country of Logres for ever, that is to say the country of England."

And so Sir Lancelot lay more than a fortnight before he could stir for pain. And then one day he said these words to Dame Elaine: "Lady Elaine, for your sake I have had much hardship, care and anguish; there is no need to go over it again, you know how. All the same, I know well I did you wrong when I drew my sword on you, to kill you, on the morning after I had lain with you. And the whole cause of it was that you and Dame Brisen made me lie with you against my will; and, as you say, that night Galahad your son was conceived."

"That is the truth," said Dame Elaine.

"Now will you, for my love," said Sir Lancelot, "go to your father and get me a place from him where I can live? For I may never come to King Arthur's court."

"Sir," said Dame Elaine, "I will live and die with you, and only for your sake; and if my life could not help you and my death could, believe me, I would die for your sake. And I will go to my father, and I am sure there is nothing I can ask of him that I will not get. And wherever you are, my lord Sir Lancelot, have no doubt that I will be with you, with all the service I can give."

So straight away she went to her father and said, "Sir, my lord Sir Lancelot wishes to be here near you, in some castle of yours."

"Well, daughter," said the king, "since it is his wish to stay in these borderlands, he shall be in the Castle of Bliant, and you shall be there with him, and twenty of the fairest ladies in the country, and they shall all be of high blood, and you shall have ten knights with you; for, daughter, I want you to know that we are all honoured by the blood of Sir Lancelot."
