Chapter 6: How Sir Lancelot came to the Joyous Isle, and there named himself Le Chevaler Mal Fet

Then Dame Elaine went to Sir Lancelot, and told him everything her father had arranged for him and her. Then the knight Sir Castor, who was King Pelles's nephew, came to Sir Lancelot, and asked him what his name was.

"Sir," said Sir Lancelot, "my name is Le Chevaler Mal Fet, that is to say, the knight who has done wrong."

"Sir," said Sir Castor, "that may well be, but all the same it seems to me your name should be Sir Lancelot du Lake, for I have seen you before now."

"Sir," said Lancelot, "you are not behaving like a well-bred knight. Suppose my name were Sir Lancelot, and I did not care to reveal my name: why should it trouble you to keep my secret here, when you are not hurt by it? But mark this: if it is ever in my power, I'll make you pay for it, and that I promise you truly."

Then Sir Castor knelt down and begged Sir Lancelot's pardon: "For I will never tell who you are, as long as you are in these parts." Then Sir Lancelot pardoned him.

And then, after this, King Pelles with ten knights, and Dame Elaine, and twenty ladies, rode to the Castle of Bliant, which stood on an island enclosed in iron, with a fine deep wide water around it. And when they were there Sir Lancelot had it called the Joyous Isle; and there he was called nothing else but Le Chevaler Mal Fet, the knight who has done wrong. Then Sir Lancelot had a shield made for himself, all black, with a crowned queen in the middle of it, all in silver, and a knight in full armour kneeling before her. And every day, whatever merriment all the ladies might make for him, once every day he would look toward the realm of Logres, where King Arthur and Queen Guinevere were. And then he would fall weeping as if his heart would burst.

So it happened at that time that Sir Lancelot heard of a jousting close by his castle, within three leagues. Then he called a dwarf to him, and told him to go to that jousting: "And before the knights leave, see that you make a proclamation there, in the hearing of all the knights, that there is a knight in the Joyous Isle, that is, the Castle of Bliant, and say his name is Le Chevaler Mal Fet, who will joust against any knights who come. And whoever gets the better of that knight shall have a fair maiden and a gerfalcon."
