Chapter 7: Of a great tournament on the Joyous Isle, and how Sir Percival and Sir Ector came there, and Sir Percival fought with Sir Lancelot

So when this proclamation was made, knights to the number of five hundred came to the Joyous Isle; and believe me, in Arthur's days there was never seen one knight who did as many deeds of arms as Sir Lancelot did those three days together; for, as the book truly records, he had the better of all five hundred knights, and not one of them was killed. And after that Sir Lancelot gave them all a great feast.

And in the meantime Sir Percival de Galis and Sir Ector de Maris came under that castle that was called the Joyous Isle. And as they looked at that splendid castle they wanted to go to it, but they could not for the broad water, and they could find no bridge. Then they saw on the other side a lady with a sparrowhawk on her hand, and Sir Percival called to her, and asked the lady who was in that castle.

"Fair knights," she said, "here within this castle is the fairest lady in this land, and her name is Elaine. We also have in this castle the fairest knight and the mightiest man, I dare say, who is alive, and he calls himself Le Chevaler Mal Fet."

"How did he come into these borderlands?" said Sir Percival.

"Truly," said the damsel, "he came into this country like a madman, with dogs and boys chasing him through the city of Corbin, and by the holy vessel of the Holy Grail he was brought back to his wits. But he will not fight any knight except between mid-morning and noon. And if you want to come into the castle," said the lady, "you must ride round to the far side of the castle, and there you will find a boat that will carry you and your horse."

Then they left, and came to the boat. And then Sir Percival dismounted, and said to Sir Ector de Maris, "You wait for me here until I find out what kind of knight he is; for it would be a shame to us, since he is only one knight, if we both fought him."

"Do as you like," said Sir Ector, "and I will wait for you here until I hear from you."

Then Sir Percival crossed the water, and when he came to the castle gate he said to the porter, "Go to the good knight within the castle, and tell him a knight-errant has come here to joust with him."

"Sir," said the porter, "ride on into the castle, and there is a common ground for jousting, where lords and ladies can watch you."

So as soon as Sir Lancelot had warning he was quickly ready; and there Sir Percival and Sir Lancelot met with such force, and their spears were so stout, that both the horses and the knights fell to the earth. Then they got clear of their horses, and drew their noble swords, and hewed pieces off their shields, and crashed together with their shields like two boars, and each wounded the other exceedingly badly. At last, when they had fought there more than two hours, Sir Percival spoke first.

"Fair knight," said Sir Percival, "I ask you to tell me your name, for I never met such a knight."

"Sir," said Sir Lancelot, "my name is Le Chevaler Mal Fet. Now tell me your name," said Sir Lancelot, "I ask you, noble knight."

"Truly," said Sir Percival, "my name is Sir Percival de Galis, and I am brother to the good knight Sir Lamorak de Galis, and King Pellinore was our father, and Sir Aglovale is my brother."

"Alas," said Sir Lancelot, "what have I done, to fight with you, who are a knight of the Round Table, and whose fellow I once was?"
