Chapter 9: How Sir Bors and Sir Lionel came to King Brandegore, and how Sir Bors took his son Helin le Blank, and of Sir Lancelot

Now we leave Sir Lancelot in the Joyous Isle with the Lady Dame Elaine, and Sir Percival and Sir Ector enjoying themselves with them, and turn to Sir Bors de Ganis and Sir Lionel, who had looked for Sir Lancelot for nearly the space of two years, and could never hear of him. And as they rode along like this, by chance they came to the house of Brandegore, and there Sir Bors was well known, for he had fathered a child on the king's daughter fifteen years before, and his name was Helin le Blank. And when Sir Bors saw that child he liked him exceedingly well. And so those knights had a good welcome from King Brandegore. And in the morning Sir Bors came before King Brandegore and said, "Here is my son Helin le Blank, for so it is said he is my son; and since it is so, I want you to know that I will take him with me to the court of King Arthur."

"Sir," said the king, "you may well take him with you, but he is too young."

"As for that," said Sir Bors, "I will have him with me, and bring him to the most honourable house in the world."

So when Sir Bors was to leave there was great sorrow over the departure of Helin le Blank, and there was great weeping. But Sir Bors and Sir Lionel left, and after a while they came to Camelot, where King Arthur was. And when King Arthur understood that Helin le Blank was Sir Bors's son, and King Brandegore's nephew, King Arthur had him made a knight of the Round Table; and so he proved a good knight and a bold one for adventures.

Now we will turn to our matter of Sir Lancelot. It happened one day that Sir Ector and Sir Percival came to Sir Lancelot and asked him what he meant to do, and whether he would go with them to King Arthur or not.

"No," said Sir Lancelot, "that cannot be by any means, for I was so treated at the court that I resolved never to come there again."

"Sir," said Sir Ector, "I am your brother, and you are the man in the world I love most; and if I understood that it would be to your dishonour, you may be sure I would never advise you to it. But King Arthur and all his knights, and Queen Guinevere above all, grieved and sorrowed so much that it was a marvel to hear and see. And you must remember the great honour and renown you have, how you have been more spoken of than any other knight now living; for there is no one who bears the name now but you and Sir Tristram. So, brother," said Sir Ector, "make yourself ready to ride to the court with us, and I dare say there was never a knight more welcome at the court than you. And I know well, and can prove it," said Sir Ector, "that the search for you has cost my lady the queen twenty thousand pounds."

"Well, brother," said Sir Lancelot, "I will do as you advise, and ride with you."

So then they took their horses and made themselves ready, and took their leave of King Pelles and of Dame Elaine. And when Sir Lancelot was to leave, Dame Elaine grieved greatly.

"My lord Sir Lancelot," said Dame Elaine, "at this same feast of Pentecost your son and mine, Galahad, is to be made a knight, for he is now a full fifteen winters old."

"Do as you like," said Sir Lancelot. "God give him grace to prove a good knight."

"As for that," said Dame Elaine, "I have no doubt he will prove the best man of his kin except one."

"Then he will be a good enough man," said Sir Lancelot.
