Chapter 11: How Isolde the Fair advised Sir Tristram to go to the court, to the great feast of Pentecost

Now we will leave this matter, and speak of Sir Tristram, and of Sir Palomides, who was the unchristened Saracen. When Sir Tristram had come home to Joyous Gard from his adventures (all this while that Sir Lancelot was missing like this, two years and more, Sir Tristram carried off the renown through all the realm of Logres, and many strange adventures happened to him, and he brought them to an end very well and manfully and honourably), so when he had come home, Isolde the Fair told him of the great feast that was to be held at the Pentecost coming next. And there she told him how Sir Lancelot had been missing two years, and all that while he had been out of his mind, and how he was helped by the holy vessel, the Holy Grail.

"Alas," said Sir Tristram, "that came of some quarrel between him and Queen Guinevere."

"Sir," said Dame Isolde, "I know all about it, for Queen Guinevere sent me a letter in which she wrote me everything that had happened, in order to ask you to look for him. And now, blessed be God," said Isolde the Fair, "he is whole and sound and has come back to the court."

"I am glad of it," said Sir Tristram, "and now you and I will make ready, for both you and I will be at the feast."

"Sir," said Isolde, "if it please you, I will not be there, for because of me you are a marked man to many good knights, and that has given you much more trouble for my sake than you have any need of."

"Then I will not be there," said Sir Tristram, "unless you are there."

"God forbid," said Isolde the Fair, "for then I would be spoken of with shame among all queens and ladies of rank. For you, who are called one of the noblest knights in the world, and a knight of the Round Table, how can you be missing from that feast? What will be said among all the knights? 'See how Sir Tristram hunts, and hawks, and cowers inside a castle with his lady, and forsakes his honour.' 'Alas,' some will say, 'it is a pity he was ever made a knight, or that he should ever have the love of a lady.' And what will queens and ladies say of me? 'It is a pity she is alive, when she will keep so noble a knight as you from his honour.'"

"So help me God," said Sir Tristram to Isolde the Fair, "that is exceedingly well said of you, and nobly advised; and now I well understand that you love me. And as you have advised me, I will do my part accordingly. But no man nor boy shall ride with me, only myself. And so I will ride on Tuesday next, and with no more armour of war than my spear and my sword."
