Chapter 12: How Sir Tristram set out unarmed and met Sir Palomides, and how they struck each other, and how Sir Palomides spared him

And so when the day came Sir Tristram took his leave of Isolde the Fair, and she sent four knights with him, and within half a mile he sent them back. And a mile after that Sir Tristram saw ahead of him where Sir Palomides had struck down a knight, and had wounded him almost to death. Then Sir Tristram regretted that he was not armed, and then he halted and waited. With that Sir Palomides recognised Sir Tristram, and cried out loud, "Sir Tristram, now we have met, and before we part we will settle our old scores."

"As for that," said Sir Tristram, "there was never yet a Christian man who could boast that I ever fled from him; and believe me, Sir Palomides, you, a Saracen, will never boast that Sir Tristram de Liones fled from you."

And with that Sir Tristram set his horse running, and with all his might he came straight at Sir Palomides, and burst his spear on him into a hundred pieces. And straight away Sir Tristram drew his sword. And then he turned his horse and struck six great strokes at Palomides on his helm. And then Sir Palomides stood still, and looked at Sir Tristram, and marvelled at his madness and his folly. And then Sir Palomides said to himself, "If Sir Tristram were armed, it would be hard to stop him in this fight; and if I turn back and kill him, I am shamed wherever I go."

Then Sir Tristram spoke and said, "You coward knight, what are you playing at? Why won't you fight me? Have no doubt of it, I'll stand up to all your malice."

"Ah, Sir Tristram," said Palomides, "you know very well I cannot fight you for shame, for you are here without armour and I am armed, and if I kill you, the dishonour will be mine. And you know well," said Sir Palomides to Sir Tristram, "I know your strength and your hardiness to hold out against a good knight."

"That is true," said Sir Tristram. "I understand your valour well."

"You say well," said Sir Palomides. "Now, I ask you, answer me a question that I will put to you."

"Tell me what it is," said Sir Tristram, "and I will answer you truthfully, so help me God."

"Suppose," said Sir Palomides, "that you were armed at all points as well as I am, and I were as unarmoured as you are: what would you do to me now, by your true knighthood?"

"Ah," said Sir Tristram, "now I understand you well, Sir Palomides, for now I must give my own judgement, and, God bless me, what I say will not be said for any fear I have of you. But this is all: understand, Sir Palomides, that at this time you should leave me, for I would not fight you."

"No more will I," said Palomides, "and so ride on your way."

"As for that, I may choose," said Sir Tristram, "whether to ride on or to stay. But, Sir Palomides," said Sir Tristram, "I wonder at one thing: that you, who are so good a knight, will not be christened, when your brother Sir Safere has been christened for many a day."
