Chapter 13: How Sir Tristram got himself the armour of a wounded knight, and how he overthrew Sir Palomides

"As for that," said Sir Palomides, "I may not be christened yet, because of a vow I made many years ago; and yet in my heart I believe in Jesus Christ and his gentle mother Mary. But I have only one battle to fight, and when that is done I will be baptised gladly."

"By my head," said Tristram, "as for one battle, you shall not have to look for it any longer. For God forbid," said Sir Tristram, "that through any failing of mine you should live as a Saracen any longer like this. For over there is a knight whom you, Sir Palomides, have hurt and struck down. Now help me to be armed in his armour, and I will soon fulfil your vow."

"As you wish," said Palomides, "so it shall be."

So they both rode to that knight, who was sitting on a bank, and then Sir Tristram greeted him, and he weakly greeted him in return.

"Sir knight," said Sir Tristram, "I ask you to tell me your real name."

"Sir," he said, "my name is Sir Galleron of Galway, a knight of the Round Table."

"So help me God," said Sir Tristram, "I am very sorry for your wounds. But this is the whole of it: I must beg you to lend me all your armour, every piece, for you see I am unarmed, and I must fight this knight."

"Sir," said the wounded knight, "you shall have it gladly; but you must take care, for I warn you, that knight is strong. Sir," said Galleron, "I beg you, tell me your name, and the name of that knight who has beaten me."

"Sir, as for my name, it is Sir Tristram de Liones; and as for the knight who has hurt you, his name is Sir Palomides, brother to the good knight Sir Safere, and Sir Palomides is still unchristened."

"Alas," said Sir Galleron, "it is a pity that so good a knight and so noble a man of arms should be unchristened."

"So help me God," said Sir Tristram, "either he will kill me or I him, or else he shall be christened before we part."

"My lord Sir Tristram," said Sir Galleron, "your renown and your honour are well known through many realms, and God save you this day from disgrace and shame."

Then Sir Tristram unarmed Galleron, who was a noble knight, and had done many deeds of arms, and he was a big knight, of flesh and bone. And when he was unarmed he stood on his feet, for he was bruised in the back by a spear; and yet, as well as Sir Galleron could, he armed Sir Tristram. And then Sir Tristram mounted his own horse, and took Sir Galleron's spear in his hand; and by then Sir Palomides was ready. And so they came crashing together, and each struck the other in the middle of his shield; and with that Sir Palomides's spear broke, and Sir Tristram struck down the horse. And Sir Palomides, as soon as he could, got clear of his horse, and set his shield, and pulled out his sword. Sir Tristram saw that, and with that he dismounted and tied his horse to a tree.
