Chapter 14: How Sir Tristram and Sir Palomides fought a long time, and afterwards made peace, and how Sir Tristram had him christened

And then they came together like two wild boars, laying into each other, circling and sidestepping like noble men who had often been well tested in battle. But all the while Sir Palomides feared the might of Sir Tristram, and so he let him stop for breath. So they fought more than two hours, but often Sir Tristram struck such strokes at Sir Palomides that he brought him to his knees; and Sir Palomides broke and cut away many pieces of Sir Tristram's shield; and then Sir Palomides wounded Sir Tristram, for he was a good fighting man. Then Sir Tristram was mad with rage beyond measure, and rushed at Sir Palomides with such force that Sir Palomides fell flat on his face on the earth; and with that he leapt up nimbly onto his feet, and then Sir Tristram wounded Palomides badly through the shoulder. And all the while Sir Tristram kept fighting just as hard, and Sir Palomides did not hold back, but gave him many heavy strokes. And at last Sir Tristram doubled his strokes, and by luck Sir Tristram struck Sir Palomides's sword out of his hand; and if Sir Palomides had stooped for his sword he would have been killed.

Then Palomides stood still and looked at his sword with a sorrowful heart.

"How now?" said Sir Tristram to Palomides. "Now I have you at a disadvantage, as you had me today. But it shall never be said in any court, nor among good knights, that Sir Tristram would kill any knight who has no weapon. And so take your sword, and let us make an end of this fight."

"As for this fight," said Palomides, "I dare very well finish it, but I have no great wish to fight any more. And this is why," said Palomides: "my offence against you is not so great that we cannot be friends. All the offence I have given is and was for the love of Isolde the Fair. And as for her, I dare say she is peerless above all other ladies, and I never offered her any dishonour; and through her I have won the greater part of my honour. And since I never offended against her own person, and the offence I have done was against your own person, and for that offence you have given me many heavy strokes today, and I have given you some in return; and now I dare say I never felt a man of your might, nor one with so much wind, unless it was Sir Lancelot du Lake: therefore I ask you, my lord, to forgive me all the offence I have given you. And this same day take me to the nearest church, and first let me be fully confessed, and after that see to it that I am truly baptised. And then we will all ride together to Arthur's court, so that we are there for the high feast."

"Now take your horse," said Sir Tristram, "and as you say, so it shall be; and may God forgive you all your ill will, as I do. And within a mile of here is the Suffragan of Carlisle, the assistant bishop, who will give you the sacrament of baptism."

Then they took their horses, and Sir Galleron rode with them. And when they came to the Suffragan, Sir Tristram told him what they wanted. Then the Suffragan had a great vessel filled with water, and when he had blessed it he heard Sir Palomides's full confession, and Sir Tristram and Sir Galleron were his godfathers. And then soon after they left, riding toward Camelot, where King Arthur and Queen Guinevere were, and most of the knights of the Round Table. And so the king and all the court were glad that Sir Palomides was christened. And at that same feast Galahad came in and sat in the Siege Perilous. And so with that all the knights of the Round Table departed and went their separate ways. And Sir Tristram went back to Joyous Gard, and Sir Palomides followed the Questing Beast.

Here ends the second book of Sir Tristram, which was drawn out of French into English. But the third book is not retold here. And here follows the noble tale of the Sangreal, which is called the Holy Vessel, and the meaning of the blessed blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, blessed may it be, which was brought into this land by Joseph of Arimathea. Therefore, blessed Lord, have mercy on all sinful souls.

Here ends the twelfth book.

Here follows the thirteenth book.
