Chapter 1: How on the eve of the Feast of Pentecost a damsel came into the hall before King Arthur and asked Sir Lancelot to come and dub a knight, and how he went with her

On the eve of Pentecost, when all the fellowship of the Round Table had come to Camelot and had heard their service there, and the tables were set ready for the meal, just then there rode into the hall a very beautiful gentlewoman on horseback, who had ridden very fast, for her horse was all in a sweat. Then she dismounted there, and came before the king and greeted him; and he said, "Damsel, God bless you."

"Sir," she said, "for God's sake tell me where Sir Lancelot is."

"You can see him over there," said the king.

Then she went to Lancelot and said, "Sir Lancelot, I greet you on King Pelles' behalf, and I ask you to come with me to a forest near here."

Then Sir Lancelot asked her whose household she belonged to.

"I live," she said, "with King Pelles."

"What do you want with me?" said Lancelot.

"You shall know," she said, "when you get there."

"Well," he said, "I will gladly go with you."

So Sir Lancelot told his squire to saddle his horse and bring his armour; and the squire did his bidding in all haste.

Then the queen came to Lancelot, and said, "Will you leave us at this high feast?"

"Madam," said the gentlewoman, "believe me, he shall be with you tomorrow by dinner time."

"If I thought," said the queen, "that he would not be with us here tomorrow, he would not go with you with my good will."

At that Sir Lancelot left with the gentlewoman, and rode until he came into a forest and into a great valley, where they saw an abbey of nuns; and there was a squire ready who opened the gates, and so they went in and got down from their horses; and a fair company gathered around Sir Lancelot, and welcomed him, and were exceedingly glad he had come. And then they led him to the Abbess's room and unarmed him; and just then he noticed two of his cousins lying on a bed, Sir Bors and Sir Lionel, and then he woke them; and when they saw him they rejoiced greatly.

"Sir," said Sir Bors to Sir Lancelot, "what chance has brought you here, for we expected to find you at Camelot tomorrow?"

"So help me God," said Sir Lancelot, "a gentlewoman brought me here, but I don't know why."

While they stood talking together like this, in came twelve nuns who brought Galahad with them, who was exceedingly handsome and well made, so that you could scarcely find his match in the world; and all those ladies wept.

"Sir," they all said, "we bring you here this child whom we have brought up, and we ask you to make him a knight, for there is no worthier man's hand from which he could receive the order of knighthood."

Sir Lancelot looked at the young squire and saw that he was comely and modest as a dove, with every kind of good feature, so that he thought he had never seen so finely formed a man of his age.

Then Sir Lancelot said, "Does this wish come from himself?"

He and all of them said yes.

"Then he shall," said Sir Lancelot, "receive the high order of knighthood tomorrow, in honour of the high feast."

That night Sir Lancelot was given an exceedingly warm welcome; and in the morning at the hour of prime, at Galahad's wish, he made him a knight and said, "God make him a good man, for in beauty you fall short of no one alive."
