Chapter 2: How letters were found written on the Siege Perilous, and of the marvellous adventure of the sword in a stone

"Now, fair sir," said Sir Lancelot, "will you come with me to the court of King Arthur?"

"No," he said, "I will not go with you at this time."

Then he left them and took his two cousins with him, and so they came to Camelot by mid-morning on Whitsunday. By that time the king and the queen had gone to the great church to hear their service. Then the king and the queen were exceedingly glad to see Sir Bors and Sir Lionel, and so was all the fellowship. So when the king and all the knights had come back from the service, the barons saw, written in golden letters on the seats of the Round Table all around, "Here ought to sit he," and "He ought to sit here." And so they went along until they came to the Siege Perilous, where they found letters newly written in gold which said: "Four hundred and fifty-four winters after the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ have passed, this seat ought to be filled."

Then they all said, "This is a marvellous thing, and a strange adventure."

"In the name of God," said Sir Lancelot; and then he counted up the term of the writing from the birth of our Lord to that day. "It seems to me," said Sir Lancelot, "that this seat ought to be filled this very day, for this is the feast of Pentecost after the four hundred and fifty-fourth year; and if it would please everyone, I would rather none of these letters were seen today, until he has come who is to achieve this adventure."

Then they had a cloth of silk made ready, to cover these letters on the Siege Perilous.

Then the king called for dinner to be served at once.

"Sir," said Sir Kay the Steward, "if you go to your meal now you will break the old custom of your court, for you have never been used to sit down to your meal on this day before you have seen some adventure."

"You are right," said the king, "but I was so glad of Sir Lancelot and of his cousins, who have come to the court safe and sound, that I did not think of my old custom."

So, as they stood talking, in came a squire and said to the king, "Sir, I bring you marvellous news."

"What is it?" said the king.

"Sir, down here at the river there is a great stone which I saw floating on the water, and I saw a sword sticking in it."

The king said, "I will see that marvel."

So all the knights went with him, and when they came to the river they found a stone floating there, as if it were of red marble, and a fine rich sword was stuck in it, and in the pommel were precious stones worked with cunning letters of gold. Then the barons read the letters, which said this: "Never shall any man take me from here, but only he by whose side I ought to hang, and he shall be the best knight in the world."

When the king had seen the letters, he said to Sir Lancelot, "Fair sir, this sword ought to be yours, for I am sure you are the best knight in the world."

Then Sir Lancelot answered very soberly, "Certainly, sir, it is not my sword. Also, sir, believe me, I have no courage to set my hand to it, for it does not belong at my side. Also, whoever tries to take the sword and fails will receive a wound from that sword that will not heal for a long time after. And I want you to know that this same day the adventures of the Sangreal, which is called the Holy Vessel, shall begin."
