Chapter 3: How Sir Gawain tried to draw out the sword, and how an old man brought in Galahad

"Now, fair nephew," said the king to Sir Gawain, "you try it, for love of me."

"Sir," he said, "saving your good grace, I will not do that."

"Sir," said the king, "try to take the sword, and do it at my command."

"Sir," said Gawain, "I will obey your command."

And with that he took hold of the sword by the hilt, but he could not stir it.

"I thank you," said the king to Sir Gawain.

"My lord Sir Gawain," said Sir Lancelot, "now believe me, this sword shall touch you so badly that you will wish you had never set your hand to it, not for the best castle in this realm."

"Sir," he said, "I could not refuse my uncle's will and command."

But when the king heard this he regretted it greatly, and told Sir Percival that he should try it, for love of him.

And he said, "Gladly, to keep Sir Gawain company."

And with that he set his hand on the sword and pulled hard, but he could not move it. Then there were no more who dared be so bold as to set their hands to it.

"Now you may go to your dinner," said Sir Kay to the king, "for you have seen a marvellous adventure."

So the king and everyone went back to the court, and every knight knew his own place, and sat down in it, and young men who were knights served them.

So when they had been served, and all the seats were filled except the Siege Perilous alone, at once a marvellous thing happened: all the doors and windows of the palace shut by themselves. And yet the hall was not greatly darkened; and with that they were all dismayed, every one of them.

Then King Arthur spoke first and said, "By God, fair fellows and lords, we have seen marvels today, but before night I think we shall see greater marvels."

Meanwhile there came in a good old man, very aged, dressed all in white, and there was no knight who knew where he came from. And with him he brought a young knight, both of them on foot, the young one in red armour, without sword or shield, except for a scabbard hanging by his side.

And he said these words: "Peace be with you, fair lords." Then the old man said to Arthur, "Sir, I bring here a young knight who is of a king's lineage, and of the kindred of Joseph of Arimathea, through whom the marvels of this court, and of strange realms, shall be fully accomplished."
