Chapter 4: How the old man brought Galahad to the Siege Perilous and seated him in it, and how all the knights marvelled

The king was very glad of his words, and said to the good man, "Sir, you are very welcome, and the young knight with you."

Then the old man had the young man take off his armour, and he was in a coat of red silk, and he had a cloak on his shoulder that was furred with ermine, and put that on him. And the old knight said to the young knight, "Sir, follow me."

And at once he led him to the Siege Perilous, beside which Sir Lancelot sat; and the good man lifted up the cloth, and found letters there that said this: "This is the seat of Galahad, the high prince."

"Sir," said the old knight, "believe me, that place is yours."

And then he sat him down firmly in that seat. And then the young knight said to the old man, "Sir, you may go on your way now, for you have done well what you were commanded to do; and commend me to my grandfather, King Pelles, and to my lord Petchere, and tell them on my behalf that I shall come and see them as soon as ever I can."

So the good man left; and twenty noble squires met him, and so they took their horses and went on their way.

Then all the knights of the Round Table marvelled greatly at Sir Galahad, that he dared sit there in that Siege Perilous, and was so young; and they did not know where he came from, except only that he came from God.

And they said, "This is he by whom the Holy Grail shall be achieved, for no one ever sat there but he came to harm."

Then Sir Lancelot looked at his son and rejoiced greatly in him.

Then Bors told his companions, "On my life, this young knight shall come to great honour."

This news spread through all the court, so that it reached the queen. Then she wondered what knight it could be who dared venture to sit in the Siege Perilous. Many told the queen that he looked very like Sir Lancelot.

"I can well believe," said the queen, "that Sir Lancelot fathered him on King Pelles' daughter, by whom he was made to lie, by enchantment, and his name is Galahad. I would gladly see him," said the queen, "for he must surely be a noble man, for so is the father who fathered him, as all the Round Table will bear me out."

So when the meal was over and the king and everyone had risen, the king went to the Siege Perilous and lifted up the cloth, and found the name of Galahad there; and then he showed it to Sir Gawain, and said, "Fair nephew, now we have Sir Galahad among us, the good knight who shall bring honour to us all; and on my life he shall achieve the Holy Grail, just as Sir Lancelot gave us to understand."

Then King Arthur came to Galahad and said, "Sir, you are welcome, for you shall move many good knights to the quest of the Holy Grail, and you shall achieve what no knights could ever bring to an end."

Then the king took him by the hand, and went down from the palace to show Galahad the adventure of the stone.
