Chapter 5: How King Arthur showed Galahad the stone floating on the water, and how he drew out the sword

The queen heard of it, and came after them with many ladies, and they showed them the stone where it floated on the water.

"Sir," said the king to Sir Galahad, "here is as great a marvel as I ever saw, and very good knights have tried and failed."

"Sir," said Galahad, "that is no marvel, for this adventure is not theirs but mine; and because I was sure of this sword I brought none with me, for here by my side hangs the scabbard."

And at once he laid his hand on the sword, and easily drew it out of the stone, and put it in the sheath, and said to the king, "Now it goes better than it did before."

"Sir," said the king, "God will send you a shield."

"Now I have that sword," said Galahad, "that once belonged to the good knight Balin le Savage, and he was an exceedingly good fighting man; and with this sword he killed his brother Balan, and that was a great pity, for he was a good knight, and each killed the other because of the Dolorous Stroke that Balin gave to my grandfather King Pelles, which is not yet healed, nor shall it be until I heal him."

With that the king and all the rest saw a lady on a white palfrey come riding down along the river toward them. Then she greeted the king and the queen, and asked whether Sir Lancelot was there.

And then he answered for himself: "I am here, fair lady."

Then she said, weeping all the while, "How your great fortune has changed since this morning!"

"Damsel, why do you say so?" said Lancelot.

"I tell you the truth," said the damsel, "for this morning you were the best knight in the world, but whoever said so now would be a liar, for there is now one better than you, and it is well proved by the adventure of the sword, which you did not dare set your hand to; and that is the change and the loss of your name. And so I give you this to remember: that from now on you must not think that you are the best knight in the world."

"As for that," said Lancelot, "I know well I was never the best."

"Yes," said the damsel, "that you were, and are still, of any sinful man in the world. And, Sir King, Nacien the hermit sends you word that the greatest honour that ever came to a king in Britain shall come to you; and I will tell you why: for this day the Holy Grail shall appear in your house and feed you and all your fellowship of the Round Table."

So she left and went back the same way that she came.
