Chapter 7: How the queen asked to see Galahad, and how afterwards all the knights were filled by the Holy Grail, and how they vowed to go on its quest

Then the king, at the queen's request, had him dismount and unlace his helmet, so that the queen might see his face.

When she saw him she said, "Truly, I dare say that Sir Lancelot fathered him, for never were two men more alike, and so it is no marvel that he is of great prowess."

Then a lady who stood by the queen said, "Madam, for God's sake, is it right that he should be so good a knight?"

"Yes, truly," said the queen, "for on every side he comes of the best knights in the world and of the highest lineage; for Sir Lancelot is descended in only the eighth degree from our Lord Jesus Christ, and Sir Galahad is in the ninth degree from our Lord Jesus Christ, and so I dare say they are the greatest gentlemen in the world."

And then the king and people of every rank went home to Camelot, and so went to evensong at the great church, and then after that to supper, and every knight sat in his own place as they had before. Then at once they heard a cracking and crying of thunder, so that they thought the place would all be shattered to pieces. In the midst of this blast there came in a sunbeam seven times brighter than any day they had ever seen, and they were all lit by the grace of the Holy Ghost. Then every knight began to look at the others, and each saw the others, as it seemed to them, fairer than they had ever seen them before. And yet there was no knight who could speak a word for a long while, and so they looked at one another as if they had been struck dumb. Then the Holy Grail came into the hall, covered with white samite, but no one could see it, nor who carried it. And all the hall was filled with sweet smells, and every knight had such food and drink as he loved best in this world. And when the Holy Grail had been carried through the hall, the holy vessel suddenly departed, so that they did not know what had become of it; then they all had breath to speak. And then the king gave thanks to God for His good grace that He had sent them.

"Certainly," said the king, "we ought to thank our Lord Jesus greatly for what He has shown us this day, in honour of this high feast of Pentecost."

"Now," said Sir Gawain, "we have been served today with whatever food and drink we thought of; but one thing cheated us: we could not see the Holy Grail, it was so preciously covered. So I will make a vow here, that tomorrow, without waiting any longer, I shall set out on the quest of the Holy Grail, and that I shall keep at it for a year and a day, or more if need be, and I shall never return to the court until I have seen it more openly than it has been seen here; and if I cannot succeed, I shall come back, as one who cannot go against the will of our Lord Jesus Christ."

When the knights of the Round Table heard Sir Gawain say so, most of them rose and made the same vows as Sir Gawain had made. As soon as King Arthur heard this he was greatly displeased, for he knew well that they could not take back their vows.

"Alas," said King Arthur to Sir Gawain, "you have nearly killed me with the vow and promise you have made; for through you I am robbed of the fairest fellowship and the truest in knighthood that was ever seen together in any realm of the world. For when they leave here I am sure they will never all meet again in this world, for many of them will die in the quest. And so I am more than a little sorry, for I have loved them as well as my life, and so it will grieve me very sorely, the breaking of this fellowship; for it has long been my custom to have them in my company."
