Chapter 8: How the king and the queen and the ladies mourned greatly at the knights' leaving, and how they set out

And with that the tears came into his eyes. And then he said, "Gawain, Gawain, you have put me in great sorrow, for I greatly fear that my true fellowship will never meet here again."

"Ah," said Sir Lancelot, "comfort yourself; for it shall be a great honour to us, and much more than if we died in any other place, for of death we are sure."

"Ah, Lancelot," said the king, "the great love I have had for you all, all the days of my life, makes me say such sorrowful words; for no Christian king ever had so many worthy men at his table as I have had this day at the Round Table, and that is my great sorrow."

When the queen, the ladies and the gentlewomen knew this news, they had such sorrow and heaviness of heart that no tongue could tell it, for those knights had held them in honour and affection. But above all the others Queen Guinevere grieved greatly.

"I am amazed," she said, "that my lord would allow them to leave him."

So all the court was troubled because of the leaving of those knights. And many of those ladies who loved knights would have gone with their lovers; and so they would have done, had not an old knight in the habit of a religious order come among them; and then he spoke out loud and said, "Fair lords, who have sworn yourselves to the quest of the Holy Grail, Nacien the hermit sends you this word: that no one on this quest is to take a lady or a gentlewoman with him, for it is not fitting in so high a service as the one you labour in; for I warn you plainly, he who is not clean of his sins shall not see the mysteries of our Lord Jesus Christ."

And for this reason they left these ladies and gentlewomen behind.

After this the queen came to Galahad and asked him where he came from, and from what country. He told her where he came from. And she said he was the son of Lancelot. To that he said neither yes nor no.

"So help me God," said the queen, "you need not be ashamed of your father, for he is the handsomest knight, and comes of the best men in the world, and of the stock of kings on every side. And so by right you ought to be, in your deeds, an exceedingly good man; and certainly," she said, "you look very like him."

Then Sir Galahad was a little ashamed and said, "Madam, since you know it for certain, why do you ask me? For he who is my father shall be known openly, and soon enough."

And then they went to their rest. And in honour of Galahad's high rank he was led into King Arthur's own room, and he rested there in the king's own bed.

And as soon as it was day the king got up, for he had had no rest all that night for sorrow. Then he went to Gawain and to Sir Lancelot, who had got up to hear mass.

And then the king said again, "Ah, Gawain, Gawain, you have betrayed me; for my court shall never be the better for you, but you will never be as sorry for me as I am for you."

And with that the tears began to run down his face. And with that the king said, "Ah, knight, Sir Lancelot, I ask you to advise me, for I wish this quest were undone, if it could be."

"Sir," said Sir Lancelot, "you saw yesterday so many worthy knights who were sworn then that they cannot leave it off in any way at all."

"I know that well," said the king, "but it will weigh so heavily on me at their leaving that I know well no kind of joy will cure me."

And then the king and the queen went to the great church. So at once Lancelot and Gawain ordered their men to bring their armour. And when they were all armed except for their shields and their helmets, they came to their fellowship, who were all ready in the same way, to go to the great church to hear their service.

Then after the service was done the king wanted to know how many had undertaken the quest of the Holy Grail; and he asked them all to be counted. Then they found by the count a hundred and fifty, and all were knights of the Round Table. And then they put on their helmets and set out, and all of them commended themselves wholly to the queen; and there was weeping and great sorrow. Then the queen went off into her room and kept to herself, so that no one should see her great sorrow. When Sir Lancelot missed the queen he went to her room, and when she saw him she cried aloud, "Oh, Lancelot, Lancelot, you have betrayed me and put me to death, to leave my lord like this."

"Ah, madam, I beg you not to be displeased, for I shall come back as soon as I can with honour."

"Alas," she said, "that I ever saw you; but may He who suffered on the cross for all mankind be your good guide and safety, and that of the whole fellowship."

At that Sir Lancelot left, and found his fellowship waiting for him. And so they mounted their horses and rode through the streets of Camelot; and there was weeping from rich and poor, and the king turned away and could not speak for weeping. So within a while they came to a city, and a castle called Vagon. There they went into the castle, and the lord of that castle was an old man called Vagon, and he was a man of good life, and he threw open the gates, and gave them all the welcome he could. And so in the morning they all agreed that they should go their separate ways; and in the morning they set out with weeping faces, and every knight took the way that he liked best.
