Chapter 9: How Galahad got himself a shield, and how those fared who dared to take that shield down

Now Sir Galahad rides on still without a shield, and so he rode four days without any adventure. And on the fourth day after evensong he came to a White Abbey, and there he was received with great reverence, and led to a room, and there his armour was taken off; and then he noticed two knights of the Round Table, one was Sir Bagdemagus, and the other was Sir Uwain.

And when they saw him they went to Galahad and made much of him, and so they went to supper.

"Sirs," said Sir Galahad, "what adventure brought you here?"

"Sir," they said, "we have been told that in this place there is a shield that no man may wear hung about his neck without coming to harm, either dead within three days, or maimed for ever."

"Ah, sir," said King Bagdemagus, "I shall wear it tomorrow, to try this adventure."

"In the name of God," said Sir Galahad.

"Sir," said Bagdemagus, "if I cannot achieve the adventure of this shield, you shall take it on yourself, for I am sure you will not fail."

"Sir," said Galahad, "I agree to that very gladly, for I have no shield."

So in the morning they got up and heard mass. Then Bagdemagus asked where the adventurous shield was. At once a monk led him behind an altar where the shield hung, as white as any snow, but in the middle was a red cross.

"Sir," said the monk, "this shield ought not to be hung about any knight's neck unless he is the worthiest knight in the world; so I advise you knights to think carefully."

"Well," said Bagdemagus, "I know well that I am not the best knight in the world, but still I shall try to wear it," and so he carried it out of the church.

And then he said to Galahad, "If you please, wait here until you know how I fare."

"I shall wait for you," said Galahad.

Then King Bagdemagus took a good squire with him, to bring news to Sir Galahad of how he fared.

Then when they had ridden some two miles and came to a fair valley in front of a hermitage, they saw a knight coming from that direction in white armour, horse and all; and he came as fast as his horse could run, with his spear in its rest, and Bagdemagus levelled his spear against him and broke it on the white knight. But the other struck him so hard that he burst the rings of his mail, and thrust him through the right shoulder, for the shield did not cover him at that moment; and so he bore him off his horse. And with that he dismounted and took the white shield from him, saying, "Knight, you have made a great fool of yourself, for this shield ought to be borne by no one but him who shall have no equal among the living."

And then he came to Bagdemagus's squire and said, "Take this shield to the good knight Sir Galahad, whom you left in the abbey, and greet him well from me."

"Sir," said the squire, "what is your name?"

"Never mind my name," said the knight, "for it is not for you to know, nor for any earthly man."

"Now, fair sir," said the squire, "for the reverence of Jesus Christ, tell me why this shield may not be borne unless the one who bears it comes to harm."

"Now since you have begged me in that name," said the knight, "this shield belongs to no man but Galahad."

And the squire went to Bagdemagus and asked whether he was badly wounded or not.

"Yes, truly," he said, "I shall barely escape death."

Then the squire fetched his horse, and brought him with great difficulty to an abbey. Then he was taken down gently and unarmed, and laid in a bed, and his wounds were seen to there. And as the book tells, he lay there a long time, and barely escaped with his life.
