Chapter 10: How Galahad left with the shield, and how King Evelake had received the shield from Joseph of Arimathea

"Sir Galahad," said the squire, "the knight who wounded Bagdemagus sends you greeting, and told me that you should bear this shield, through which great adventures shall come about."

"Now blessed be God and fortune," said Galahad.

And then he asked for his armour, and mounted his horse, and hung the white shield about his neck, and commended them to God. And Sir Uwain said he would keep him company if he pleased.

"Sir," said Galahad, "you may not, for I must go alone, except that this squire shall keep me company."

And so Uwain left.

Then within a while Galahad came to where the White Knight was waiting for him by the hermitage, and each greeted the other courteously.

"Sir," said Galahad, "many marvels have come about through this shield."

"Sir," said the knight, "it happened thirty-two years after the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ that Joseph of Arimathea, the noble knight who took our Lord down from the holy Cross, left Jerusalem at that time with a great part of his kindred with him. And so they journeyed on until they came to a city called Sarras. And at the very hour that Joseph came to Sarras there was a king called Evelake, who was at great war with the Saracens, and especially with one Saracen, who was King Evelake's cousin, a rich king and a mighty one, whose lands bordered on this land, and his name was Tolleme la Feintes. So one day these two met to do battle. Then Joseph, the son of Joseph of Arimathea, went to King Evelake and told him he would be defeated and killed unless he left his belief in the old law and believed in the new law. And then and there he showed him the true belief in the Holy Trinity, to which he agreed with all his heart; and there this shield was made for King Evelake, in the name of Him who died on the Cross. And then through his good belief he got the better of King Tolleme. For when Evelake was in the battle there was a cloth set over the shield, and when he was in the greatest danger he had the cloth taken away, and then his enemies saw the figure of a man on the Cross, and because of it they were all defeated. And so it happened that a man of King Evelake's had his hand struck off, and carried that hand in his other hand; and Joseph called that man to him and told him to go and touch the Cross with good devotion. And as soon as that man had touched the Cross with his hand, it was as whole as it had ever been before. Then soon after a great marvel happened: the cross on the shield vanished away all at once, so that no one knew what had become of it. And then King Evelake was baptised, and most of the people of that city with him. So, soon after, Joseph wanted to leave, and King Evelake would go with him, whether he liked it or not. And so by chance they came into this land, which at that time was called Great Britain; and there they found a great wicked pagan, who put Joseph in prison. And so by chance news came to a worthy man called Mondrames, and he gathered all his people because of the great renown he had heard of Joseph; and so he came into the land of Great Britain and stripped this wicked pagan of his lands and destroyed him, and with that freed Joseph from prison. And after that all the people were converted to the Christian faith."
