Chapter 11: How Joseph made a cross on the white shield with his blood, and how a monk brought Galahad to a tomb

"Not long after that," the White Knight went on, "Joseph was laid on his deathbed. And when King Evelake saw that, he grieved greatly, and said, 'For love of you I have left my country, and since you must depart out of this world, leave me some token of yours so that I may think of you.'"

"'That I will do most gladly,' said Joseph. 'Now bring me your shield that I gave you when you went into battle against King Tolleme.'"

"Then Joseph bled badly at the nose, so that it could not be stopped by any means. And there on that shield he made a cross of his own blood. 'Now you may see a remembrance that I love you, for you shall never see this shield without thinking of me, and it shall always be as fresh as it is now. And no man shall ever bear this shield about his neck without regretting it, until the time that Galahad, the good knight, bears it; and the last of my line shall have it about his neck, and he shall do many marvellous deeds.'"

"'Now,' said King Evelake, 'where shall I put this shield, so that this worthy knight may have it?'"

"'You shall leave it where Nacien the hermit shall be laid after his death; for that good knight will come there on the fifteenth day after he receives the order of knighthood.' And so the day that they set is this very time, when you have your shield, and in the same abbey lies Nacien the hermit."

And then the White Knight vanished away.

As soon as the squire had heard these words, he got down off his small riding horse and knelt at Galahad's feet, and begged him that he might go with him until Galahad had made him a knight.

"Yes," said Galahad, "I would not refuse you."

"Then will you make me a knight?" said the squire. "And that order, by the grace of God, shall be well placed in me."

So Sir Galahad granted it to him, and turned back to the abbey they had come from; and there people rejoiced greatly over Sir Galahad. And as soon as he had dismounted, a monk took him to a tomb in a churchyard, where there was such a noise that whoever heard it would very nearly go mad or lose his strength.

"And sir," they said, "we think it is a fiend."
