Chapter 12: Of the marvel that Sir Galahad saw and heard in the tomb, and how he made Melias a knight

"Now take me there," said Galahad.

And so they did, all armed except for his helmet.

"Now," said the good man, "go to the tomb and lift it up."

So he did, and heard a great noise; and a voice said piteously, so that all men could hear it, "Sir Galahad, servant of Jesus Christ, do not come near me, for you will make me go back again to where I have been so long."

But Galahad was not at all afraid, and lifted up the stone; and out came so foul a smoke, and after it he saw leap out the foulest figure in the likeness of a man that he had ever seen; and then he crossed himself and knew well that it was a fiend. Then he heard a voice say, "Galahad, I see so many angels all around you that my power cannot harm you."

Just then Sir Galahad saw a body lying fully armed in that tomb, and beside him a sword.

"Now, fair brother," said Galahad, "let us remove this body, for it is not worthy to lie in this churchyard, for he was a false Christian."

And with that they all left and went to the abbey. And as soon as he was out of his armour a good man came and sat down beside him and said, "Sir, I will tell you what all that you saw in the tomb signifies. For that covered body signifies the hardship of the world, and the great sin that Our Lord found in the world. For there was such wretchedness that the father did not love the son, nor did the son love the father; and that was one of the reasons that Our Lord took flesh and blood of a pure maiden, for our sins were so great at that time that very nearly everything was wickedness."

"Truly," said Galahad, "I believe you entirely."

So Sir Galahad rested there that night; and in the morning he made the squire a knight, and asked him his name, and what family he came from.

"Sir," he said, "men call me Melias de Lile, and I am the son of the King of Denmark."

"Now, fair sir," said Galahad, "since you are descended from kings and queens, now see that knighthood is well placed in you, for you ought to be a mirror to all chivalry."

"Sir," said Sir Melias, "you speak the truth. But, sir, since you have made me a knight, by rights you must grant me my first wish, if it is reasonable."

"That is true," said Galahad.

"Then," said Melias, "that you will allow me to ride with you in this quest of the Holy Grail, until some adventure parts us."

"I grant it to you, sir."

Then men brought Sir Melias his armour and his spear and his horse, and so Sir Galahad and he rode on all that week before they found any adventure. And then on a Monday morning, as they were leaving an abbey, they came to a cross where two ways parted, and on that cross were letters written that said this: "Now, you knights-errant who go seeking adventurous knights, see here two ways. One way forbids you to go down it, for no man shall come out of it again unless he is a good man and a worthy knight. And if you go on the left hand, you will not easily win prowess there, for on this way you will soon be put to the test."

"Sir," said Melias to Galahad, "if it pleases you to let me take the way on the left hand, tell me, for there I can well prove my strength."

"It would be better," said Galahad, "if you did not ride that way, for I think I would come through that way better than you."

"No, my lord, I beg you, let me have that adventure."

"Take it, in God's name," said Galahad.
