Chapter 13: Of the adventure Melias had, and how Galahad avenged him, and how Melias was carried into an abbey

And then Melias rode into an old forest, and he rode in it two days and more. And then he came into a fair meadow, and there was a fair lodge of boughs. And then he saw in that lodge a chair, and in it a crown of gold, finely worked. Also there were cloths spread upon the ground, and many delicious foods set on them. Sir Melias looked at this adventure and thought it marvellous, but he was not hungry; but he took great notice of the crown of gold, and with that he stooped down and picked it up, and rode on his way with it. And at once he saw a knight come riding after him, who said, "Knight, set down that crown, which is not yours, and defend yourself!"

Then Sir Melias crossed himself and said, "Fair Lord of heaven, help and save your new-made knight."

And then they let their horses run as fast as they could, so that the other knight struck Sir Melias through his hauberk and through the left side, so that he fell to the ground near dead. And then he took the crown and went his way; and Sir Melias lay still and had no power to stir.

Meanwhile, by fortune, Sir Galahad came by and found him there in danger of death. And then he said, "Ah, Melias, who has wounded you? It would have been better to have ridden the other way."

And when Sir Melias heard him speak, "Sir," he said, "for the love of God, do not let me die in this forest, but carry me to the abbey near here, so that I may make my confession and have my last rites."

"It shall be done," said Galahad. "But where is the man who has wounded you?"

With that Sir Galahad heard a voice cry out loud among the leaves, "Knight, keep away from me!"

"Ah, sir," said Melias, "beware, for that is the man who has killed me."

Sir Galahad answered, "Sir knight, come on at your peril."

Then each squared up to the other, and they came together as fast as their horses could run, and Galahad struck him so that his spear went through his shoulder, and struck him down off his horse, and in the fall Galahad's spear broke.

With that another knight came out of the leaves and broke a spear on Galahad before he could even turn. Then Galahad drew his sword and struck off the man's left arm, so that it fell to the ground. And then he fled, and Sir Galahad pursued hard after him. And then he turned back to Sir Melias, and there he dismounted and set him gently on his horse in front of him, for the broken shaft of the spear was in his body; and Sir Galahad leapt up behind him, and held him in his arms, and so brought him to the abbey, and there took off his armour and brought him to his room. And then he asked for his Saviour. And when he had received Him, he said to Sir Galahad, "Sir, let death come when it pleases him."

And with that he drew the broken shaft of the spear out of his body, and then he fainted.

Then there came an old monk who had once been a knight, and looked at Sir Melias. And at once he searched his wound; and then he said to Sir Galahad, "I will heal him of his wound, by the grace of God, within the space of seven weeks."

Then Sir Galahad was glad, and took off his armour, and said he would stay there three days. And then he asked Sir Melias how it was with him. Then he said he was on the mend, thank God.
