Chapter 14: How Sir Galahad left, and how he was commanded to go to the Castle of Maidens to destroy the wicked custom

"Now I will leave," said Galahad, "for I have much on hand, for many good knights are very busy about it, and this knight and I were in the same quest of the Holy Grail."

"Sir," said a good man, "it was for his sin that he was wounded like this. And I marvel," said the good man to Melias, "how you dared take upon yourself so rich a thing as the high order of knighthood without a clean confession, and that was the reason you were so cruelly wounded. For the way on the right hand signifies the highway of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the way of a good, true, good-living man. And the other way signifies the way of sinners and unbelievers. And when the devil saw your pride and presumption, in taking yourself into the quest of the Holy Grail, that made you be overthrown, for it cannot be achieved except by virtuous living. Also, the writing on the cross was a sign of heavenly deeds, and of knightly deeds in God's works, and not knightly deeds in worldly works. And pride, which is the head of all deadly sins, caused this knight to part from Galahad. And when you took the crown of gold you sinned in covetousness and in theft: none of this was knightly deeds. And as for this Galahad, the holy knight who fought with the two knights: the two knights signify the two deadly sins that were wholly in this knight Melias; and they could not stand against you, Galahad, for you are without deadly sin."

Now Galahad left that place, and commended them all to God.

Sir Melias said, "My lord Galahad, as soon as I can ride I will look for you."

"God send you health," said Galahad, and so took his horse and left, and rode many days' journeys forward and back, wherever adventure would lead him. And at last it happened that he left a place, or a castle, which was called Abblasoure; and he had heard no mass, which he was always used to hearing before he left any castle or place, and he kept that as a custom. Then Sir Galahad came to a mountain where he found an old chapel, and found nobody there, for all, all was desolate; and there he knelt before the altar, and prayed God for wholesome counsel. So as he prayed he heard a voice that said, "Go now, you adventurous knight, to the Castle of Maidens, and there put an end to the wicked customs."
