Chapter 15: How Sir Galahad fought with the knights of the castle, and destroyed the wicked custom

When Sir Galahad heard this he thanked God, and took his horse; and he had ridden no more than half a mile when he saw in the valley before him a strong castle with deep moats, and beside it ran a fair river called the Severn; and there he met a man of great age, and they greeted each other, and Galahad asked him the castle's name.

"Fair sir," he said, "it is the Castle of Maidens. That is a cursed castle, and so are all who live in it, for all pity has gone out of it, and all hardness and harm are in it. So I advise you, sir knight, to turn back."

"Sir," said Galahad, "you may be sure I will not turn back."

Then Sir Galahad looked over his arms to see that nothing was missing, and then he put his shield before him; and at once he was met by seven fair maidens, who said to him, "Sir knight, you are riding here in great folly, for you have the water to cross."

"Why should I not cross the water?" said Galahad.

So he rode away from them, and met a squire, who said, "Knight, those knights in the castle defy you, and forbid you to go any further until they know what you want."

"Fair sir," said Galahad, "I have come to destroy the wicked custom of this castle."

"Sir, if you hold to that, you will have enough to do."

"Go now," said Galahad, "and hurry my business along."

Then the squire went into the castle. And soon after, seven knights came out of the castle, and they were all brothers. And when they saw Galahad they cried, "Knight, look to yourself, for we promise you nothing but death!"

"What," said Galahad, "will you all fight me at once?"

"Yes," they said, "you can count on that."

Then Galahad put forward his spear and struck the foremost to the ground, so that he nearly broke his neck. And with that the others struck him great blows on his shield, so that their spears broke. Then Sir Galahad drew his sword, and set upon them so hard that it was a marvel to see, and so by great force he made them leave the field; and Galahad chased them until they went into the castle, and so out through the castle by another gate.

And there Sir Galahad was met by an old man in a religious habit, who said, "Sir, here, take the keys of this castle."

Then Sir Galahad opened the gates, and saw so many people in the streets that he could not count them, and they all said, "Sir, you are welcome, for we have waited here a long time for our deliverance."

Then a gentlewoman came to him and said, "These knights have fled, but they will come back tonight, and begin their evil custom here again."

"What do you want me to do?" said Galahad.

"Sir," said the gentlewoman, "send for all the knights who hold their lands from this castle to come here, and make them swear to keep the customs that were kept here in the old days."

"Gladly," said Galahad.

And she brought him a horn of ivory, richly bound with gold, and said, "Sir, blow this horn, which will be heard two miles around this castle."

When Sir Galahad had blown the horn he sat down on a bed.

Then a priest came to Galahad and said, "Sir, it is more than seven years now since these seven brothers came into this castle and lodged with the lord of this castle, who was called Duke Lianour, and he was lord of all this country. And when they saw the duke's daughter, who was a very beautiful woman, then by their false deceit they started a quarrel among themselves, and the duke in his goodness tried to part them, and there they killed him and his eldest son. And then they took the maiden and the treasure of the castle. And then by great force they held all the knights of this castle under their rule against their will, in great servitude and tribute, robbing and plundering the poor common people of all they had. So it happened one day that the duke's daughter said, 'You have done me great wrong in killing my own father and my brother, and in holding our lands like this. Nevertheless,' she said, 'you shall not hold this castle for many years, for you will be overcome by one knight.' This she prophesied seven years ago. 'Well,' said the seven knights, 'since you say so, no lady or knight shall ever pass this castle without being made to stay, whether they like it or not, or die for it, until that knight comes by whom we shall lose this castle.' And that is why it is called the Maidens' Castle, for they have devoured many maidens."

"Now," said Galahad, "is she here, the one through whom this castle was lost?"

"No, sir," said the priest, "she was dead within three nights after she was forced like this; and since then they have kept her younger sister, who suffers great pains, with many other ladies."

By this time the knights of the country had come, and then he made them do homage and swear fealty to the king's daughter, and set their hearts much at ease. And in the morning someone came to Galahad and told him that Gawain, Gareth and Uwain had killed the seven brothers.

"I can well believe it," said Sir Galahad, and took his armour and his horse, and commended them to God.
