Chapter 16: How Sir Gawain came to the abbey to follow Galahad, and how he made his confession to a hermit

Now, the tale says, after Sir Gawain left, he rode many days' journeys, both this way and that. And at last he came to the abbey where Sir Galahad had the white shield, and there Sir Gawain learned the way to follow Sir Galahad; and so he rode to the abbey where Melias lay sick, and there Sir Melias told Sir Gawain of the marvellous adventures that Sir Galahad had done.

"Certainly," said Sir Gawain, "I am sorry that I did not take the way he went, for if I can meet him I will not lightly part from him, for Sir Galahad achieves all marvellous adventures."

"Sir," said one of the monks, "he will not have your company."

"Why?" said Sir Gawain.

"Sir," he said, "because you are wicked and sinful, and he is truly blessed."

Just as they stood talking like this, Sir Gareth came riding in. And then they rejoiced over each other. And in the morning they heard mass, and so left. And on the way they met Sir Uwain les Avoutres, and there Sir Uwain told Sir Gawain that he had met with no adventure since he left the court.

"Nor have we," said Sir Gawain.

And the three knights each promised the others not to part while they were in that quest, unless fortune caused it.

So they set off and rode where fortune took them, until they came by the Castle of Maidens; and there the seven brothers saw the three knights, and said, "Since we have been driven out of this castle by one knight, we will destroy all of King Arthur's knights that we can overcome, for the love of Sir Galahad."

And with that the seven knights set upon the three knights, and by fortune Sir Gawain killed one of the brothers, and each one of his companions killed another, and so they killed the rest. And then they took the way under the castle, and there they lost the way that Sir Galahad had ridden, and there each of them parted from the others; and Sir Gawain rode until he came to a hermitage, and there he found the good man saying his evensong of Our Lady; and there Sir Gawain asked for lodging for charity, and the good man granted it to him gladly.

Then the good man asked him who he was.

"Sir," he said, "I am a knight of King Arthur's who is in the quest of the Holy Grail, and my name is Sir Gawain."

"Sir," said the good man, "I would like to know how things stand between God and you."

"Sir," said Sir Gawain, "I will willingly show you my life, if it pleases you." And there he told the hermit how a monk of an abbey had called him a wicked knight.

"He might well say it," said the hermit, "for when you were first made a knight you should have given yourself to knightly deeds and virtuous living, and you have done the opposite, for you have lived wickedly for many winters; and Sir Galahad is a virgin and never sinned, and that is the reason that wherever he goes he shall achieve what neither you nor any like you shall attain, nor anyone in your company, for you have led the most faithless life that I ever heard of a knight living. For certainly, if you had not been as wicked as you are, the seven brothers would never have been killed by you and your two companions. For Sir Galahad by himself alone beat all seven of them the day before, but his way of life is such that he will not lightly kill any man. Also I can tell you that the Castle of Maidens signifies the good souls that were in prison before the Incarnation of Jesus Christ. And the seven knights signify the seven deadly sins that reigned in the world at that time; and I may liken the good Galahad to the Son of the High Father, who came down within a maiden and bought all the souls out of bondage: so did Sir Galahad free all the maidens out of the woeful castle."

"Now, Sir Gawain," said the good man, "you must do penance for your sin."

"Sir, what penance shall I do?"

"Such as I will give," said the good man.

"No," said Sir Gawain, "I can do no penance; for we knights-errant often suffer great woe and pain."

"Well," said the good man, and then he held his peace.

And in the morning Sir Gawain left the hermit, and commended him to God. And by chance he met Sir Aglovale and Sir Griflet, two knights of the Round Table. And they rode four days without finding any adventure, and on the fifth day they parted. And each went as chance befell him. Here the tale leaves Sir Gawain and his companions, and we speak of Sir Galahad.
