Chapter 17: How Sir Galahad met Sir Lancelot and Sir Percival, and struck them down, and rode away from them

So when Sir Galahad had left the Castle of Maidens he rode until he came to a wild forest, and there he met Sir Lancelot and Sir Percival, but they did not know him, for he was newly disguised. Just then Sir Lancelot, his father, lowered his spear and broke it on Sir Galahad, and Galahad struck him back so hard that he struck down horse and man. And then he drew his sword, and turned on Sir Percival, and struck him so hard on the helmet that it split down to the steel cap beneath; and if the sword had not swerved Sir Percival would have been killed, and with the stroke he fell out of his saddle. This joust was done in front of the hermitage where a recluse lived. And when she saw Sir Galahad ride, she said, "God be with you, best knight in the world." "Ah, certainly," she said, out loud, so that Lancelot and Percival could hear it, "if those two knights had known you as well as I do, they would not have taken you on."

When Sir Galahad heard her say this he was afraid of being recognised, and with that he struck his horse with his spurs and rode away from them at a great pace. Then they both realised that he was Galahad; and up they got on their horses, and rode hard after him, but in a little while he was out of their sight. And then they turned back, downcast.

"Let us ask that recluse over there for some news," said Percival.

"Do as you like," said Sir Lancelot.

When Sir Percival came to the recluse she knew him well enough, and Sir Lancelot too. But Sir Lancelot rode across and along a wild forest, and kept to no path but where wild adventure led him. And at last he came to a stone cross where two ways parted in waste land; and by the cross was a stone that was of marble, but it was so dark that Sir Lancelot could not tell what it was. Then Sir Lancelot looked about him, and saw an old chapel, and there he expected to have found people; and Sir Lancelot tied his horse to a tree, and there he took off his shield and hung it on a tree, and then went to the chapel door, and found it deserted and broken. And inside he found a fair altar, very richly adorned with cloth of pure silk, and there stood a fair bright candlestick, which held six great candles, and the candlestick was of silver. And when Sir Lancelot saw this light he had a great wish to go into the chapel, but he could find no place where he might enter; then he was exceedingly downcast and dismayed. Then he went back to his horse and took off his saddle and bridle, and let him graze, and unlaced his helmet, and took off his sword belt, and lay down to sleep on his shield in front of the cross.
