Chapter 18: How Sir Lancelot, half asleep and half awake, saw a sick man carried in a litter, and how he was healed by the Holy Grail

And so he fell asleep; and half awake and half asleep he saw two palfreys come by him, all fair and white, which carried a litter, and in it lay a sick knight. And when he was near the cross he stopped there and stayed still. All this Sir Lancelot saw and watched, for he was not truly asleep; and he heard him say, "O sweet Lord, when will this sorrow leave me? And when will the holy vessel come by me, through which I shall be blessed? For I have endured like this for a long time, for a little sin."

For a long while the knight lamented like this, and all the while Sir Lancelot heard it. With that Sir Lancelot saw the candlestick with the six candles come before the cross, and he saw nobody bringing it. Also there came a table of silver, and the holy vessel of the Holy Grail, which Lancelot had seen before in the house of King Pescheour, the Fisher King. And with that the sick knight sat up, and held up both his hands, and said, "Fair sweet Lord, who are here within this holy vessel, take heed of me, so that I may be made whole of this sickness."

And with that he went on his hands and knees so near that he touched the holy vessel and kissed it, and at once he was whole; and then he said, "Lord God, I thank You, for I am healed of this sickness."

So when the holy vessel had been there a long while, it went into the chapel with the candlestick and the light, so that Lancelot did not know where it had gone; for he was so weighed down by sin that he had no power to rise up before the holy vessel. And for that, many men spoke shame of him afterwards, but he repented after that. Then the sick knight got up and kissed the cross; at once his squire brought him his arms, and asked his lord how he was.

"Certainly," he said, "I thank God, very well; I am healed through the holy vessel. But I marvel at this sleeping knight, who had no power to wake when this holy vessel was brought here."

"I dare well say," said the squire, "that he is living in some deadly sin that he has never confessed."

"On my faith," said the knight, "whoever he is, he is unfortunate, for as I judge he is of the fellowship of the Round Table, which has entered into the quest of the Holy Grail."

"Sir," said the squire, "I have brought you all your arms here except your helmet and your sword, and so, with my agreement, you may take this knight's helmet and his sword now."

And so he did. And when he was fully armed he took Sir Lancelot's horse, for it was better than his own; and so they left the cross.
