Chapter 19: How a voice spoke to Sir Lancelot, and how he found his horse and his helmet taken away, and afterwards went on foot

Then at once Sir Lancelot woke, and sat up, and thought over what he had seen there, and whether it was dreams or not. Just then he heard a voice that said, "Sir Lancelot, harder than the stone, and more bitter than the wood, and more naked and barer than the leaf of the fig tree: go away from here, and take yourself out of this holy place."

And when Sir Lancelot heard this he was exceedingly downcast and did not know what to do, and so he left, weeping bitterly, and cursed the time that he was born. For then he believed he would never have honour again. For those words went to his heart, until he knew why he was called so. Then Sir Lancelot went to the cross and found his helmet, his sword and his horse taken away. And then he called himself a true wretch, and the most unhappy of all knights; and there he said, "My sin and my wickedness have brought me to great dishonour. For when I sought worldly adventures for worldly desires, I always achieved them and had the better of it in every place, and I was never beaten in any quarrel, whether it was right or wrong. And now I take upon me the adventures of holy things, and now I see and understand that my old sin hinders me and shames me, so that I had no power to stir or speak when the holy blood appeared before me."

So he grieved like this until it was day, and heard the birds sing: then he was somewhat comforted. But when Sir Lancelot found his horse and his armour gone, then he knew well that God was displeased with him.

Then he left the cross on foot and went into a forest; and so by six in the morning he came to a high hill, and found a hermitage, and a hermit in it who was going to mass. And then Lancelot knelt down and cried to Our Lord for mercy for his wicked works. So when mass was done Lancelot called to him, and begged him for charity to hear his life.

"Willingly," said the good man. "Sir," he said, "are you of King Arthur's court and of the fellowship of the Round Table?"

"Yes, truly, and my name is Sir Lancelot du Lake, who has been very well spoken of, and now my good fortune is changed, for I am the greatest wretch in the world."

The hermit looked at him and marvelled at how humbled he was.

"Sir," said the hermit, "you ought to thank God more than any knight living, for He has caused you to have more worldly honour than any knight now alive. And it was your presumption, in taking it upon yourself to be in His presence in deadly sin, where His flesh and His blood were, that caused you not to be able to see it with worldly eyes; for He will not appear where such sinners are, unless it is to their great harm and their great shame. And there is no knight living now who ought to give God such great thanks as you, for He has given you beauty, comeliness, and great strength above all other knights; and so you are more beholden to God than any other man, to love Him and fear Him, for your strength and manhood will be of little use to you if God is against you."
