Chapter 20: How Sir Lancelot made his confession, and what sorrow he felt, and of the good examples that were shown him

Then Sir Lancelot wept, with a heavy face, and said, "Now I know well that you are telling me the truth."

"Sir," said the good man, "hide no old sin from me."

"Truly," said Sir Lancelot, "I am very loath to reveal it. For these fourteen years I have never revealed one thing that I have done, and for that I may now blame my shame and my misfortune."

And then he told that good man all his life, and how he had loved a queen beyond measure, and for a very long time. "And all my great deeds of arms that I have done, I did for the most part for the queen's sake, and for her sake I would fight, whether it was right or wrong, and I never fought only for God's sake, but to win honour and to make myself the better loved, and I thanked God for it little or not at all."

Then Sir Lancelot said, "I beg you, counsel me."

"I will counsel you," said the hermit, "if you will promise me that you will never come into that queen's company, as far as you can avoid it."

And then Sir Lancelot promised him that he would not, on his life.

"See that your heart and your mouth agree," said the good man, "and I promise you that you will have more honour than you ever had."

"Holy father," said Sir Lancelot, "I marvel at the voice that said such marvellous words to me, as you have heard already."

"Do not marvel at it," said the good man, "for it seems clear that God loves you. For men may understand that a stone is hard by nature, and one more than another especially; and that is to be understood of you, Sir Lancelot, for you will not leave your sin for any goodness that God has sent you. So you are harder than any stone, and you would never be made soft, neither by water nor by fire; and that is to say, the heat of the Holy Ghost cannot enter into you. Now take heed: in all the world men will not find one knight to whom Our Lord has given so much grace as He has given you. For He has given you beauty with comeliness, He has given you understanding, and discretion to know good from evil, He has given you prowess and boldness, and has given you to do such great deeds that you have always had the better of it, wherever you came; and now Our Lord will bear with you no longer, but you shall know Him, whether you will or not. And as to why the voice called you more bitter than wood: where too much sin lives, there can be only a little sweetness, and so you are likened to an old rotten tree."

"Now I have shown you why you are harder than the stone and more bitter than the tree. Now I will show you why you are more naked and barer than the fig tree. It happened that Our Lord preached in Jerusalem on Palm Sunday, and there He found that all hardness was lodged in the people, and in the whole town He found not one who would give Him lodging. And then He went outside the town, and found in the middle of the road a fig tree, which was very fair and well furnished with leaves, but it had no fruit. Then Our Lord cursed the tree that bore no fruit; the fig tree signifies Jerusalem, which had leaves and no fruit. So you, Sir Lancelot, when the Holy Grail was brought before you, He found no fruit in you, neither good thought nor good will, and found you defiled with lechery."

"Certainly," said Sir Lancelot, "all that you have said is true, and from now on I intend, by the grace of God, never to be as wicked as I have been, but to follow knighthood and to do feats of arms."

Then the good man gave Sir Lancelot such penance as he could do, and told him to pursue knighthood, and so absolved him, and begged Sir Lancelot to stay with him all that day.

"Gladly," said Sir Lancelot, "for I have neither helmet, nor horse, nor sword."

"As for that," said the good man, "I will help you to a horse before tomorrow evening, and to everything that belonged to you."

And then Sir Lancelot repented greatly.

Here ends the history of Sir Lancelot.

And here follows the story of Sir Percival de Galis, which is the fourteenth book.
