Chapter 1: How Sir Percival came to a recluse and asked her advice, and how she told him that she was his aunt

Now the tale says that when Sir Lancelot had ridden off after Sir Galahad, who had had all these adventures told above, Sir Percival turned back to the recluse, where he thought he would get news of the knight that Lancelot was following. And so he knelt at her window, and the recluse opened it and asked Sir Percival what he wanted.

"Madam," he said, "I am a knight of King Arthur's court, and my name is Sir Percival de Galis."

When the recluse heard his name she was overjoyed to see him, for she had loved him much more than any other knight, as she ought to have done, for she was his aunt. And then she ordered the gates to be opened, and there she gave him all the welcome she could, and everything in her power was at his command.

So in the morning Sir Percival went to the recluse and asked her if she knew that knight with the white shield.

"Sir," she said, "why do you want to know?"

"Truly, madam," said Sir Percival, "I shall never be at ease until I know that knight's company, and can fight with him, for I cannot let him go so easily, since the shame is still on me."

"Ah, Percival," she said, "would you fight with him? I can see very well that you are eager to be killed as your father was, through recklessness."

"Madam," said Sir Percival, "it seems by your words that you know me."

"Yes," she said, "I ought to know you well, for I am your aunt, although I am in a priory now. For some people once called me the Queen of the Waste Lands, and I was called the richest queen in the world; and my riches never pleased me as much as my poverty does."

Then Sir Percival wept out of pure pity when he knew that she was his aunt.

"Ah, fair nephew," she said, "when did you last hear news of your mother?"

"Truly," he said, "I have heard none of her, but I dream of her often in my sleep; and so I do not know whether she is dead or alive."

"Certainly, fair nephew," she said, "your mother is dead, for after you left her she fell into such grief that, soon after she had made her confession, she died."

"Now God have mercy on her soul," said Sir Percival. "I am deeply sorry for it; but we must all leave this life. Now, fair aunt, tell me, who is the knight? I think it is the one who bore the red arms on Whitsunday."

"Believe me," she said, "this is he, for he ought not to do otherwise than go in red arms; and that same knight has no equal, for he does everything by miracle, and he shall never be overcome by any earthly man's hand."
