Chapter 2: How Merlin likened the Round Table to the world, and how the knights who would achieve the Holy Grail would be known

"Also," she said, "Merlin made the Round Table as a sign of the roundness of the world, for by the Round Table the world is rightly signified. For all the world, Christian and heathen, comes to the Round Table; and when they are chosen to be of the fellowship of the Round Table they think themselves more blessed and more honoured than if they had won half the world. And you have seen that they have left their fathers and their mothers, and all their kin, and their wives and their children, to be of your fellowship. It is plain to see in you; for since you left your mother you would never go to see her, such fellowship did you find at the Round Table."

"When Merlin had founded the Round Table he said that through those who would be fellows of the Round Table the truth of the Holy Grail would be well known. And people asked him how they might know the ones who would do best and achieve the Holy Grail. Then he said there would be three white bulls who would achieve it, and two of them would be virgins, and the third would be chaste. And one of the three would surpass his father as much as the lion surpasses the leopard, both in strength and in daring."

"Those who heard Merlin say this said to Merlin, 'Since there is to be such a knight, you should make, by your arts, a seat in which no man may sit but he alone who will surpass all other knights.' Then Merlin answered that he would do so. And then he made the Siege Perilous, in which Galahad sat at his meal last Whitsunday."

"Now, madam," said Sir Percival, "I have heard so much from you that by my own good will I will never fight Sir Galahad except in the way of friendship. And for God's love, fair aunt, can you show me some way to find him? For I would dearly love his company."

"Fair nephew," she said, "you must ride to a castle called Goothe, where he has a first cousin, and there you may be lodged tonight. And as he directs you, follow after as fast as you can; and if he can tell you no news of him, ride straight to the Castle of Carbonek, where the Maimed King lies, for there you will hear true news of him."
