Chapter 3: How Sir Percival came to a monastery, where he found King Evelake, who was an old man

Then Sir Percival left his aunt, and each of them grieved greatly. And so he rode until the time of evensong. And then he heard a clock strike; and then he noticed a house well enclosed with walls and deep ditches, and there he knocked at the gate and was let in, and he dismounted and was led to a room, and soon he was out of his armour. And there he had a very good welcome all that night; and in the morning he heard his mass, and in the monastery he found a priest ready at the altar. And on the right side he saw a pew closed in with iron, and behind the altar he saw a bed, rich and fair, as if of cloth of silk and gold.

Then Sir Percival noticed that there was a man or a woman in it, for the face was covered; then he stopped looking and listened to the service. And when it came to the consecration, the one who lay within that partition raised himself up and uncovered his head; and then he seemed to Sir Percival an exceedingly old man, and he had a crown of gold on his head, and his shoulders were bare and uncovered down to his navel. And then Sir Percival saw that his body was full of great wounds, on the shoulders, the arms and the face. And all the while he held up his hands toward Our Lord's body, and cried, "Fair, sweet Father, Jesus Christ, do not forget me." And so he lay down, but he was always at his prayers and devotions; and he seemed to be three hundred years old. And when the mass was done the priest took Our Lord's body and carried it to the sick king. And when he had received it he took off his crown, and commanded the crown to be set on the altar.

Then Sir Percival asked one of the brothers who he was.

"Sir," said the good man, "you have heard much of Joseph of Arimathea, how he was sent by Jesus Christ into this land to teach and preach the holy Christian faith; and for that he suffered many persecutions that the enemies of Christ did to him. And in the city of Sarras he converted a king whose name was Evelake. And so this king came with Joseph into this land, and he was always eager to be where the Holy Grail was; and once he came so near it that Our Lord was displeased with him, but still he followed it more and more, until God struck him almost blind. Then this king begged for mercy, and said, 'Fair Lord, let me never die until the good knight of my blood in the ninth generation has come, so that I may see him plainly, the one who shall achieve the Holy Grail, and so that I may kiss him.'"
