Chapter 5: How a yeoman asked him to win back a horse, and how Sir Percival's own horse was killed, and how he got a horse

And at once the yeoman came spurring after as fast as he could, and asked Sir Percival if he had seen any knight riding on his black steed.

"Yes, sir, truly," he said. "Why, sir, do you ask me that?"

"Ah, sir, he has taken that steed from me by force; and so my lord will kill me wherever he finds me."

"Well," said Sir Percival, "what do you want me to do? You can see well that I am on foot, but if I had a good horse I would soon bring him back."

"Sir," said the yeoman, "take my small riding horse and do the best you can, and I will follow you on foot to learn how you get on."

Then Sir Percival mounted that small horse, and rode as fast as he could, and at last he saw that knight.

And then he cried, "Knight, turn back!"

And he turned and set his spear against Sir Percival, and he struck the small horse in the middle of the breast so that it fell down dead to the ground, and Sir Percival had a great fall there, and the other rode on his way.

And then Sir Percival was mad with rage, and cried, "Wait, you wicked knight! Coward, false-hearted knight, turn back and fight me on foot!"

But he did not answer, but went on his way. When Sir Percival saw that he would not turn, he threw away his helmet and sword, and said, "Now I am a true wretch, cursed and the most unlucky of all knights."

So in this sorrow he stayed there all that day until it was night; and then he was faint, and lay down and slept until midnight; and then he woke and saw before him a woman, who said to him very fiercely, "Sir Percival, what are you doing here?"

He answered, "I am doing neither good nor great harm."

"If you will promise me," she said, "that you will do my will when I summon you, I will lend you my own horse, which will carry you wherever you wish."

Sir Percival was glad of her offer, and promised her to fulfil all her desire.

"Then wait for me here, and I will go and fetch you a horse."

And so she soon came back and brought a horse with her that was utterly black. When Percival looked at that horse he marvelled that it was so big and so well equipped; and even so he was bold enough, and he leapt onto him, and took no thought for himself. And as soon as he was on him he thrust his spurs into him, and so he rode along beside a forest, and the moon shone clear. And within an hour or less the horse carried him four days' journey from there, until he came to a rough water that roared, and his horse would have carried him into it.
