Chapter 6: Of the great danger Sir Percival was in because of his horse, and how he saw a serpent and a lion fight

And when Sir Percival came near the brink, and saw the water so rough, he was afraid to cross it. And then he made the sign of the cross on his forehead. When the fiend felt himself burdened with that, he shook Sir Percival off, and he went into the water crying and roaring and making great lament, and it seemed to Sir Percival that the water burned. Then Sir Percival understood that it was a fiend, which would have brought him to his damnation. Then he commended himself to God, and prayed Our Lord to keep him from all such temptations; and so he prayed all that night until morning, when it was day. Then he saw that he was on a wild mountain that was almost entirely surrounded by the sea, so that he could see no land around him that might bring him help, but only wild beasts.

And then he went into a valley, and there he saw a young serpent carrying a young lion by the neck, and so it came past Sir Percival. With that a great lion came crying and roaring after the serpent. And as soon as Sir Percival saw this he marvelled, and hurried there, but at once the lion had overtaken the serpent and began to fight him. And then Sir Percival thought he would help the lion, for he was the more natural beast of the two; and with that he drew his sword, and set his shield before him, and there he gave the serpent such a blow that he had a deadly wound. When the lion saw that, he made no sign of fighting him, but gave him all the welcome a beast can give a man. Then Percival saw that, and threw down his shield, which was broken; and then he took off his helmet to get his breath, for he was greatly heated from fighting the serpent. And the lion kept going round him, fawning like a spaniel. And then he stroked him on the neck and on the shoulders. And then he thanked God for the company of that beast. And about noon the lion took up his little cub and bundled him up and carried him back to where he came from.

Then Sir Percival was alone. And as the tale tells, he was one of the men in the world at that time who believed most in Our Lord Jesus Christ, for in those days there were only a few people who believed in God perfectly. For in those days the son spared his father no more than a stranger. And so Sir Percival took comfort in our Lord Jesus, and begged God that no temptation should bring him out of God's service, but that he might endure as his true champion. So when Sir Percival had prayed, he saw the lion come toward him, and then he lay down at his feet. And so all that night the lion and he slept together; and while Sir Percival slept he dreamed a marvellous dream: that two ladies met him there, and that one sat on a lion, and the other sat on a serpent, and that one of them was young, and the other was old. And he thought that the younger one said, "Sir Percival, my lord greets you, and sends you word to prepare yourself and make ready, for tomorrow you must fight the strongest champion in the world. And if you are overcome, you will not get off with the loss of any of your limbs, but you will be shamed for ever, to the world's end."

And then he asked her who her lord was. And she said the greatest lord in all the world. And so she left so suddenly that he did not know where she had gone.
