Chapter 7: Of the vision Sir Percival saw, and how his vision was explained, and of his lion

Then the other lady, who rode on the serpent, came forward, and she said, "Sir Percival, I have a complaint against you for what you have done to me, when I have not wronged you."

"Certainly, madam," he said, "I never wronged you nor any lady."

"Yes," she said, "I will tell you why. I have kept a serpent in this place for a long while, which served me a long while, and yesterday you killed him as he was taking his prey. Tell me for what reason you killed him, for the lion was not yours."

"Madam," said Sir Percival, "I know well the lion was not mine, but I did it because the lion is of a nobler nature than the serpent, and so I killed him. It seems to me I did you no wrong. Madam," he said, "what do you want me to do?"

"I want you," she said, "to become my man, in amends for my beast."

And then he answered, "That I will not grant you."

"No?" she said. "Truly, you were never anything but my servant until you received the homage of Our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore I warn you, wherever I find you unguarded I will take you, as one who was once my man."

And so she left Sir Percival and left him sleeping, and he was badly troubled by his vision. And in the morning he got up and crossed himself, and he was exceedingly weak.

Then Sir Percival looked out to sea, and saw a ship come sailing toward him; and Sir Percival went to the ship and found it covered inside and out with white samite. And at the side stood an old man dressed in a surplice, in the likeness of a priest.

"Sir," said Sir Percival, "you are welcome."

"God keep you," said the good man. "Sir," said the old man, "where are you from?"

"Sir," said Sir Percival, "I am of King Arthur's court, and a knight of the Round Table, and I am on the quest of the Holy Grail; and here I am in great hardship, and never likely to escape out of this wilderness."

"Do not fear," said the good man. "If you are as true a knight as the order of chivalry requires, and of such heart as you ought to be, you need not fear that any enemy will kill you."

"Who are you?" said Sir Percival.

"Sir," said the old man, "I am from a strange country, and I have come here to comfort you."

"Sir," said Sir Percival, "what does the dream that I dreamed last night mean?"

And there he told him all of it.

"She who rode on the lion stands for the new law of holy church, that is to say, faith, good hope, belief and baptism. There is good reason why she seemed younger than the other, for she was born in the resurrection and the passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ. And out of great love she came to you to warn you of the great battle that is coming to you."

"Whom shall I fight?" said Sir Percival.

"The greatest champion in the world," said the old man. "For as the lady said, unless you acquit yourself well you will not get off with the loss of one limb, but you will be shamed to the world's end. And she who rode on the serpent stands for the old law, and that serpent stands for a fiend. And as for her blaming you for killing her servant, that means nothing; the serpent that you killed stands for the devil that you rode on to the rock. And when you made the sign of the cross, there you killed him, and put away his power. And when she asked you for amends, and to become her man, and you said you would not, that was to make you believe in her and leave your baptism."

So he commanded Sir Percival to go, and so he leapt over the side, and the ship and all went away he did not know where. Then he went up onto the rock and found the lion, which always kept him company, and he stroked him on the back and rejoiced greatly in him.
