Chapter 8: How Sir Percival saw a ship coming towards him, and how the lady of the ship told him how she had been disinherited

When Sir Percival had stayed there until midday, he saw a ship come rowing over the sea as if all the wind in the world were driving it. And so it drove in under that rock. And when Sir Percival saw this he hurried there, and found the ship covered with silk blacker than any bear, and in it was a gentlewoman of great beauty, and she was dressed so richly that no one could be better.

And when she saw Sir Percival she said, "Who brought you into this wilderness, where you are never likely to get away from here? For you will die here of hunger and distress."

"Damsel," said Sir Percival, "I serve the best man in the world, and in his service he will not let me die. For whoever knocks shall enter, and whoever asks shall have, and whoever seeks him, he does not hide from him."

But then she said, "Sir Percival, do you know who I am?"

"Yes," he said.

"Now who taught you my name?" she said.

"Now," said Sir Percival, "I know you better than you think."

"And I have come out of the waste forest, where I found the Red Knight with the white shield," said the damsel.

"Ah, damsel," he said, "I would very gladly meet that knight."

"Sir knight," she said, "if you will promise me, by the faith that you owe to knighthood, that you will do my will whenever I summon you, then I will bring you to that knight."

"Yes," he said, "I promise to fulfil your desire."

"Well," she said, "now I will tell you. I saw him in the forest chasing two knights to a water called Mortaise; and he drove them into the water for fear of death, and the two knights crossed over, and the Red Knight went over after them, and there his horse was drowned, and he, through great strength, escaped to the land."

So she told him, and Sir Percival was exceedingly glad of it. Then she asked him if he had eaten any food lately.

"No, madam, truly, I have eaten no food these three days, but just now I spoke here with a good man who fed me with his good and holy words, and refreshed me greatly."

"Ah, sir knight," she said, "that same man is an enchanter and a spinner of words. For if you believe him you will certainly be shamed, and die on this rock of sheer hunger, and be eaten by wild beasts; and you are a young man and a handsome knight, and I will help you if you will let me."

"Who are you," said Sir Percival, "who offer me such great kindness?"

"I am," she said, "a gentlewoman who has been disinherited, who was once the richest woman in the world."

"Damsel," said Sir Percival, "who has disinherited you? For I feel great pity for you."

"Sir," she said, "I lived with the greatest man in the world, and he made me so fair and bright that there was none like me; and because of that great beauty I had a little more pride than I ought to have had. Also I said a word that did not please him. And then he would not let me stay any longer in his company, and so he drove me out of my inheritance, and so disinherited me, and he never had pity on me, nor on any of my followers, nor on my court. And since then, sir knight, since this happened to me, I and my people have taken many of his men from him, and made them become my men. For they never ask anything of me that I do not give them, that and much more. So I and all my servants have been against him night and day. Therefore I know of no good knight, nor any good man, whom I do not try to get on my side if I can. And since I know that you are a good knight, I beg you to help me; and since you are a fellow of the Round Table, you ought not to fail any gentlewoman who has been disinherited, if she asks you for help."
