Chapter 9: How Sir Percival promised her help, and how he asked for her love, and how he was saved from the fiend

Then Sir Percival promised her all the help he could give; and then she thanked him. And at that time the weather was hot. Then she called a gentlewoman to her and told her to bring out a tent; and so she did, and pitched it on the gravel.

"Sir," she said, "now you may rest in this heat of the day."

Then he thanked her, and she took off his helmet and his shield, and there he slept a long while. And then he woke and asked her if she had any food.

And she said, "Yes, and you shall have plenty."

And so plenty was set on the table, and so much on it that he marvelled, for there was every kind of food he could think of. He also drank there the strongest wine he had ever drunk, as he thought, and with that he grew a little more heated than he ought to have been. With that he looked at the gentlewoman, and he thought she was the most beautiful creature he had ever seen. And then Sir Percival offered her his love, and begged her to be his. Then she refused him, after a fashion, when he asked her, so that he would be the more ardent for her, and he never stopped begging her for her love.

And when she saw him well heated, then she said, "Sir Percival, believe me, I will not do your will unless you swear that from now on you will be my true servant, and do nothing but what I command you. Will you promise me this, as you are a true knight?"

"Yes," he said, "fair lady, on my life."

"Well," she said, "now you shall do with me whatever you please; and now, believe me, you are the knight in the world I most desire."

And then two squires were ordered to make a bed in the middle of the tent. And at once she was undressed and laid in it. And then Sir Percival lay down beside her naked. And by chance and by grace he saw his sword lying on the ground, out of its sheath, and in its pommel was a red cross and the sign of the crucifix, and he thought of his knighthood and of the promise he had made earlier to the good man. Then he made the sign of the cross on his forehead, and with that the tent turned upside down, and then it changed into a smoke and a black cloud, and then he was afraid and cried aloud:
