Chapter 10: How Sir Percival for penance stabbed himself through the thigh, and how she was revealed to be the devil

"Fair sweet Father, Jesus Christ, do not let me be shamed, who would have been lost if not for your good grace!"

And then he looked into a ship, and saw her go into it, and she said, "Sir Percival, you have betrayed me."

And so she went away with the wind, roaring and yelling, so that it seemed all the water burned behind her. Then Sir Percival grieved greatly, and drew his sword to him, saying, "Since my flesh would be my master, I will punish it." And with that he drove the sword through his thigh, so that the blood spurted out around him, and he said, "O good Lord, take this in recompense for what I have done against you, my Lord."

So then he dressed himself and armed himself, and called himself a wretch, saying, "How near I was to being lost, and to losing what I could never have got back, which was my virginity, for that can never be recovered once it is lost."

And then he stopped his bleeding wound with a piece of his shirt. So, as he was lamenting, he saw the same ship come from the East that the good man had been in the day before, and the noble knight was ashamed of himself, and with that he fell into a faint. And when he came to, he went to him weakly, and there he greeted this good man.

And then he asked Sir Percival, "How have you done since I left?"

"Sir," he said, "a gentlewoman was here, and she led me into deadly sin."

And there he told him all of it.

"Did you not know the maiden?" said the good man.

"Sir," he said, "no, but I know well that the fiend sent her here to shame me."

"O good knight," he said, "you are a fool, for that gentlewoman was the master fiend of hell, who has power over all devils, and she was the old lady you saw in your vision riding on the serpent."

Then he told Sir Percival how our Lord Jesus Christ drove him out of heaven for his sin, he who was the brightest angel of heaven, and so he lost his inheritance.

"And that was the champion you fought with, who would have overcome you if not for the grace of God. Now beware, Sir Percival, and take this as an example."

And then the good man vanished. Then Sir Percival took up his arms, and went into the ship, and so departed from there.

Here ends the fourteenth book, which is of Sir Percival.

And here follows the tale of Sir Lancelot, which is the fifteenth book.
