Chapter 1: How Sir Lancelot came to a chapel, where he found a man of religion a hundred years old lying dead in a white shirt

When the hermit had kept Sir Lancelot three days, the hermit got him a horse, a helmet and a sword. And then he left at about the hour of noon. And then he saw a little house. And when he came near he saw a chapel, and beside it he saw an old man who was dressed all in white, very richly.

And then Sir Lancelot said, "God save you."

"God keep you," said the good man, "and make you a good knight."

Then Sir Lancelot dismounted and went into the chapel, and there he saw an old man lying dead, in a white shirt of exceedingly fine cloth.

"Sir," said the good man, "this man who is dead ought not to be in such clothing as you see him in, for in that he broke the oath of his order; for he has been a man of religion more than a hundred years."

And then the good man and Sir Lancelot went into the chapel; and the good man put a stole around his neck, and took a book, and then he conjured on that book; and with that they saw a figure so hideous and horrible that there was no man so hard-hearted or so hardy but he would have been afraid.

Then the fiend said, "You have troubled me greatly. Now tell me what you want with me."

"I want you," said the good man, "to tell me how my brother came to be dead, and whether he is saved or damned."

Then he said in a horrible voice, "He is not lost but saved."

"How can that be?" said the good man. "It seemed to me that he did not live well, for he broke his order by wearing a shirt where he ought to wear none, and whoever offends against our order does not do well."

"Not so," said the fiend. "This man who lies here dead came of a great lineage. And there was a lord called the Earl de Vale, who made great war on this man's nephew, who was called Aguarus. And so this Aguarus saw that the earl was stronger than he was. Then he went to take the advice of his uncle, who lies here dead, as you can see. And then this man asked leave, and went out of his hermitage to support his nephew against the mighty earl; and so it happened that this man who lies here dead did so much by his wisdom and his daring that the earl was taken, and three of his lords, by the strength of this dead man."
