Chapter 2: Of a dead man, how men tried to hack at him and could not, and how Sir Lancelot took the dead man's hair shirt

"Then," said the fiend, "there was peace between the earl and this Aguarus, and a firm guarantee that the earl would never make war on him again. Then this dead man who lies here came back to this hermitage; and then the earl set two of his nephews to take revenge on this man. So one day they came, and found this dead man at the consecration in his mass, and they waited for him until he had said mass. And then they set on him and drew their swords to kill him; but no sword would bite on him any more than on a spike of steel, for the high Lord whom he served preserved him. Then they made a great fire, and took off all his clothes, and the hair shirt off his back. And then this dead man, the hermit, said to them, 'Do you think you will burn me? It will not be in your power to harm so much as a thread on me, if there were any on my body.' 'No?' said one of them. 'We shall try it.' And then they stripped him, and put this shirt on him, and threw him in a fire, and there he lay all that night in that fire until it was day, and was not dead. And so in the morning I came and found him dead; but I found neither thread nor skin harmed, and so I took him out of the fire with great fear, and laid him here as you can see. And now you may let me go on my way, for I have told you the truth."

And then he left in a great storm. Then the good man and Sir Lancelot were gladder than they had been before. And then Sir Lancelot stayed with that good man that night.

"Sir," said the good man, "are you not Sir Lancelot du Lake?"

"Yes, sir," he said.

"What are you seeking in this country?"

"Sir," said Sir Lancelot, "I am going to seek the adventures of the Holy Grail."

"Well," he said, "you may well seek it, but even if it were here you would have no more power to see it than a blind man would have to see a bright sword. And that is because of your sin, or else you would be more able than any man living."

And then Sir Lancelot began to weep.

Then the good man said, "Have you made your confession since you entered on the quest of the Holy Grail?"

"Yes, sir," said Sir Lancelot.

Then in the morning, when the good man had sung his mass, they buried the dead man.

Then Sir Lancelot said, "Father, what shall I do?"

"Now," said the good man, "I ask you to take this hair shirt that belonged to this holy man and put it next to your skin, and it will do you great good."

"Sir, I will do it," said Sir Lancelot.

"Also I charge you to eat no meat as long as you are on the quest of the Holy Grail, and to drink no wine, and to hear mass every day if you can."

So he took the hair shirt and put it on, and so left at evensong time. And so he rode into a forest, and there he met a gentlewoman riding on a white palfrey.

And then she asked him, "Sir knight, where are you riding?"

"Certainly, damsel," said Lancelot, "I do not know where I am riding, except as fortune leads me."

"Ah, Sir Lancelot," she said, "I know what adventure you are seeking, for you were nearer to it once than you are now, and yet you shall see it more plainly than you ever did, and you will understand that in a short time."

Then Sir Lancelot asked her where he might find lodging that night.

"You will not find any this day or night, but tomorrow you will find good lodging, and relief from what you are anxious about."

And then he commended her to God. Then he rode until he came to a Cross, and took that for his host for that night.
