Chapter 3: Of a vision Sir Lancelot had, and how he told it to a hermit and asked his advice

And so he put his horse out to graze, and took off his helmet and his shield, and prayed to the Cross that he might never fall into deadly sin again. And so he lay down to sleep. And as soon as he was asleep a vision came to him there: that a man came before him all surrounded by stars, and that man had a crown of gold on his head, and that man led in his company seven kings and two knights. And all these worshipped the Cross, kneeling on their knees and holding up their hands toward heaven.

And they all said, "Fair sweet Father of heaven, come and visit us, and give each of us what we have deserved."

Then Lancelot looked up to heaven, and it seemed to him that the clouds opened, and an old man came down with a company of angels, and alighted among them, and gave each of them his blessing, and called them his servants, and good and true knights. And when this old man had said this he came to one of those knights, and said, "I have lost all that I put into you, for you have conducted yourself against me like a warrior, and fought wrongful wars out of vainglory, more for the pleasure of the world than to please me. Therefore you will be destroyed unless you give me back my treasure."

All this vision Sir Lancelot saw at the Cross. And in the morning he took his horse and rode until midday; and there by chance he met the same knight who had taken his horse, his helmet and his sword while he slept, when the Holy Grail appeared before the Cross. When Sir Lancelot saw him he did not greet him kindly, but cried aloud, "Knight, defend yourself! You have done me a great wrong."

And then they set their spears before them, and Sir Lancelot came at him so fiercely that he struck him and his horse down to the ground, so that he nearly broke his neck. Then Sir Lancelot took the knight's horse, which had been his own before, and got down from the horse he was sitting on, and mounted his own horse, and tied the knight's own horse to a tree, so that he might find that horse when he got up. Then Sir Lancelot rode until night, and by chance he met a hermit, and each of them greeted the other; and there he rested with that good man all night, and gave his horse what feed he could get.

Then the good man said to Lancelot, "Where are you from?"

"Sir," he said, "I am of Arthur's court, and my name is Sir Lancelot du Lake, and I am on the quest of the Holy Grail; and so I beg you to advise me about a vision that I had at the Cross."

And so he told him all of it.
