Chapter 4: How the hermit explained Sir Lancelot's vision to him, and told him that Sir Galahad was his son

"Look, Sir Lancelot," said the good man, "there you may understand the high lineage you come from, and what your vision means. Forty years after the passion of Jesus Christ, Joseph of Arimathea preached the victory of King Evelake, so that he got the better of his enemies in his battles. And as for the seven kings and the two knights: the first of them is called Nappus, a holy man; and the second was called Nacien, in memory of his grandfather, and in him dwelt our Lord Jesus Christ; and the third was called Helias le Grose; and the fourth was called Lisais; and the fifth was called Jonas. He left his own country and went into Wales, and took there the daughter of Manuel as his wife, by whom he had the land of Gaul, and he came to live in this country. And from him came King Lancelot, your grandfather, who married the King of Ireland's daughter there, and he was as worthy a man as you are; and from him came King Ban, your father, who was the last of the seven kings. And as for you, Sir Lancelot, it means that the angels said you were none of the seven fellowships. And the last was the ninth knight; he was signified by a lion, for he would surpass every kind of earthly knight, and that is Sir Galahad, whom you fathered on King Pelles's daughter. And you ought to thank God more than any other man living, for among earthly sinners you have no equal in knighthood, nor ever will have. But you have given God little thanks for all the great virtues that God has lent you."

"Sir," said Lancelot, "you say that that good knight is my son."

"You ought to know that, and no man better," said the good man, "for you knew King Pelles's daughter in the flesh, and on her you fathered Galahad, and he was the one who sat in the Siege Perilous at the feast of Pentecost. And so make it openly known that he is your son, fathered on King Pelles's daughter, for that will be to your honour and credit, and to all your kindred's. And I advise you never, anywhere, to press him to fight with you."

"Well," said Lancelot, "it seems to me that good knight should pray for me to the High Father, that I do not fall into sin again."

"You may be sure," said the good man, "that you fare much the better for his prayer; but the son shall not bear the wickedness of the father, nor shall the father bear the wickedness of the son, but each shall bear his own burden. And so beseech God alone, and He will help you in all your needs."

And then Sir Lancelot and he went to supper, and so Lancelot lay down to rest, and the hair shirt pricked Sir Lancelot's skin so much that it hurt him very badly, but he took it meekly, and endured the pain. And so in the morning he heard his mass and took his arms, and so took his leave.
