Chapter 5: How Sir Lancelot jousted with many knights, and how he was taken prisoner

And then he mounted his horse, and rode into a forest, and kept to no highway. And as he looked ahead of him he saw a fair plain, and beside it a fair castle, and before the castle were many tents of silk, of various colours. And it seemed to him that he saw five hundred knights riding there on horseback; and there were two sides. Those who were of the castle were all on black horses, with black trappings, and those who were outside were all on white horses with white trappings, and they all crashed into each other so that Sir Lancelot marvelled at it. And at last he thought that the side of the castle was getting the worst of it.

Then Sir Lancelot thought he would help the weaker side there, to increase his own renown in arms. And so Sir Lancelot thrust in on the side of the castle, and struck down a knight, horse and man, to the ground. And then he rushed here and there, and did marvellous deeds of arms. And then he drew his sword, and struck many knights to the ground, so that all who saw him marvelled that any one knight could do such great deeds of arms.

But all the while the white knights kept close around Sir Lancelot, to tire him and wear out his wind. But at last, since no man can endure for ever, Sir Lancelot grew so faint from fighting and toiling, and was so weary from his great deeds, that he could not lift up his arms to give a single stroke, so that he thought he would never bear arms again. And then they all took him and led him away into a forest, and there made him dismount and rest.

And then all the company of the castle was overcome for lack of him.

Then they all said to Sir Lancelot, "Blessed be God that you are now of our company, for we will hold you in our prison."

And so they left him with few words. And then Sir Lancelot grieved greatly. "For never before now was I at a tournament or jousts but I had the best of it, and now I am shamed." And then he said, "Now I am sure that I am more sinful than I ever was."

So he rode on grieving, and for half a day he was close to despair, until he came into a deep valley. And when Sir Lancelot saw that he could not ride up the mountain, he dismounted there under an apple tree, and there he left his helmet and his shield, and put his horse out to graze. And then he lay down to sleep.

And then it seemed to him that an old man came before him, who said, "Ah, Lancelot, man of evil faith and poor belief, why is your will turned so easily toward your deadly sin?"

And when he had said this he vanished, and Lancelot did not know where he had gone. Then he took his horse, and armed himself; and as he rode along he saw a chapel where there was a recluse, who had a window through which she could see up to the altar. And she called aloud to Lancelot, because he looked like a knight-errant. And then he came, and she asked him who he was, and from what place, and what he was going about to seek.
