Chapter 6: How Sir Lancelot told his vision to a woman, and how she explained it to him

And then he told her all of it, word for word, and the truth of how it went with him at the tournament. And after that he told her the vision he had had that night in his sleep, and begged her to tell him what it might mean, for he was not at all easy about it.

"Ah, Lancelot," she said, "as long as you were a knight of earthly knighthood you were the most marvellous man in the world, and the most adventurous. Now," said the lady, "since you have been set among the knights of heavenly adventures, do not wonder if things went against you at that tournament, for that tournament yesterday was nothing but a sign from Our Lord. And even so there was no enchantment in it, for those at the tournament were earthly knights. The tournament was a sign to see who would have the most knights, Eliazar, the son of King Pelles, or Argustus, the son of King Harlon. But Eliazar was all clothed in white, and Argustus was covered in black, and they were the ones who were overcome."

"I will tell you all that this means," she said. "On the day of Pentecost, when King Arthur held his court, it happened that earthly kings and knights began a tournament together, that is to say, the quest of the Holy Grail. The earthly knights were the ones who were clothed all in black, and the covering stands for the sins they have not confessed. And those with the covering of white stand for virginity, and for those who chose chastity. And so the quest was begun in them. Then you saw the sinners and the good men, and when you saw the sinners being overcome, you leaned to that side out of boastfulness and worldly pride, and all that must be left behind in that quest; for in this quest you will have many companions who are your betters. For you are so feeble, so full of bad trust and so short of good belief, that this is what happened when you were there, where they took you and led you into the forest. And at once the Holy Grail appeared to the white knights, but you were so feeble in good belief and faith that you could not bear it, for all the teaching of the good man, but at once you turned to the sinners. And that caused your mishap, so that you should know good from evil, and the vainglory of the world, which is not worth a pear. And out of great pride you grieved greatly that you had not overcome all the white knights with the covering of white, by whom virginity and chastity were signified; and so God was angry with you, for God loves no such deeds in this quest. And this vision means that you were of evil faith and of poor belief, which will make you fall into the deep pit of hell if you do not take care. Now I have warned you of your vainglory and of your pride, by which you have many times offended against your Maker. Beware of everlasting pain, for of all earthly knights I have the most pity for you, for I know well that you have no equal among earthly sinful men."

And so she invited Sir Lancelot to dinner. And after dinner he took his horse and commended her to God, and so rode into a deep valley, and there he saw a river and a high mountain. And he had to cross the water, which was hideous; and then, in the name of God, he went into it with a good heart. And when he came over he saw an armed knight, horse and man as black as any bear. Without a word he struck Sir Lancelot's horse to the ground; and so he went on, and Lancelot did not know where he had gone. And then he took his helmet and his shield, and thanked God for his adventure.

Here the story of Sir Lancelot leaves off, and we speak of Sir Gawain, which is the sixteenth book.
