Chapter 1: How Sir Gawain grew nearly weary of the quest of the Holy Grail, and of his marvellous dream

When Sir Gawain had left his companions he rode a long time without any adventure. For he did not find a tenth part of the adventures he was used to finding. Sir Gawain rode from Whitsun until Michaelmas, the end of September, and found no adventure that pleased him. So one day it happened that Gawain met Sir Ector de Maris, and each of them rejoiced so greatly in the other that it was a marvel to tell. And so they told each other their news, and complained bitterly that they could find no adventure.

"Truly," said Sir Gawain to Sir Ector, "I am nearly weary of this quest, and I am loath to follow it any further in strange countries."

"One thing makes me wonder," said Sir Ector. "I have met twenty knights, companions of mine, and they all complain as I do."

"I wonder," said Sir Gawain, "where Sir Lancelot, your brother, is."

"Truly," said Sir Ector, "I can hear no news of him, nor of Sir Galahad, Percival, nor Sir Bors."

"Let them be," said Sir Gawain, "for those four have no equals. And if it were not for one thing in Sir Lancelot, he would have no equal among earthly men; but he is as we are, except that he took more pains. And if these four meet together, any man will be loath to meet with them; for if they fail of the Holy Grail, it is wasted labour for all the rest of us to try to win it."

So Ector and Gawain rode for more than eight days, and on a Saturday they found an old chapel, which was so ruined that it seemed no one ever came there. And there they dismounted, and set their spears by the door, and went into the chapel, and said their prayers there a long while, and sat down in the seats of the chapel. And as they talked of one thing and another, they fell asleep for heaviness of heart, and marvellous adventures came to them both. It seemed to Sir Gawain that he came into a meadow full of grasses and flowers, and there he saw a hayrack with bulls feeding at it, a hundred and fifty of them, proud and black, except that three of them were all white, and one of those had a black spot, and the other two were so fair and so white that they could be no whiter. And these three bulls that were so fair were tied with two strong cords. And the rest of the bulls said among themselves, "Let us go away from here to look for better pasture." And so some went, and some came back, but they were so lean that they could not stand upright; and of the bulls that were so white, one came back and no more. But when this white bull had come back among the others, a great cry rose up for lack of the breath that failed them; and so they scattered, one here and another there. This was the vision that came to Gawain that night.
