Chapter 2: Of Sir Ector's vision, and how he jousted with Sir Uwain les Avoutres, his sworn brother

But to Ector de Maris came another vision, the opposite of it. For it seemed to him that his brother, Sir Lancelot, and he got down out of a chariot and leapt onto two horses, and the one said to the other, "Let us go and seek what we shall not find." And he thought that a man beat Sir Lancelot, and stripped him, and dressed him in other clothes, which were all full of knots, and set him on a donkey, and so he rode until he came to the fairest spring he had ever seen; and Sir Lancelot got down and wanted to drink from that spring. And when he stooped to drink the water, the water sank away from him. And when Sir Lancelot saw that, he turned and went back toward the place he had come from. And in the meantime he thought that he himself and Sir Ector rode until they came to a rich man's house where there was a wedding. And there he saw a king, who said, "Sir knight, there is no place here for you." And then he turned back to the chariot that he had come from.

So after a while both Gawain and Ector woke up, and each told the other his vision, and they marvelled greatly at them.

"Truly," said Ector, "I shall never be merry until I hear news of my brother Lancelot."

Now as they sat talking like this, they saw a hand showing to the elbow, and it was covered with red samite, and from it hung a bridle that was not very rich, and in its fist it held a great candle which burned very bright; and so it passed before them, and went into the chapel, and then vanished, and they did not know where. And at once a voice came down, which said, "Knights of very evil faith and of poor belief, these two things have failed you, and therefore you may not come to the adventures of the Holy Grail."

Then Gawain spoke first and said, "Ector, did you hear those words?"

"Yes, truly," said Sir Ector, "I heard everything. Now let us go," said Sir Ector, "to some hermit who will tell us the meaning of our visions, for it seems to me that all our labour is in vain."

And so they left and rode into a valley, and there they met a squire riding on a small riding horse, and they greeted him courteously.

"Sir," said Gawain, "can you direct us to a hermit?"

"There is one on a little mountain here, but it is so rough that no horse can go up there, and so you must go on foot. There you will find a poor house, and in it is Nacien the hermit, who is the holiest man in this country."

And so they parted from each other.

And then in a valley they met a knight in full armour, who challenged them to joust as soon as he saw them.

"In the name of God," said Sir Gawain, "since I left Camelot no one has challenged me to joust except once."

"And now, sir," said Ector, "let me joust with him."

"No," said Gawain, "you shall not, unless I am beaten; I shall not mind then if you go after me."

And then each of them took up position against the other to joust, and they came together as fast as their horses could run, and burst their shields and their mail, the one more than the other. And Gawain was wounded in the left side, but the other knight was struck through the breast, and the spear came out at the other side, and so they both fell out of their saddles, and in falling they both broke their spears.

Gawain got up at once and put his hand to his sword, and cast his shield before him. But it was all for nothing, for the knight had no strength to get up against him.

Then Gawain said, "You must yield as a beaten man, or else I may kill you."

"Ah, sir knight," he said, "I am as good as dead. For God's sake and of your nobility, take me to an abbey here, so that I may receive my Creator."

"Sir," said Gawain, "I know of no religious house near here."

"Sir," said the knight, "set me on a horse in front of you, and I will show you the way."

Gawain set him up in the saddle, and leapt up behind him to hold him up, and so they came to an abbey where they were well received; and at once his armour was taken off, and he received his Creator. Then he begged Gawain to draw the broken spear shaft out of his body. Then Gawain asked him who he was, for he did not know him.

"I am," he said, "of King Arthur's court, and I was a companion of the Round Table, and we were sworn brothers together. And now, Sir Gawain, you have killed me, and my name is Uwain les Avoutres, who was once the son of King Uriens, and I was on the quest of the Holy Grail. And now may God forgive you for it, for it will always be said that one sworn brother killed the other."
