Chapter 3: How Sir Gawain and Sir Ector came to a hermitage to be confessed, and how they told the hermit their visions

"Alas," said Gawain, "that this mischance ever happened to me."

"No matter," said Uwain. "Since I must die this death, I could not die by the hand of a more honourable man. But when you come to the court, commend me to my lord King Arthur, and to all those who are left alive, and for old brotherhood think of me."

Then Gawain began to weep, and Ector too. And then Uwain himself and Sir Gawain drew out the broken spear shaft, and at once the soul left the body. Then Sir Gawain and Sir Ector buried him as men ought to bury a king's son, and had his name written on the tomb, and by whom he was killed.

Then Gawain and Ector left, as downcast as they could be over their mischance, and so they rode until they came to the rough mountain, and there they tied up their horses and went on foot to the hermitage. And when they had come up they saw a poor house, and beside the chapel a little garden, where Nacien the hermit gathered roots and herbs, for he had tasted no other food for a long while. And when he saw the knights-errant he came toward them and greeted them, and they greeted him in return.

"Fair lords," he said, "what adventure brought you here?"

"Sir," said Gawain, "we have come to speak with you, to be confessed."

"Sir," said the hermit, "I am ready."

Then they told him so much that he knew well who they were. And then he thought he would counsel them if he could.

Then Gawain began first and told him of the vision he had had in the chapel, and Ector told him everything as it is told above.

"Sir," said the hermit to Sir Gawain, "by the fair meadow and the hayrack in it you ought to understand the Round Table, and by the meadow you ought to understand humility and patience; those are the things which are always green and alive. For no one can ever overcome humility and patience; that is why the Round Table was founded, and its knighthood has always been such, through the brotherhood that was there, that it could not be overcome; for men said it was founded in patience and in humility. At the hayrack a hundred and fifty bulls were feeding; but they did not feed in the meadow, though their hearts should have been set in humility and patience; and the bulls were proud and black, all but three. By the bulls you are to understand the fellowship of the Round Table, who for their sin and their wickedness are black. Blackness means being without good or virtuous works. And the three bulls which were white, except only one that was spotted: the two white ones stand for Sir Galahad and Sir Percival, for they are virgins, pure and without spot; and the third, which had a spot, signifies Sir Bors de Ganis, who sinned only once against his virginity, but since then he has kept himself so well in chastity that all is forgiven him, and his misdeeds too. And as for why those three were tied by the necks: they are three knights in virginity and chastity, and there is no pride rooted in them. And the black bulls which said, 'Let us go away from here,' were those who at Pentecost, at the high feast, took it on themselves to go on the quest of the Holy Grail without confession: they could not enter the meadow of humility and patience. And so they went back into waste countries, which signifies death, for many of them will die there: each of them will kill another for sin, and those who escape will be so lean that it will be a marvel to see them. And of the three bulls without spot, one will come back, and the other two never."
