Chapter 4: How the hermit explained their visions

Then Nacien spoke to Ector: "It is true that Lancelot and you came down out of one chariot: the chariot signifies the mastery and lordship which you came down from. But you two knights," said the hermit, "you go to seek what you shall never find, that is, the Holy Grail; for it is the secret thing of our Lord Jesus Christ. What does it mean that Sir Lancelot fell down off his horse? He has left pride and taken himself to humility, for he has cried loudly for mercy for his sin, and bitterly repented, and our Lord has clothed him in His clothing, which is full of knots: that is the hair shirt that he wears every day. And the donkey that he rode on is a beast of humility, for God would not ride on any warhorse, nor on any palfrey; so it was as a sign that a donkey signifies meekness that you saw Sir Lancelot ride on one in your sleep. And as for the spring, where the water sank away from him when he went to drink from it, and when he saw he could not have it he went back to where he came from: the spring signifies the high grace of God, and the more men desire to take it, the more their desire will be. So when he came near the Holy Grail, he humbled himself so that he did not hold himself a man worthy to be so near the Holy Vessel, for he had been so defiled by deadly sin for so many years; yet when he knelt to drink from the spring, there he saw great providence of the Holy Grail. And because he served the devil so long, he shall suffer punishment for twenty-four days, because he has been the devil's servant for twenty-four years. And then soon after he will return out of this country to Camelot, and he will tell part of the things that he has found."

"Now," said the hermit, "I will tell you what the hand with the candle and the bridle means. You are to understand by it the Holy Ghost, in whom charity always is; and the bridle signifies abstinence. For when abstinence is bridled in a Christian man's heart, she holds him so tight that he does not fall into deadly sin. And the candle, which gives brightness and sight, signifies the right way of Jesus Christ. And when he went and said, 'Knights of poor faith and of wicked belief,' these three things had failed, charity, abstinence and truth; therefore you may not achieve that high adventure of the Holy Grail."
