Chapter 5: Of the good advice that the hermit gave them

"Certainly," said Gawain, "what you have said is true, for I see it plainly. Now, I beg you, good man and holy father, tell me why we have not met with as many adventures as we used to, when we commonly had the better of them."

"I will tell you gladly," said the good man. "The adventure of the Holy Grail, which you and many others have undertaken the quest of and do not find: the reason is that it does not appear to sinners. So do not marvel if you fail of it, and many others with you. For you are a faithless knight and a great murderer, and to good men it signifies other things than murder. For I dare say that, sinful as Sir Lancelot has been, since he went on the quest of the Holy Grail he has never killed a man, nor shall he, until he comes back to Camelot; for he has taken it on himself to forsake sin. And were it not that he is unsteady, and in his thoughts is likely to turn back, he would be the next to achieve it, after Galahad his son. But God knows his thoughts and his unsteadiness, and yet he will die a very holy man, and without doubt he has no equal among earthly sinful men."

"Sir," said Gawain, "it seems to me from your words that because of our sins it will do us no good to toil in this quest."

"Truly," said the good man, "there are a hundred like you who will never succeed in it, except to have shame."

And when they had heard these words they commended him to God.

Then the good man called Gawain, and said, "It is a long time since you were made a knight, and never since then have you served your Maker, and now you are so old a tree that there is neither life nor fruit in you. So take thought that you yield to Our Lord the bare bark, since the Fiend has the leaves and the fruit."

"Sir," said Gawain, "if I had the time I would speak with you, but my companion here, Sir Ector, has gone, and is waiting for me down there below the hill."

"Well," said the good man, "you would do better to take counsel."

Then Gawain left and came to Ector, and so they took their horses and rode until they came to a forester's house, who gave them very good lodging. And in the morning they left their host, and rode a long time before they could find any adventure.
