Chapter 6: How Sir Bors met a hermit, and how he made his confession to him, and of the penance laid on him

When Bors had left Camelot he met a man of religion riding on a donkey, and Sir Bors greeted him. At once the good man knew that he was one of the knights-errant who were on the quest of the Holy Grail.

"Who are you?" said the good man.

"Sir," he said, "I am a knight who would gladly have counsel in the quest of the Holy Grail, for whoever can bring it to an end will have great earthly honour."

"Certainly," said the good man, "that is true, for he will be the best knight in the world, and the fairest of all the fellowship. But believe me, no one shall achieve it except by cleanness, that is, by pure confession."

So they rode together until they came to a hermitage. And there he begged Bors to stay all that night with him. And so Bors dismounted and put off his armour, and begged him that he might be confessed; and so they went into the chapel, and there he made a clean confession, and they ate bread and drank water together.

"Now," said the good man, "I beg you to eat nothing else until you sit at the table where the Holy Grail will be."

"Sir," he said, "I agree to that. But how do you know that I shall sit there?"

"Yes," said the good man, "I know that; but there will be only a few of your companions with you."

"All is welcome," said Sir Bors, "that God sends me."

"Also," said the good man, "instead of a shirt, and as a sign of chastisement, you shall wear a garment. So I beg you, take off all your clothes and your shirt."

And so he did. And then he gave him a scarlet coat, which was to serve instead of his shirt until he had fulfilled the quest of the Holy Grail. And the good man found in him so marvellous a life, and so steadfast, that he marvelled, and perceived that he had never been corrupted by the lusts of the flesh except at the one time when he fathered Helin le Blank.

Then he armed himself, and took his leave, and so departed. And a little way from there he looked up into a tree, and there he saw an exceedingly great bird on an old tree, and the tree was exceedingly dry, without leaves; and the bird sat at the top, and had young ones, which were dead of hunger. So he struck himself with his beak, which was great and sharp. And so the great bird bled until he died among his young. And the young birds took life from the blood of the great bird. When Bors saw this he knew well that it was a great sign; and when he saw that the great bird did not rise again, he took his horse and went on his way. So by evensong, by chance, he came to a strong, high tower, and there he was gladly given lodging.
