Chapter 7: How Sir Bors lodged with a lady, and how he took it on himself to fight against a champion for her land

And when his armour had been taken off they led him into a high tower where there was a lady, young, lively and fair. And she received him with great joy, and had him sit down beside her, and so he was set to supper with meat and many delicacies. And when Sir Bors saw that, he remembered his penance, and told a squire to bring him water. And so he brought it to him, and he soaked bread in it and ate it.

"Ah," said the lady, "I think you do not like my food."

"Yes, truly," said Sir Bors, "God thank you, madam, but I may eat no other food today."

Then she said no more for that time, for she was loath to displease him. Then after supper they talked of one thing and another.

With that a squire came and said, "Madam, you must provide yourself with a champion for tomorrow, or else your sister will have this castle and your lands too, unless you can find a knight who will fight tomorrow in your quarrel against Pridam le Noire."

Then she grieved and said, "Ah, Lord God, why did You grant me to hold my land, if I am now to be robbed of it without reason and right?"

And when Sir Bors had heard her speak like this, he said, "I will comfort you."

"Sir," she said, "I will tell you. There was a king here called Aniause, who held all this land in his keeping. So it happened by ill luck that he loved a gentlewoman a good deal older than I am. So he gave all this land into her keeping, and all his men to govern; and she brought in many evil customs, by which she put to death a great part of his kinsmen. And when he saw that, he had her driven out of this land, and handed it over to me, with all this land as my own domain. But as soon as that worthy king was dead, this other lady began to make war on me, and has destroyed many of my men, and turned them against me, so that I have hardly a man left; and I have nothing else but this high tower that she has left me. And even so she has promised that she will have this tower, unless I can find a knight to fight with her champion."

"Now tell me," said Sir Bors, "who is this Pridam le Noire?"

"Sir," she said, "he is the most feared man in this land."

"Now you may send her word that you have found a knight who will fight with that Pridam le Noire in God's quarrel and yours."

Then that lady was not a little glad, and sent word that she had found her champion, and that night Bors was well entertained. But he would not get into any bed, but lay on the floor, and he would never do otherwise until he had accomplished the quest of the Holy Grail.
