Chapter 8: Of a vision Sir Bors had that night, and how he fought and overcame his opponent

And as soon as he was asleep a vision came to him: two birds came to him, the one as white as a swan, and the other marvellously black; but it was not as big as the other, but in the likeness of a raven. Then the white bird came to him and said, "If you would give me food and serve me, I would give you all the riches of the world, and I will make you as fair and as white as I am."

So the white bird went away, and the black bird came to him and said, "If you will, serve me tomorrow, and do not hold me in contempt because I am black, for believe me, my blackness is worth more than the other's whiteness."

And then he went away.

And he had another vision. It seemed to him that he came to a great place which looked like a chapel, and there he found a chair set on the left side, which was worm-eaten and feeble. And on the right hand were two flowers like lilies, and the one would have taken away the other's whiteness, but a good man parted them, so that the one did not touch the other; and then out of each flower came many flowers, and fruit in great plenty. Then it seemed to him that the good man said, "Would not a man do great folly who let these two flowers perish to save the rotten tree, so that it did not fall to the earth?"

"Sir," he said, "it seems to me that this wood could be of no use."

"Then take care," said the good man, "that you never see such an adventure happen to you."

Then he woke and made the sign of the cross in the middle of his forehead, and so got up and dressed. And the lady of the place came, and she greeted him, and he her in return, and so they went to a chapel and heard their service. And there came a company of knights, whom the lady had sent for, to lead Sir Bors to the battle. Then he asked for his arms. And when he was armed she begged him to take a little morsel to eat.

"No, madam," he said, "that I will not do until I have fought my battle, by the grace of God."

And so he leapt onto his horse and departed, with all the knights and men. And as soon as these two ladies met, the one whom Bors was to fight for made her complaint, and said, "Madam, you have done me wrong in robbing me of my lands that King Aniause gave me, and I am very loath that there should be any battle."

"You have no choice," said the other lady, "unless your knight withdraws."

Then the proclamation was made that whichever of the two knights had the better, his lady should have all the land. Now the one knight went off to one side, and the other to the other. Then they came together with such a great charge that they pierced their shields and their hauberks, and the spears flew in pieces, and they wounded each other badly. Then they crashed together, so that they both fell to the earth, with their horses between their legs; and at once they got up, and set hand to their swords, and struck each other on the head, so that they made great, deep wounds, and the blood ran out of their bodies. For Sir Bors found more defence in that knight than he had expected. For this Pridam was an exceedingly good knight, and he wounded Sir Bors very badly, and Bors him in return; but this Pridam kept up the fight just as hard all the while. Sir Bors saw that, and let him go on until he was nearly spent. And then he pressed on him more and more, and the other gave ground for fear of death. So as he drew back he fell flat on his back, and Sir Bors pulled at his helm so hard that he tore it from his head, and gave him great strokes in the face with the flat of his sword, and told him to yield or he would kill him.

Then he begged for mercy and said, "Fair knight, for the love of God do not kill me, and I will give you my word never to make war against your lady, but always to be on her side."

Then Bors let him be; then the old lady fled with all her knights.
