Chapter 9: How the lady won back her lands through the battle Sir Bors fought, and of his leaving, and how he met Sir Lionel taken prisoner and beaten with thorns, and also of a maiden who was about to be dishonoured

So then Bors came to all those who held lands from his lady, and said he would destroy them unless they did her such service as belonged to their lands. So they did their homage, and those who would not were driven out of their lands. So it came about that the young lady came into her estate again, through the mighty prowess of Sir Bors de Ganis. So when all the country was well settled in peace, Sir Bors took his leave and departed; and she thanked him greatly, and would have given him great riches, but he refused them.

Then he rode all that day until night, and came to lodge with a lady who knew him well enough, and gave him a great welcome. In the morning, as soon as day appeared, Bors left there, and so rode into a forest until the hour of midday, and there a marvellous adventure befell him. At the parting of two ways he met two knights who were leading Lionel, his brother, stark naked, bound onto a strong small riding horse, with his hands bound in front of his chest. And each of them held thorns in his hands, with which they went on beating him so hard that the blood ran down in more than a hundred places on his body, so that he was all blood in front and behind. But he never said a word; like the great-hearted man he was, he endured everything they did to him as if he felt no pain.

At once Sir Bors made ready to rescue him, since he was his brother. And then he looked to the other side of him, and saw a knight who was carrying off a fair gentlewoman, and meant to take her into the thickest part of the forest, to be the more safely out of the way of those who were looking for him. And she, who felt anything but safe, cried out in a loud voice, "Saint Mary, help your maiden!"

And at once she saw Sir Bors come riding. And when she came near him she judged him to be a knight of the Round Table, and from that she hoped for some comfort; and then she implored him, by the faith that he owed to Him in whose service he had entered, "and for the faith you owe to the high order of knighthood, and for the sake of the noble King Arthur, who I suppose made you a knight, that you help me, and do not let me be shamed by this knight."

When Bors heard her speak like this he was so full of sorrow that he did not know what to do. "For if I leave my brother in danger he must be killed, and I would not have that for all the earth. And if I do not help the maiden she is shamed for ever, and she will also lose her virginity, which she can never get back."

Then he lifted up his eyes and said, weeping, "Fair sweet Lord Jesus Christ, whose liege man I am, keep Lionel my brother, so that these knights do not kill him; and for pity of you, and for Mary's sake, I will help this maiden."
