Chapter 10: How Sir Bors left off rescuing his brother and rescued the damsel, and how he was told that Lionel was dead

Then he turned towards the knight who had the gentlewoman, and he cried, "Sir knight, take your hand off that maiden, or you are a dead man!"

And then the knight set the maiden down. He was armed at every point, except that he had no spear. Then he set his shield and drew his sword, and Bors struck him so hard that the spear went through his shield and his hauberk at the left shoulder. And by great strength he beat him down to the ground, and as Bors pulled his spear out, the knight fainted. Then Bors came to the maiden and said, "How does it seem to you now? You are free of this knight for the present."

"Now, sir," she said, "I beg you, take me back to the place where this knight took me."

"I will do that gladly," he said; and he took the wounded knight's horse, and set the gentlewoman on it, and so brought her where she wished.

"Sir knight," she said, "you have done better than you expected, for if I had lost my maidenhood, five hundred men would have died for it."

"What knight was he who had you in the forest?"

"On my faith," she said, "he is my cousin. And I never knew by what trickery the devil inflamed him, for yesterday he took me secretly from my father; for neither I nor any of my father's men suspected him at all. And if he had had my maidenhood he would have died for the sin, and his body would have been shamed and dishonoured for ever."

As she stood there talking with him, twelve knights came looking for her, and at once she told them all how Bors had rescued her. Then they rejoiced greatly, and begged him to come to her father, a great lord, where he would be most welcome.

"Truly," said Bors, "that cannot be at this time, for I have a great adventure to carry out in this country." So he commended them to God and left.

Then Sir Bors rode after Lionel his brother by the tracks of their horses, and so he rode searching for a long while. Then he overtook a man in the clothes of a religious order, riding a strong black horse, blacker than a berry, and the man said, "Sir knight, what are you looking for?"

"Sir," he said, "I am looking for my brother, whom I saw a little while ago being beaten by two knights."

"Ah, Bors, do not be dismayed, and do not fall into despair; for I will tell you the news such as it is, and truly, he is dead."

Then he showed him a newly killed body lying in a bush, and it seemed to him plainly that it was the body of Lionel. And then he grieved so much that he fell to the ground in a faint, and lay there a long while. And when he came to himself he said, "Fair brother, since the fellowship of you and me is broken, I shall never have joy in my heart. And now may He whom I have taken for my master be my help."

And when he had said this he lifted the body lightly in his arms and laid it across the saddlebow. And then he said to the man, "Can you direct me to some chapel where I may bury this body?"

"Come on," he said, "there is one close by."

And so they rode until they saw a fine tower, and in front of it there seemed to be an old, decaying chapel. And then they both dismounted, and laid him in a marble tomb.
