Chapter 11: How Sir Bors told a priest the dream he had dreamed, and of the advice the priest gave him

"Now let us leave him here," said the good man, "and go to our lodging until tomorrow. We will come back here to do him service."

"Sir," said Bors, "are you a priest?"

"Yes, truly," he said.

"Then I beg you, explain to me a dream that came to me last night."

"Go on," he said.

Then he began, and told him all about the great bird in the forest, and after that about his birds, one white and the other black, and about the rotten tree, and the white flowers.

"Sir, I will tell you part of it now, and the rest tomorrow. The white bird stands for a gentlewoman, fair and rich, who loves you as a lover and has loved you long; and if you refuse her love she will go and die at once, if you have no pity on her. That is what the great bird means, which will make you refuse her. Now it is not out of any fear you have, nor any dread of God, that you will refuse her; you would do it only to be thought chaste, to win the praise of the vain glory of the world. For this will happen to you now if you refuse her: Lancelot, the good knight, your cousin, will die. And then men will say that you are a killer, both of your brother, Sir Lionel, and of your cousin, Sir Lancelot du Lake, whom you could easily have saved and rescued; but you chose to rescue a maiden who is nothing to you. Now consider whether it would have been the greater harm, your brother's death, or to have let her lose her maidenhood."

Then he asked him, "Have you heard the meaning of your dream that I have told you?"

"Yes, truly," said Sir Bors, "I have heard and well understood all your explanation and interpretation of my dream."

Then said the man in the black clothes, "Then it will be your fault if Sir Lancelot, your cousin, dies."

"Sir," said Bors, "I would hate that; for believe me, there is nothing in the world I would not rather do than see my lord Sir Lancelot du Lake die through my fault."

"Choose now, the one or the other," said the good man.

And then he led Sir Bors into a high tower, and there he found knights and ladies. The ladies said he was welcome, and so they took off his armour. And when he was in his doublet they brought him a cloak trimmed with ermine and put it around him; and then they gave him such a welcome that he forgot all his sorrow and anguish, and set his heart only on these delights and luxuries, and gave no more thought to his brother Sir Lionel, nor to Sir Lancelot du Lake his cousin. And at once there came out of a chamber to him the fairest lady he had ever seen, and more richly dressed than he had ever seen Queen Guinevere or any other lady of rank.

"Look, Sir Bors," they said, "here is the lady to whom we owe all our service, and I believe she is the richest lady and the fairest in all the world, and the one who loves you best above all other knights, for she will have no knight but you."

And when he heard that speech he was dismayed. Nevertheless she greeted him, and he her; and then they sat down together and spoke of many things, until she begged him to be her love, for she had loved him above all earthly men, and she would make him richer than any man of his age had ever been. When Bors understood her words he was very ill at ease, for he would on no account break his chastity, and so he did not know how to answer her.
