Chapter 12: How the devil in a woman's likeness tried to get Sir Bors to sleep with her, and how by God's grace he escaped

"Alas, Bors," she said, "will you not do my will?"

"Madam," said Bors, "there is no lady in the world whose will I would do in this matter, for my brother lies dead, who was killed only just now."

"Ah, Bors," she said, "I have loved you long, for the great beauty I have seen in you and the great boldness I have heard of in you, so that you must lie with me this night; and so I beg you to grant it to me."

"Truly," he said, "I will not do it in any way."

Then she made such a show of grief before him as though she would have died. "Well, Bors," she said, "you have brought me to this, close to my end." And with that she took him by the hand and told him to look at her. "And you shall see how I will die for your love."

"Ah," he said then, "that I shall never see."

Then she left and went up onto a high battlement, and took twelve gentlewomen with her; and when they were up there, one of the gentlewomen cried out and said, "Ah, Sir Bors, noble knight, have mercy on us all, and let my lady have her will! And if you do not, we must all die with our lady, by falling from this high tower. And if you let us die like this for so small a thing, all ladies and gentlewomen will speak of you with dishonour."

Then he looked up, and they all seemed to be ladies of high rank, and richly and finely dressed. Then he had great pity on them; nevertheless he was settled in his own mind that he would rather they all lost their souls than he lost his. And with that they all fell down at once to the ground. And when he saw that, he was utterly dismayed, and marvelled greatly at it. With that he crossed himself, body and face. And at once he heard a great noise and a great cry, as though all the fiends of hell were about him; and with that he saw neither tower, nor lady, nor gentlewoman, nor the chapel where he had brought his brother. Then he held up both his hands to heaven and said, "Fair Father God, I have had a narrow escape!" And then he took his arms and his horse and rode on his way.

Then he heard a clock strike on his right hand; and he went that way and came to an abbey on his right hand, enclosed with high walls, and there he was let in. They supposed that he was one of the quest of the Holy Grail, so they led him into a chamber and took off his armour.

"Sirs," said Sir Bors, "if there is any holy man in this house, I beg you, let me speak with him."

Then one of them led him to the Abbot, who was in a chapel. And then Sir Bors greeted him, and he greeted him in return.

"Sir," said Bors, "I am a knight-errant." And he told him all the adventure that he had seen.

"Sir knight," said the Abbot, "I do not know who you are, for I never thought that a knight of your age could be so strong in the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. Nevertheless, you shall go to your rest, for I will not advise you today; it is too late. And tomorrow I will advise you as well as I can."
