Chapter 13: Of the holy conversation of an abbot with Sir Bors, and how the abbot advised him

And that night Sir Bors was richly served; and early in the morning he heard mass, and the Abbot came to him and bade him good morning, and Bors returned it. And then he told him that he was a companion of the quest of the Holy Grail, and how the holy man had charged him to eat only bread and water.

Then the Abbot said, "Our Lord Jesus Christ showed Himself to you in the likeness of a soul that suffered great anguish for us, since He was put upon the cross and bled His heart's blood for mankind. There was the sign and the likeness of the Holy Grail that appeared before you, for the blood that the great bird bled brought the chicks back from death to life. And the bare tree signifies the world, which is naked and without fruit unless the fruit comes from Our Lord. Also the lady you fought for, and King Aniause who was lord there before, signify Jesus Christ, who is the King of the world. And your fighting the champion for the lady signifies this: when you took up the battle for the lady, by her you are to understand the new law of Jesus Christ and Holy Church; and by the other lady you are to understand the old law and the devil, who wars against Holy Church all day long; and so your battle was a just one. For you are Jesus Christ's knights, and so you ought to be defenders of Holy Church. And by the black bird you may understand Holy Church, which says, 'I am black, but I am fair.' And by the white bird men may understand the devil, and I will tell you how: the swan is white outside and black within. It is hypocrisy, which is sallow or pale on the outside and looks from without like the servants of Jesus Christ, but within they are so horrible with filth and sin, and they deceive the world wickedly. Also, when the devil appeared to you in the likeness of a man of religion, and blamed you for leaving your brother for a lady, he led you to where it seemed to you your brother had been killed; but he is still alive. And all this was done to lead you into error, and bring you to despair and lechery, for he knew you were tender-hearted; and all of it was so that you should not find the blessed adventure of the Holy Grail. And the third bird signifies the hard battle against the fair ladies, who were all devils. Also the dry tree and the white lily: the dry tree signifies your brother Lionel, who is dry and without virtue, and so many men ought to call him the rotten tree and the worm-eaten tree, for he is a murderer and acts against the order of knighthood. And the two white flowers signify two virgins: the one is a knight who was wounded the other day, and the other is the gentlewoman you rescued. And as for why the one flower drew close to the other, that was the knight who would have defiled her and himself both. And, Sir Bors, you would have been a great fool, and in great danger, to have watched those two flowers perish in order to help the rotten tree; for if they had sinned together they would have been damned. And because you rescued them both, men may call you a true knight and servant of Jesus Christ."
