Chapter 14: How Sir Bors met his brother Sir Lionel, and how Sir Lionel meant to kill Sir Bors

Then Sir Bors went on from there and commended the Abbot to God. And then he rode all that day, and lodged with an old lady. And in the morning he rode to a castle in a valley, and there he met a yeoman going at a great pace towards a forest.

"Tell me," said Sir Bors, "can you tell me of any adventure?"

"Sir," he said, "here below this castle there is to be a great and marvellous tournament."

"What people will be in it?" said Sir Bors.

"The Earl of Plains will be on the one side, and the lady's nephew of Hervin on the other."

Then Bors thought he would be there, in case he might meet his brother Sir Lionel, or any others of his fellowship who were in the quest of the Holy Grail. And then he turned aside to a hermitage that stood at the edge of the forest.

And when he got there he found Sir Lionel his brother, who sat fully armed at the entrance of the chapel door, to lodge there until the morning when the tournament was to be. And when Sir Bors saw him he was so glad of him that his joy was a marvel to tell. And then he dismounted from his horse and said, "Fair sweet brother, when did you come here?"

As soon as Lionel saw him he said, "Ah, Bors, you have nothing to boast of, for as far as you were concerned I might have been killed. When you saw two knights leading me away and beating me, you left me to go and help a gentlewoman, and left me in danger of death; for never before did any brother do another so great a betrayal. And for that misdeed I promise you nothing now but death, for you have well deserved it. So look out for yourself from now on, and you'll find out as soon as I am armed."

When Sir Bors understood his brother's anger he knelt down on the ground and begged his pardon, holding up both his hands, and begged him to forgive him his ill will.

"No," said Lionel, "that will never be, if I can get the upper hand. I swear it to God: you will die for it, for it would be a pity for you to live any longer."

Then and there he went in and took his armour, and mounted his horse, and came before him and said, "Bors, keep away from me, for I will treat you as I would a felon or a traitor; for you are the most faithless knight that ever came out of so worthy a house as that of King Bors de Ganis, who was our father. So get up on your horse, and that way you will be at your best advantage. And if you won't, I'll ride at you where you stand on foot, and so the shame will be mine and the harm yours; but I care nothing for that shame."

When Sir Bors saw that he must fight his brother or else die, he did not know what to do. His heart advised him against it, since Lionel was born before him, and so he owed him reverence. Yet he knelt down before the feet of Lionel's horse and said, "Fair sweet brother, have mercy on me and do not kill me, and remember the great love that ought to be between the two of us."

Lionel cared nothing for what Sir Bors said to him, for the devil had brought him to such a will that he meant to kill him. Then, when Lionel saw that he would do nothing else, and would not get up to give him battle, he charged right over him, so that he struck Bors down to the ground with his horse, feet upward, and hurt him so badly that he fainted from the distress he felt at the thought of dying without confession. So when Lionel saw this, he dismounted from his horse to strike off his head. And so he took him by the helm, and would have torn it from his head. Then the hermit came running to him, who was a good man and of great age, and had heard all the words that passed between them, and so he threw himself down upon Sir Bors.
