Chapter 15: How Sir Colgrevance fought against Sir Lionel to save Sir Bors, and how the hermit was killed

Then he said to Lionel, "Ah, noble knight, have mercy on me and on your brother, for if you kill him you will die in sin, and that would be a sorrowful thing, for he is one of the worthiest knights in the world, and of the best character."

"So help me God," said Lionel, "sir priest, unless you get away from him I will kill you, and he will be none the sooner spared for it."

"Certainly," said the good man, "I would rather you killed me than him, for my death will be no great harm, not half so much as his."

"Very well," said Lionel, "I'm content." And he set his hand to his sword and struck him so hard that his head flew backward. Even so, he did not hold back from his wicked purpose, but took his brother by the helm and unlaced it to strike off his head, and he would have killed him without fail. But so it happened that Colgrevance, a fellow of the Round Table, came there at that moment, as Our Lord willed. And when he saw the good man killed he wondered greatly what it could be. And then he saw that Lionel was about to kill his brother, and he recognised Sir Bors, whom he loved very much. Then he leapt down and took Lionel by the shoulders, and pulled him hard back from Bors, and said, "Lionel, will you kill your brother, one of the worthiest knights in the world? No good man should allow that."

"What," said Lionel, "will you stop me? Then if you meddle in this I'll kill you, and him after."

"What," said Colgrevance, "is it true that you will kill him?"

"Kill him I will," he said, "whoever says otherwise, for he has done so much against me that he has well deserved it."

And so he ran at him, and would have struck him through the head; and Sir Colgrevance ran between them and said, "If you are so bold as to do that again, the two of us will fight it out together."

When Lionel heard his words he took his shield before him and asked him who he was. And he told him: Colgrevance, one of his fellows. Then Lionel defied him, and gave him a great stroke through the helm. Then he drew his sword, for he was an exceedingly good knight, and defended himself most manfully. The battle lasted so long that Bors got up, in great pain, and saw Colgrevance, the good knight, fighting with his brother for his sake. Then he was very sorry and downcast, and thought that if Colgrevance killed his brother he would never have joy; and if his brother killed Colgrevance, "the shame would be mine for ever." Then he would have got up to part them, but he did not have the strength to stand on his feet; so he waited there until Colgrevance had the worst of it, for Lionel was a knight of great prowess and very bold, and he had pierced Colgrevance's hauberk and helm, so that he expected nothing but death; for he had lost so much blood that it was a marvel he could stand upright. Then he looked at Sir Bors, who was sitting up, trying to raise himself, and said, "Ah, Bors, why don't you come and get me out of danger of death, which I put myself into to help you, when you were close to death just now?"

"Certainly," said Lionel, "that won't do you any good, for neither of you will be able to protect the other: you will both die by my hand."

When Bors heard that, he made such an effort that he got up and put on his helm. Then for the first time he saw the hermit-priest who had been killed, and he grieved over him marvellously.
