Chapter 17: How a voice came that commanded Sir Bors not to touch him, and of a cloud that came between them

And then he heard a voice that said, "Flee, Bors, and do not touch him, or else you will kill him."

At that moment a cloud came down between them, in the likeness of a fire and a marvellous flame, so that both their shields burned. Then they were so badly frightened that they both fell to the ground, and lay there a long while in a faint. And when they came to themselves, Bors saw that his brother had come to no harm; then he held up both his hands, for he feared God had taken vengeance on him. With that he heard a voice say, "Bors, go from here, and keep your brother company no longer, but take your way straight to the sea, for Sir Percival is waiting for you there."

Then he said to his brother, "Fair sweet brother, for God's love forgive me all the wrong I have done you."

Then he answered, "May God forgive you, and I do, gladly."

So Sir Bors left him and rode the shortest way to the sea. And at last, by fortune, he came to an abbey which was near the sea. That night Bors rested there; and in his sleep a voice came to him and told him to go to the sea. Then he leapt up and made the sign of the cross in the middle of his forehead, and took his armour, and made his horse ready, and mounted; and he rode out through a gap in a broken wall, and rode on until he came to the sea. And on the shore he found a ship covered all in white samite, and he dismounted and commended himself to Jesus Christ. And as soon as he went aboard the ship, it set off out to sea, and went so fast that it seemed to him the ship was flying. But it was soon dark, so that he could recognise no one, and so he slept until it was day. Then he woke, and saw in the middle of the ship a knight lying fully armed except for his helm. Then he knew that it was Sir Percival of Wales, and he was overjoyed to see him. But Sir Percival was taken aback at the sight of him, and asked him who he was.

"Ah, fair sir," said Bors, "don't you know me?"

"Certainly," he said, "I wonder how you came here, unless Our Lord brought you here Himself."

Then Sir Bors smiled and took off his helm. Then Percival knew him, and each rejoiced so greatly in the other that it was a marvel to hear. Then Bors told him how he had come into the ship, and at whose bidding; and each told the other of their temptations, as you have heard before. So they went down the sea, sometimes backward, sometimes forward, and each comforted the other, and they were often at their prayers.

Then said Sir Percival, "We lack nothing but Galahad, the good knight."

Thus ends the sixteenth book, which is of Sir Gawain, Ector de Maris, Sir Bors de Ganis and Sir Percival.

Here follows the seventeenth book, which is of the noble knight Sir Galahad.
