Chapter 1: How Sir Galahad fought at a tournament, and how he was recognised by Sir Gawain and Sir Ector de Maris

Now this story says that when Galahad had rescued Percival from the twenty knights, he went then into a waste forest, in which he rode for many days; and he met with many adventures, which he brought to an end, and of which the story makes no mention here. Then one day he took his way to the sea, and it happened as he passed by a castle that there was a marvellous tournament going on there; but those outside had done so much that those inside were getting the worst of it, and yet those inside were good enough knights. When Galahad saw that those inside were in such great distress that men were killing them at the gate of the castle, he decided to help them, and he set his spear forward and struck the first man so that he fell to the earth, and the spear broke to pieces. Then he drew his sword and struck where they were thickest, and he did such wonderful deeds of arms that they all marvelled. Then it happened that Gawain and Sir Ector de Maris were with the knights outside. But when they saw the white shield with the red cross, the one said to the other, "There is the good knight, Sir Galahad, the high prince. Now a man would be a great fool to meet him in a fight." So by chance Galahad came upon Sir Gawain, and he struck him so hard that he split his helm and the iron cap under it to the head, so that Gawain fell to the earth; but the stroke was so great that it slanted down to the ground and carved his horse's shoulder in two.

When Ector saw Gawain down he drew aside, and thought it no wisdom to stand against him, and also out of natural love, because he was Galahad's uncle. So through his great boldness Galahad beat back all the knights outside. And then those inside came out and chased them all about. But when Galahad saw that none of them would turn back to fight, he slipped away secretly, so that no one knew what had become of him.

"Now by my head," said Gawain to Ector, "now the marvels are true that were said by Lancelot du Lake, that the sword which stuck in the stone would give me such a blow that I would not have it for the best castle in this world; and truly, now it is proved true, for I never had such a stroke from a man's hand before."

"Sir," said Ector, "it seems to me your quest is done."

"And yours is not done," said Gawain, "but mine is done. I shall seek no further."

Then Gawain was carried into a castle, and they took off his armour and laid him in a rich bed, and a doctor found that he would live, and be healed within a month. So Gawain and Ector stayed together, for Sir Ector would not leave until Gawain was healed.

And the good knight Galahad rode on so long that he came that night to the Castle of Carbonek; and it so happened that night overtook him at a hermitage. And the good man was glad when he saw that he was a knight-errant. Then, when they were at rest, there came a gentlewoman knocking at the door, and called for Galahad, and so the good man came to the door to find out what she wanted. Then she called to the hermit, "Sir Ulfin, I am a gentlewoman who would speak with the knight who is with you."

Then the good man woke Galahad, and said to him, "Get up, and speak with a gentlewoman who seems to have great need of you."

Then Galahad went to her and asked her what she wanted.

"Galahad," she said, "I want you to arm yourself, and mount your horse and follow me, for within these three days I will show you the highest adventure that any knight ever saw."

At once Galahad armed himself, and took his horse, and commended himself to God, and told the gentlewoman to go ahead, and he would follow wherever she pleased.
