Chapter 2: How Sir Galahad rode with a damsel, and came to the ship where Sir Bors and Sir Percival were

So she rode as fast as her palfrey could carry her, until she came to the sea, which was called Collibe. And at nightfall they came to a castle in a valley, enclosed by running water and by strong, high walls; and so she went into the castle with Galahad, and there he was given a warm welcome, for the lady of that castle was the damsel's mistress. So when he had taken off his armour, the damsel said, "Madam, shall we stay here all this day?"

"No," she said, "only until he has dined and slept a little."

So he ate and slept a while, until the maiden called him, and he armed himself by torchlight. And when the maiden and he were both on horseback, the lady gave Galahad a fair page, richly dressed; and so they left the castle and rode until they came to the seaside. And there they found the ship that Bors and Percival were in, and they called from the ship's side, "Sir Galahad, you are welcome! We have waited for you a long time."

And when he heard them he asked them who they were.

"Sir," she said, "leave your horse here, and I will leave mine." And they took their saddles and their bridles with them, and made the sign of the cross over them, and so went aboard the ship. And the two knights received them both with great joy, and each knew the other; and so the wind rose, and drove them through the sea at a marvellous pace. And within a while it was dawn.

Then Galahad took off his helm and his sword, and asked his companions where that fair ship had come from.

"Truly," they said, "you know as well as we do, except by God's grace."

And then each told the other of all their hard adventures, and of their great temptations.

"Truly," said Galahad, "you are much bound to God, for you have come safely through great adventures; and if it had not been for the gentlewoman I would not have come here; for as for you, I never expected to find you in these strange countries."

"Ah, Galahad," said Bors, "if Lancelot your father were here, then we would be well content, for then it would seem to us that we lacked nothing."

"That cannot be," said Galahad, "unless it pleased Our Lord."

By then the ship had gone from the land of Logres, and by chance it came in between two rocks, exceedingly great and marvellous; but there they could not land, for there was a whirlpool of the sea there; except that there was another ship, and onto it they could go without danger.

"Let us go there," said the gentlewoman, "and there we shall see adventures, for such is Our Lord's will."

And when they came there they found the ship rich enough, but they found neither man nor woman in it. But at the end of the ship they found two fair inscriptions, which spoke a dreadful and a marvellous word: "You who shall enter this ship, take care that you be steadfast in faith, for I am Faith, and so take care how you enter, for if you fail I shall not help you."

Then the gentlewoman said, "Percival, do you know who I am?"

"Certainly not," he said, "to my knowledge."

"Know this," she said, "that I am your sister, the daughter of King Pellinore, and so believe me, you are the man in the world I love most; and if you are not perfect in your belief in Jesus Christ, do not enter in any way at all, for then you would perish in the ship, for it is so perfect that it will suffer no sinner in it."

When Percival understood that she was truly his sister, he was glad at heart, and said, "Fair sister, I will go in, for if I am an unbeliever or an untrue knight, there I shall perish."
