Chapter 3: How Sir Galahad went aboard the ship, and of a fine bed in it, with other marvellous things, and of a sword

In the meantime Galahad crossed himself and went aboard; and then after him the gentlewoman, and then Sir Bors and Sir Percival. And when they were in, it was so marvellously fair and rich that they marvelled; and in the middle of the ship was a fair bed, and Galahad went to it, and found a crown of silk there. And at its foot was a sword, rich and fair, and it was drawn out of the sheath half a foot and more. And the sword was of many fashions: the pommel was of stone, and there were in it all the colours that any man could find, and each of the colours had its own powers; and the grip plates of the hilt were made of the ribs of two different beasts. The one beast was a serpent that lived in Calidone, and is called the Serpent of the Fiend; and its bone has such a power that no hand that holds it shall ever be weary or hurt. And the other beast is a fish, not very large, that lives in the river Euphrates; and that fish is called Ertanax, and its bones are of such a nature that whoever holds them shall have so much will that he shall never be weary, and he shall not think of any joy or sorrow that he has had, but only of the thing that he sees before him. And as for this sword, no man shall ever grasp it by the hilt but one; but he shall surpass all others.

"In the name of God," said Percival, "I will try to hold it."

So he set his hand to the sword, but he could not grasp it.

"By my faith," he said, "now I have failed."

Bors set his hand to it and failed.

Then Galahad looked at the sword and saw letters like blood that said: "Let no one try to draw me out of my sheath unless he is bolder than any other; and whoever draws me, believe me, he shall never escape being shamed in his body, or wounded to the death."

"By my faith," said Galahad, "I would draw this sword out of the sheath, but the forbidding is so great that I will not set my hand to it."

"Now, sirs," said the gentlewoman, "know this, that the drawing of this sword is forbidden to all men except only to you. Also, this ship came to land in the realm of Logres; and at that time there was deadly war between King Labor, who was father to the Maimed King, and King Hurlame, who was a Saracen. But then he was newly christened, so that men held him afterwards one of the cleverest men in the world. And so one day it happened that King Labor and King Hurlame had gathered their people by the sea, where this ship had come to land; and there King Hurlame was defeated, and his men killed; and he was afraid of being killed, and fled to his ship, and there found this sword and drew it, and came out and found King Labor, the man in all Christendom in whom there was then the greatest faith. And when King Hurlame saw King Labor he raised this sword, and struck him on the helm so hard that he split him and his horse to the ground with the first stroke of his sword. And this was in the realm of Logres; and so great plague and great harm fell on both realms. For after that neither corn nor grass grew, nor hardly any fruit, nor were there any fish in the water; and that is why men call it the lands of the two borders, the Waste Land, because of that dolorous stroke. And when King Hurlame saw that this sword cut so well, he turned back to fetch the scabbard, and so came into this ship and went aboard, and put the sword back in its sheath. And as soon as he had done it he fell down dead before the bed. So the sword was proved, that no one ever drew it without being killed or maimed. So he lay there until a maiden came into the ship and threw him out, for there was no man in the world bold enough to go into that ship because of the prohibition."
