Chapter 4: Of the marvels of the sword and of the scabbard

And then they looked at the scabbard. It seemed to be made of a serpent's skin, and on it were letters of gold and silver. And the girdle was a poor thing to look at, and not fit to hold so rich a sword. And the letters said: "He who shall wield me ought to be bolder than any other, if he bears me as truly as I ought to be borne. For the body of him by whom I ought to hang shall not be shamed in any place while he is girded with this girdle, and let no one ever be so bold as to take this girdle away; for it ought not to be taken away except by the hands of a maiden, and she must be a king's daughter and a queen's, and she must be a maiden all the days of her life, both in will and in deed. And if she breaks her virginity she shall die the most shameful death that any woman ever died."

"Sir," said Percival, "turn this sword over, so that we may see what is on the other side."

And it was red as blood, with letters as black as any coal, which said: "He who shall praise me most shall find me most to blame at a time of great need; and to the one to whom I should be most courteous I shall be most cruel, and that shall be at one time."

"Fair brother," she said to Percival, "it happened some forty years after the Passion of Jesus Christ that Nacien, the brother-in-law of King Mordrains, was carried, by the commandment of Our Lord, to a town more than fourteen days' journey from his country, onto an island in the parts of the West that men called the Isle of Turnance. So it happened that he found this ship at the entrance of a rock, and he found the bed and this sword just as we have heard now. Even so, he did not have the boldness to draw it; and he stayed there some eight days, and on the ninth day a great wind blew up which carried him away from the island, and brought him to another island by a rock, and there he found the greatest giant that any man ever saw. With that this horrible giant came to kill him; and he looked about him and could not flee, and he had nothing to defend himself with. So he ran to the sword, and when he saw it naked he praised it highly, and then he shook it, and with that he broke it in the middle. 'Ah,' said Nacien, 'the thing that I most praised I ought now most to blame.' And with that he threw the pieces of his sword over the bed. And afterwards he leapt over the side to fight with the giant, and killed him."

"And at once he went aboard the ship again, and the wind rose and drove him through the sea, so that by chance he came to another ship where King Mordrains was, who had been sorely tempted by a fiend at the Port of Perilous Rock. And when the one saw the other they rejoiced greatly over each other, and each told the other of his adventure, and how the sword had failed him in his greatest need. When Mordrains saw the sword he praised it highly. 'But,' he said, 'the breaking was not to be done except by your own wickedness, for you are in some sin.' And there he took the sword and set the pieces together, and they joined as fair as they ever were before; and he put the sword in the sheath, and laid it down on the bed. Then they heard a voice that said, 'Get out of this ship for a little while, and go into the other, for fear you fall into deadly sin; for if you are found in deadly sin you cannot escape, but will perish.' And so they went into the other ship. And as Nacien went over the side he was struck by a sword on the right foot, so that he fell flat on his face on the ship's deck; and with that he said, 'O God, how I am hurt!' And then a voice came and said, 'Take that for the offence you committed in drawing this sword. That is why you receive a wound, for you were never worthy to handle it, as the writing says.'"

"In the name of God," said Galahad, "you are very wise in these matters."
