Chapter 5: How King Pelles was struck through both thighs because he drew the sword, and other marvellous stories

"Sir," she said, "there was a king called Pelles, the Maimed King. And while he could still ride he did much to uphold Christendom and Holy Church. So one day he was hunting in a wood of his that ran down to the sea; and at last he lost his hounds and all his knights except only one. And there he and his knight went on until they came toward Ireland, and there he found the ship. And when he saw the letters and understood them, he went in all the same, for he was very perfect in his life, but his knight had no courage to go in; and there he found this sword, and drew it out as far as you can see. So with that a spear came in, with which he was struck through both thighs, and he could never be healed after that, nor shall he be until we come to him. So," she said, "was not King Pelles, your grandfather, maimed for his boldness?"

"In the name of God, damsel," said Galahad.

So they went toward the bed to look all about it, and above its head there hung two swords. Also there were two spindles which were as white as any snow, and others that were as red as blood, and others above them as green as any emerald: these were the three colours of the spindles, and they were the natural colour of the wood within, without any painting.

"These spindles," said the damsel, "came from the time when sinful Eve went to gather the fruit for which Adam and she were put out of paradise: she took with her the bough on which the apple hung. Then she saw that the branch was fair and green, and she remembered the loss that came from the tree. Then she decided to keep the branch as long as she could. And because she had no chest to keep it in, she put it in the earth. So by the will of Our Lord the branch grew into a great tree within a little while, and it was as white as any snow, branches, boughs and leaves: that was a sign that a maiden had planted it. But afterwards God came to Adam, and told him to know his wife in the flesh, as nature required. So Adam lay with his wife under the same tree; and at once the tree that had been white turned as green as any grass, and everything that came out of it; and at the same time that they lay together, Abel was conceived. So the tree was green in colour for a long time. And so it happened many days after that, under the same tree, Cain killed Abel, from which came a great marvel. For as soon as Abel had received his death under the green tree, it lost its green colour and became red; and that was a sign of the blood. And at once all the plants that had grown from it died, but the tree grew and flourished marvellously, and it was the fairest tree and the most delightful that any man could behold and see; and so the plants that had grown out of it before Abel was killed under it all died."

So the tree lasted until Solomon, King David's son, reigned and held the land after his father. This Solomon was wise, and knew all the powers of stones and trees, and he knew the course of the stars, and many other different things. This Solomon had a wicked wife, because of whom he thought that there had never been a good woman, and so he scorned women in his books. So a voice once answered him: "Solomon, if sorrow comes to a man through a woman, never mind it; for yet there shall come a woman from whom shall come a hundred times more joy to men than this sorrow gives grief; and that woman shall be born of your line."

Then when Solomon heard these words he thought himself nothing but a fool, and he found the truth of it in old books. Also the Holy Ghost showed him the coming of the glorious Virgin Mary. Then he asked the voice whether it would be in the branch of his line.

"No," said the voice, "but there shall come a man who shall be a virgin, and the last of your blood, and he shall be as good a knight as Duke Josua, your brother-in-law."
