Chapter 6: How Solomon took David's sword on the advice of his wife, and of other marvellous matters

"Now I have made certain for you the thing you were in doubt of."

Then Solomon was glad that any such man should come of his line; but all the while he wondered and pondered who that should be, and what his name might be. His wife saw that he was pondering, and thought she would find it out at some time; and so she waited her chance, and asked him the reason for his pondering, and he told her all of it, how the voice had spoken to him.

"Well," she said, "I will have a ship made of the best and most lasting wood that men can find."

So Solomon sent for all the carpenters of the land, and the best ones. And when they had made the ship the lady said to Solomon, "Sir," she said, "since it is so that this knight is to surpass all the knights of chivalry who have been before him and who shall come after him, I will tell you something more," she said. "You shall go into Our Lord's temple, where King David's sword is, your father's, which is the most marvellous and the sharpest that was ever taken in any knight's hand. So take that, and take off the pommel, and make a pommel of precious stones for it, so cunningly made that no one can see but that it is all one piece; and after that, have a hilt made for it so marvellously and wonderfully that no one may recognise it; and after that, have a marvellous sheath made. And when you have done all this, I will have a girdle made for it, such as shall please me."

King Solomon had all this made as she planned it, both the ship and all the rest. And when the ship was ready in the sea to sail, the lady had a great bed made, marvellously rich, and set it at the head of the bed, covered with silk, and laid the sword at its foot; and the girdles were of hemp, and at that the king was angry.

"Sir, believe me," she said, "I have nothing so high that it would be worthy to hold up so high a sword; and a maiden shall bring other girdles to it, but I do not know when it shall be, nor at what time."

And then she had a covering made for the ship, of silk cloth that would never rot in any kind of weather. Then that lady went and had a carpenter come to the tree under which Abel was killed.

"Now," she said, "carve me out of this tree as much wood as will make me a spindle."

"Ah, madam," he said, "this is the tree that our first mother planted."

"Do it," she said, "or I will destroy you."

As soon as he began to work, drops of blood came out; and then he would have stopped, but she would not allow him to, and so he took away as much wood as would make a spindle; and so she made him take as much from the green tree and from the white tree. And when these three spindles were shaped she had them fastened to the canopy of the bed.

When Solomon saw this, he said to his wife, "You have done marvellously; for though all the world were here right now, no one could work out why all this was made, except Our Lord Himself; and you who have done it do not know what it will mean."

"Let it be, now," she said, "for you will hear news of it sooner than you think."

Now you shall hear a wonderful tale of King Solomon and his wife.
