Chapter 7: A wonderful tale of King Solomon and his wife

That night Solomon lay in front of the ship with only a few companions. And when he was asleep it seemed to him that a great company of angels came from heaven, and came down into the ship, and took water which was brought by an angel in a vessel of silver, and sprinkled all the ship with it. And afterwards he came to the sword and drew letters on the hilt. And afterwards he went to the ship's side, and wrote other letters there, which said: "You who would come into me, take care that you are full in the faith, for I am nothing but Faith and Belief."

When Solomon saw these letters he was dismayed, so that he did not dare go in, and so he drew back; and at once the ship was pushed out into the sea, and it went so fast that he lost sight of it within a little while. And then a small voice said, "Solomon, the last knight of your line shall rest in this bed."

Then Solomon went and woke his wife, and told her of the adventures of the ship.

Now the story says that the three companions looked at the bed and the three spindles for a long while. Then they were certain that they were of natural colours, without painting. Then they lifted a cloth which lay above the floor, and found there what seemed to be a rich purse. And Percival took it, and found a written paper in it, and so he read it, and it told of the making of the spindles and of the ship, where it came from, and by whom it was made.

"Now," said Galahad, "where shall we find the gentlewoman who is to make new girdles for the sword?"

"Fair sir," said Percival's sister, "do not be dismayed, for by God's leave I will make a girdle for the sword, such as shall belong to it."

And then she opened a box and took out girdles which were finely worked with golden threads, and on them were set very precious stones, and a rich buckle of gold.

"Look, lords," she said, "here is a girdle that ought to be set about the sword. And believe me, the greatest part of this girdle was made of my hair, which I loved well while I was a woman of the world. But as soon as I knew that this adventure was ordained for me, I cut off my hair, and made this girdle in the name of God."

"You are well met," said Sir Bors, "for certainly you have saved us from a great deal of trouble, which we would have gone into if it had not been for your news."

Then the gentlewoman went and set it on the sword as its girdle.

"Now," said the fellowship, "what is the name of the sword, and what shall we call it?"

"Truly," she said, "the name of the sword is the Sword with the Strange Girdles; and the sheath is Mover of Blood; for no man who has blood in him shall ever see the one part of the sheath, which was made of the Tree of Life."

Then they said to Galahad, "In the name of Jesus Christ, we beg you to gird yourself with this sword, which has been so much longed for in the realm of Logres."

"Now let me begin to grip this sword," said Galahad, "to give you courage; but believe me, it belongs no more to me than it does to you."

And then he closed his fingers round it a good way; and then she girded the sword about his waist.

"Now I do not care if I die," she said, "for now I count myself one of the blessed maidens of the world, who has made the worthiest knight in the world."

"Damsel," said Galahad, "you have done so much that I will be your knight all the days of my life."

Then they left that ship and went to the other. And at once the wind drove them out to sea at a great pace, but they had no food. But it happened that in the morning they came to a castle that men call Carteloise, which was in the borders of Scotland. And when they had passed the harbour, the gentlewoman said, "Lords, there are men here who, if they knew that you were of King Arthur's court, would attack you at once."

"Damsel," said Galahad, "He who brought us out of the rock shall deliver us from them."
