Chapter 8: How Galahad and his companions came to a castle, and how they were attacked there, and how they slew their enemies, and other matters

So it happened, as they were speaking like this, that a squire came by them and asked who they were; and they said they were of King Arthur's household.

"Is that true?" he said. "Now by my head," he said, "you are in a bad way." And then he turned back to the cliff fortress.

And within a while they heard a horn blow. Then a gentlewoman came to them and asked them where they were from; and they told her.

"Fair lords," she said, "for the love of God turn back if you can, for you have come to your death."

"No," they said, "we will not turn back, for He in whose service we have set out shall help us."

Then, as they stood talking, knights came up well armed, and told them to yield or else die.

"That yielding," they said, "will do you harm."

And with that they let their horses run at them, and Sir Percival struck the foremost to the earth, and took his horse and mounted it, and Galahad did the same. Bors served another the same way too, for they had no horses in that country, for they had left their horses behind when they took ship in other countries. And so when they were mounted they began to set upon them; and the men of the castle fled into the strong fortress, and the three knights after them into the castle, and there they dismounted, and with their swords they cut them down, and got into the hall.

Then, when they saw the great multitude of people they had killed, they counted themselves great sinners.

"Certainly," said Bors, "I think that if God had loved them, we would not have had the power to kill them like this. But they have done so much against Our Lord that He would not allow them to reign any longer."

"Do not say so," said Galahad, "for if they did wrong against God, the vengeance is not ours, but His who has power over it."

Then there came out of a chamber a good man who was a priest, and he carried the Body of Our Lord in a cup. And when he saw the men lying dead in the hall he was utterly dismayed; and Galahad took off his helm and knelt down, and so did his two companions.

"Sir," they said, "have no fear of us, for we are of King Arthur's court."

Then the good man asked how they had been killed so suddenly, and they told him.

"Truly," said the good man, "if you could live as long as the world lasts, you could never have done so great a work of charity as this."

"Sir," said Galahad, "I am very sorry for it, since they were christened men."

"No, do not be sorry," he said, "for they were not christened, and I will tell you what I know of this castle. Not more than a year ago, the lord here was Earl Hernox, and he had three sons, good knights of arms, and a daughter, the fairest gentlewoman that men knew. And those three knights loved their sister so badly that they burned with desire for her, and so they lay with her against her will. And because she cried out to her father, they killed her, and took their father and put him in prison, and wounded him almost to death, but a cousin of hers rescued him. And then they did great wickedness: they killed clerks and priests, and had chapels torn down, so that Our Lord's service could not be served or said. And this very day her father sent for me to hear his confession and give him communion; but no man ever had such shame as I had this day from the three brothers. But the earl told me to bear it, for he said they would not last long, for three servants of Our Lord would destroy them; and now it is brought to an end. And by this you may know that Our Lord is not displeased with your deeds."

"Certainly," said Galahad, "if it had not pleased Our Lord, we would never have killed so many men in so short a while."

And then they brought the Earl Hernox out of prison into the middle of the hall, and he knew Galahad at once, and yet he had never seen him before except by a revelation of Our Lord.
