Chapter 9: How the three knights, with Percival's sister, came to the same forest, and of a hart and four lions, and other things

Then he began to weep very tenderly, and said, "I have waited a long time for you to come. But for God's love, hold me in your arms, so that my soul may leave my body in the arms of as good a man as you are."

"Gladly," said Galahad.

And then a voice spoke on high, so that all heard it: "Galahad, you have avenged me well on God's enemies. Now you must go to the Maimed King as soon as you can, for through you he shall receive the health he has waited for so long."

And with that the soul left the body, and Galahad had him buried as was fitting.

Then the three knights left at once, and Percival's sister with them. And so they came into a desolate forest, and there they saw in front of them a white hart, which four lions were leading. Then they agreed among themselves to follow it to find out where it was going; and so they rode after it at a great pace until they came to a valley, and near it was a hermitage where a holy man lived, and the hart and the lions went in there too. So when they saw all this they turned to the chapel, and saw the holy man in a religious habit and in the armour of Our Lord, the vestments of the mass, for he was going to sing the mass of the Holy Ghost; and so they went in and heard mass. And at the silent prayers of the mass the three of them saw the hart become a man, which amazed them, and he was set upon the altar in a rich seat; and they saw that the four lions were changed, the one into the form of a man, the next into the form of a lion, the third into an eagle, and the fourth was changed into an ox. Then they took up their seat where the hart sat, and went out through a glass window, and nothing was damaged or broken; and the knights heard a voice say, "In just this way the Son of God entered the womb of the maiden Mary, whose virginity was neither damaged nor harmed." And when they heard these words they fell down to the earth and were stunned; and with that there was a great brightness.

And when they had come to themselves again they went to the holy man and begged him to tell them the truth.

"What have you seen?" he said.

And they told him all that they had seen.

"Ah, lords," he said, "you are welcome. Now I know well that you are the good knights who shall bring the Holy Grail to its end; for you are the ones to whom Our Lord shall show great secrets. And it is right that Our Lord should be signified by a hart, for when the hart is old he grows young again in his white skin. Just so Our Lord comes again from death to life, for He lost His earthly flesh, the mortal flesh which He had taken in the womb of the blessed Virgin Mary; and for that reason Our Lord appeared as a white hart without a spot. And the four that were with Him are to be understood as the Four Evangelists, who set down in writing a part of the deeds of Jesus Christ that He did once when He was among you as an earthly man. For believe me, never before could any knight know the truth of this; for often before now Our Lord has shown Himself to good men and to good knights in the likeness of a hart, but I believe that from now on you will see it no more."

And then they rejoiced greatly, and stayed there all that day. And the next morning, when they had heard mass, they left and commended the holy man to God; and so they came to a castle and passed it by. Then a knight in armour came after them and said, "Lords, listen to what I have to say to you."
