Chapter 10: How they were asked to keep a strange custom, which they would not obey, and so they fought and slew many knights

"This gentlewoman you are leading with you, is she a maiden?"

"Sir," she said, "a maiden I am."

Then he took her horse by the bridle and said, "By the Holy Cross, you shall not get away from me before you have paid the custom of this castle."

"Let her go," said Percival. "You are not wise, for a maiden is free wherever she comes."

Meanwhile some ten or twelve knights in armour came out of the castle, and with them came gentlewomen holding a dish of silver.

And then they said, "This gentlewoman must pay us the custom of this castle."

"Sir," said one knight, "every maiden who passes by here must give this dish full of blood from her right arm."

"Shame on you who brought in such customs," said Galahad. "And so God save me, I promise you this: you shall not have it from this gentlewoman while I live."

"So help me God," said Percival, "I would rather be killed."

"And so would I," said Sir Bors.

"By my faith," said the knight, "then you shall die, for you cannot hold out against us, even if you were the best knights in the world."

Then they charged at each other, and the three companions beat the ten knights, and then set their hands to their swords and beat them down and killed them. Then some sixty knights in armour came out of the castle.

"Fair lords," said the three companions, "have mercy on yourselves and do not fight with us."

"No, fair lords," said the knights of the castle, "we advise you to withdraw, for you are the best knights in the world, and so do no more, for you have done enough. We will let you go with the harm you have done, but we must have the custom."

"Truly," said Galahad, "you are wasting your words."

"Well," they said, "do you want to die?"

"We have not come to that yet," said Galahad.

Then they began to fight together, and Galahad drew his sword, the one with the strange girdles, and struck on the right hand and on the left, and killed whoever stood up to him, and did such marvels that no one who saw him thought he was an earthly man, but some unearthly prodigy. And his two companions helped him exceedingly well, and so they each kept up the engagement equally hard until it was night: then they had to break off.

Then a good knight came out and said to the three companions, "If you will come in tonight and take such lodging as there is here, you shall be very welcome. And we promise you on our lives, and as we are true knights, to leave you tomorrow in the same state as we find you, without any treachery. And as soon as you know about the custom, we dare say you will agree to it."

"For God's love," said the gentlewoman, "go in there, and do not hold back for my sake."

"Let us go," said Galahad; and so they went into the chapel. And when they had dismounted, the people there made them very welcome. Then after a while the three knights asked about the custom of the castle, and the reason for it.

"What it is," they said, "we will tell you truly."
