Chapter 11: How Sir Percival's sister bled a dish full of blood to heal a lady, and so died, and how her body was put in a ship

"There is a gentlewoman in this castle to whom we belong, and this castle is hers, and many others too. Many years ago it happened that a sickness came upon her; and when she had lain sick a long time she fell into a leprosy, and no doctor could give her any remedy. But at last an old man said that if she could have a dish full of the blood of a maiden who was a pure virgin in will and in deed, and a king's daughter, that blood would be her health, if she were anointed with it; and that is why this custom was made."

"Now, fair knights," said Percival's sister, "I can see well that this gentlewoman is as good as dead."

"Truly," said Galahad, "if you bleed so much you may die."

"Truly," she said, "if I die to heal her I shall win great honour and my soul's health, and honour for my family; and one harm is better than two. And so there shall be no more fighting, but tomorrow I shall pay you the custom of this castle."

And then there was great joy, more than there had been before, for otherwise there would have been mortal war in the morning; and she would have it no other way, whether they liked it or not.

That night the three companions were given the best of everything; and in the morning they heard mass, and Sir Percival's sister told them to bring out the sick lady. So she was brought, and she was very ill.

Then Percival's sister said, "Who will let my blood?"

So someone came forward and opened her vein, and she bled so much that the dish was full. Then she lifted up her hand and crossed herself; and then she said to the lady, "Madam, I have come to my death to make you whole. For God's love, pray for me."

With that she fell into a faint. Then Galahad and his two companions leapt up to her, and lifted her up and stopped the bleeding, but she had bled so much that she could not live.

Then she said, when she had come to, "Fair brother Percival, I am dying for the healing of this lady, so I ask you not to bury me in this country, but as soon as I am dead put me in a boat at the nearest harbour, and let me go wherever chance will take me. And as soon as you three come to the City of Sarras, to achieve the Holy Grail there, you shall find me arrived beneath a tower, and bury me there in the holy place; for I tell you this much, Galahad shall be buried there, and you too, in the same place."

Then Percival understood these words, and promised it to her, weeping.

And then a voice said, "Lords and companions, tomorrow at the hour of prime you three shall part, each from the others, until the adventure brings you to the Maimed King."

Then she asked for her Saviour in the sacrament; and as soon as she had received it the soul left the body. And that same day the lady was healed, when she was anointed with the blood. Then Sir Percival wrote a letter telling all the ways she had helped them in strange adventures, and put it in her right hand, and so laid her in a barge, and covered it with black silk; and so the wind rose, and drove the barge away from the land, and all the knights watched it until it was out of their sight. Then they all went back towards the castle, and at once there came a sudden storm, with thunder, lightning and rain, as if the whole earth would have broken apart. And half the castle was turned upside down. It was past evensong before the storm stopped.

Then they saw in front of them a knight in armour, badly wounded in the body and in the head, who said, "O God, help me, for now is my need!"

After this knight came another knight and a dwarf, who shouted to him from far off, "Stand! You can't escape!"

Then the wounded knight held up his hands to God, praying that he should not die in such distress.

"Truly," said Galahad, "I will help him, for the sake of Him he is calling on."

"Sir," said Bors, "I will do it, for it is not a task for you, since he is only one knight."

"Sir," said Galahad, "I grant it."

So Sir Bors took his horse, and commended himself to God, and rode after them to rescue the wounded knight. Now we turn to the two companions.
