Chapter 13: How Sir Lancelot boarded the ship where Sir Percival's sister lay dead, and how he met Sir Galahad, his son

Now the story says that when Lancelot had come to the water of Mortoise, as was told before, he was in great peril, and so he lay down and slept, and accepted whatever adventure God would send him. So when he was asleep a vision came to him and said, "Lancelot, get up and take your armour, and go aboard the first ship you find."

And when he heard these words he leapt up and saw a great brightness all around him. And then he lifted up his hand and crossed himself, and so took his arms and made himself ready; and so by chance he came to a shore, and found a ship that had neither sail nor oar. And as soon as he was inside the ship he felt the greatest sweetness he had ever felt, and he was filled with everything he could think of or desire.

Then he said, "Fair sweet Father, Jesus Christ, I do not know what joy I am in, for this joy surpasses all the earthly joys I was ever in."

And so in this joy he lay down on the deck of the ship, and slept until day. And when he woke he found there a fair bed, and lying in it a gentlewoman, dead, who was Sir Percival's sister. And as Lancelot looked her over carefully, he noticed a letter in her right hand, which he read, and which told him all the adventures that you have heard before, and what family she came from. So Sir Lancelot stayed with this gentlewoman a month and more. If you ask how he lived: He who fed the people of Israel with manna in the desert, so was he fed; for every day, when he had said his prayers, he was sustained by the grace of the Holy Ghost.

So one night he went to amuse himself by the waterside, for he was somewhat weary of the ship. And then he listened and heard a horse coming, and someone riding on it. And when it came near, it seemed to be a knight. And so Lancelot let him pass, and the knight went to where the ship was; and there he dismounted, and took off the saddle and the bridle and sent the horse away, and went into the ship.

And then Lancelot turned to him and said, "You are welcome."

And he answered and greeted him in return, and asked him, "What is your name? For my heart goes out to you greatly."

"Truly," he said, "my name is Lancelot du Lake."

"Sir," said he, "then you are welcome, for you were the one who began me in this world."

"Ah," said Lancelot, "are you Galahad?"

"Yes, truly," he said; and so he knelt down and asked for his blessing, and afterwards took off his helmet and kissed him.

And there was great joy between them, for no tongue can tell the joy they had in each other, and many a loving word was spoken between them, as is natural between kin, which there is no need to repeat here. And there each told the other of the adventures and marvels that had befallen them on their many journeys since they left the court.

As soon as Galahad saw the gentlewoman dead in the bed, he knew her well enough, and spoke of her with great honour, saying she was the best maiden living, and that her death was a great pity. But when Lancelot heard how the marvellous sword had been won, and who made it, and all the marvels told before, he begged Galahad, his son, to show him the sword, and so he did; and at once Lancelot kissed the pommel, and the hilt, and the scabbard.

"Truly," said Lancelot, "never before did I know of such high adventures, so marvellous and strange."

So Lancelot and Galahad stayed in that ship half a year, and served God day and night with all their strength; and often they landed on islands far from people, where nothing came but wild beasts, and there they found many strange and perilous adventures, which they brought to an end. But because those adventures were with wild beasts, and not in the quest of the Holy Grail, the tale makes no mention of them here, for it would take too long to tell of all the adventures that befell them.
