Chapter 14: How a knight brought Sir Galahad a horse, and told him to come away from his father, Sir Lancelot

So afterwards, on a Monday, it happened that they landed at the edge of a forest, in front of a cross. And then they saw a knight armed all in white, richly mounted, leading a white horse in his right hand. And so he came to the ship, and greeted the two knights in the name of the High Lord, and said, "Galahad, sir, you have been with your father long enough. Come out of the ship, and leap up on this horse, and go where the adventures shall lead you in the quest of the Holy Grail."

Then Galahad went to his father and kissed him tenderly, and said, "Fair sweet father, I do not know when I shall see you again, until I see the body of Jesus Christ."

"I beg you," said Lancelot, "pray to the High Father that He keep me in His service."

And so Galahad took his horse, and then they heard a voice that said, "Take care to do well, for the one of you shall never see the other again before the dreadful Day of Judgement."

"Now, son Galahad," said Lancelot, "since we must part and never see each other again, I pray to the High Father to preserve both you and me."

"Sir," said Galahad, "no prayer avails as much as yours."

And with that Galahad rode into the forest.

And the wind rose, and drove Lancelot for more than a month across the sea, and he slept but little, but prayed to God that he might see some sign of the Holy Grail. So it happened one night, at midnight, that he arrived in front of a castle, on its back side, a rich and fair one, and there was a back gate open towards the sea. It stood open without any guard, except that two lions guarded the entrance; and the moon shone clear.

At once Sir Lancelot heard a voice that said, "Lancelot, go out of this ship and enter the castle, where you shall see a great part of your desire."

Then he ran to his arms, and armed himself, and so went to the gate and saw the lions. Then he set his hand to his sword and drew it. Then suddenly a dwarf came and struck him on the arm so hard that the sword fell out of his hand.

Then he heard a voice say, "O man of evil faith and poor belief, why do you trust more in your armour than in your Maker? For He could help you more than your armour, He in whose service you are set."

Then Lancelot said, "Fair Father Jesus Christ, I thank You for Your great mercy, that You rebuke me for my misdeed. Now I see well that You hold me for Your servant."

Then he took up his sword again and put it back in its sheath, and made the sign of the cross on his forehead, and came to the lions, and they made as if to do him harm. Nevertheless he passed by them without hurt, and went into the castle, to the keep, and there everyone was asleep. Then Lancelot went in, armed as he was, for he found no gate or door that was not open. And at last he found a room whose door was shut, and he set his hand to it to open it, but he could not.
