Chapter 15: How Sir Lancelot stood before the door of the chamber where the Holy Grail was

Then he strained hard to open the door. Then he listened and heard a voice singing so sweetly that it seemed no earthly thing; and he thought the voice said, "Joy and honour be to the Father of Heaven."

Then Lancelot knelt down before the room, for he knew well that the Holy Grail was inside that room.

Then he said, "Fair sweet Father, Jesus Christ, if ever I did anything that pleased You, Lord, for Your pity do not scorn me for the sins I have done in the past, and show me something of what I am seeking."

And with that he saw the door of the room open, and out of it came a great brightness, so that the house was as bright as if all the torches in the world had been there.

So he came to the door of the room, and would have gone in. And at once a voice said to him, "Flee, Lancelot, and do not go in, for you ought not to do it; and if you go in, you shall regret it."

Then he drew back, very downcast. Then he looked up into the middle of the room, and saw a table of silver, and the Holy Vessel, covered with red samite, and many angels around it, of whom one held a burning candle of wax, and another held a cross and the ornaments of an altar. And before the Holy Vessel he saw a holy man dressed as a priest. And it seemed that he was at the consecration of the mass. And it seemed to Lancelot that above the priest's hands there were three men, of whom two put the youngest, in likeness, between the priest's hands; and so the priest lifted it up very high, and it seemed that he was showing it to the people. And then Lancelot marvelled not a little, for he thought the priest was so heavily weighed down by the figure that it seemed to him he would fall to the earth.

And when he saw no one near who would help him, then he came to the door at a great pace, and said, "Fair Father Jesus Christ, do not count it as a sin if I help the good man, who has great need of help."

At once he went into the room, and came towards the table of silver; and when he came near he felt a breath which he thought was mingled with fire, and it struck him so hard in the face that he thought it burned his face. And with that he fell to the earth, and had no power to get up, like a man so overcome that he had lost the power of his body, and his hearing, and his sight. Then he felt many hands around him, which picked him up and carried him out of the door of the room, without his coming out of his faint at all, and left him there, seeming dead to everyone.

So the next morning, when it was broad day, the people within got up, and found Lancelot lying before the door of the room. They all marvelled at how he had got in, and so they looked him over, and felt his pulse to find out whether there was any life in him; and so they found life in him, but he could not stand or stir any limb he had. And so they took him by every part of his body, and carried him into a room, and laid him in a rich bed, far from everyone; and so he lay four days.

Then one said he was alive, and another said no.

"In the name of God," said an old man, "I tell you truly, he is not dead, but as full of life as the mightiest of you all. And so I advise you that he be well cared for until God sends him life again."
