Chapter 16: How Sir Lancelot lay like a dead man for twenty-four days and as many nights, and several other matters

In this way they cared for Lancelot twenty-four days and as many nights, and all that time he lay still as a dead man; and on the twenty-fifth day, after midday, it happened that he opened his eyes. And when he saw people he grieved greatly, and said, "Why have you woken me? For I was more at ease than I am now. O Jesus Christ, who could be so blessed as to see openly Your great marvels of secrecy, there where no sinner may be!"

"What have you seen?" said those around him.

"I have seen," he said, "marvels so great that no tongue can tell them, and more than any heart can think. And if my son had not been here before me, I would have seen much more."

Then they told him how he had lain there twenty-four days and nights. Then he thought it was punishment for the twenty-four years he had been a sinner, and that for this Our Lord had put him to penance for twenty-four days and nights. Then Sir Lancelot looked in front of him, and saw the hair shirt he had worn for nearly a year, and he was very sorry that he had broken the promise he had vowed to the hermit.

Then they asked how it was with him.

"Truly," he said, "I am whole in body, thanks be to Our Lord. And so, sirs, for God's love tell me where I am."

Then they all said that he was in the castle of Carbonek.

With that a gentlewoman came and brought him a shirt of fine linen cloth, but he did not change into it there, but took the hair shirt back to him again.

"Sir," they said, "the quest of the Holy Grail is achieved now, for you; you shall never see any more of the Holy Grail than you have seen."

"Now I thank God," said Lancelot, "for His great mercy in what I have seen, for it is enough for me. For as I believe, no man in this world has lived better than I have done, to achieve what I have achieved."

And with that he took the hair shirt and put it on, and over it he put a linen shirt, and after that a robe of scarlet, fresh and new. And when he was dressed like this they all marvelled, for they knew him, that he was Lancelot, the good knight.

And then they all said, "O my lord Sir Lancelot, is it you?"

And he said, "Truly, I am he."

Then word came to King Pelles that the knight who had lain so long as if dead was Sir Lancelot. Then the king was very glad, and went to see him. And when Lancelot saw him coming he went to meet him, and there the king made him very welcome. And there the king told him the news that his fair daughter was dead.

Then Lancelot was very sad about it, and said, "Sir, I am sorry for the death of your daughter, for she was a very fair lady, fresh and young. And I know well that she bore the best knight who is now on the earth, or who ever was since God was born."

So the king kept him there four days, and on the next day he took his leave of King Pelles and of all the company, and thanked them for their great trouble.

Just as they sat at their dinner in the great hall, it so happened that the Holy Grail had filled the table with every kind of food that any heart could think of. And as they sat there they saw all the doors and the windows of the place shut without anyone's hand, at which they were all dismayed, and no one knew what to do.

And then it happened suddenly that a knight came to the main door and knocked, and shouted, "Open the door!"

But they would not. And still he shouted, "Open!" But they would not. And at last it annoyed them so much that the king himself got up and came to a window, there where the knight was calling.

Then he said, "Sir knight, you shall not come in at this time, while the Holy Grail is here, and so go elsewhere. For truly you are none of the knights of the quest, but one of those who have served the Fiend and left the service of Our Lord."

And the knight was exceedingly angry at the king's words.

"Sir knight," said the king, "since you are so eager to come in, tell me what country you are from."

"Sir," he said, "I am from the realm of Logres, and my name is Ector de Maris, and I am brother to my lord, Sir Lancelot."

"In the name of God," said the king, "I am sorry for what I have said, for your brother is here inside."

And when Ector de Maris understood that his brother was there, for he was the man in the world he most feared and loved, he said, "Ah God, now my sorrow and shame are doubled. The holy man on the hill spoke very truly to Gawain and to me about our dreams."

Then he rode out of the court as fast as his horse could go, and so on through the castle.
