Chapter 17: How Sir Lancelot returned towards Logres, and of other adventures he saw on the way

Then King Pelles came to Sir Lancelot and told him news of his brother, at which he was so sorry that he did not know what to do. So Sir Lancelot departed, and took his arms, and said he would go and see the realm of Logres, "which I have not seen in twelve months." And with that he commended the king to God, and so rode through many realms. And at last he came to a white abbey, and there they gave him a warm welcome that night; and in the morning he rose and heard mass. And before an altar he found a rich tomb, which was newly made; and then he looked closely, and saw that the sides were written in gold, which said: "Here lies King Bagdemagus of Gore, whom King Arthur's nephew killed"; and it named him, Sir Gawain. Then he was not a little sorry, for Lancelot loved him much more than any other, and if it had been anyone other than Gawain, he would not have escaped from death to life; and he said to himself, "Ah, Lord God, this is a great blow to King Arthur's court, the loss of such a man." And then he departed and came to the abbey where Galahad did the adventure of the tombs, and won the white shield with the red cross; and there he was given a warm welcome all that night.

And in the morning he turned towards Camelot, where he found King Arthur and the queen. But many of the knights of the Round Table were killed and destroyed, more than half. And so three had come home, Ector, Gawain and Lionel, and many others that need not be listed. And all the court was exceedingly glad of Sir Lancelot, and the king asked him much news of his son Galahad. And there Lancelot told the king of the adventures that had befallen him since he departed. And he also told him of the adventures of Galahad, Percival and Bors, which he knew from the letter of the dead damsel, and as Galahad had told him.

"Now would to God," said the king, "that they were all three here."

"That shall never be," said Lancelot, "for two of them you shall never see again, but one of them shall come back."

Now we leave this story and speak of Galahad.
