Chapter 18: How Galahad came to King Mordrains, and of other matters and adventures

Now, the story says, Galahad rode many days' journeys in vain. And at last he came to the abbey where King Mordrains was, and when he heard that, he thought he would stay to see him. And in the morning, when he had heard mass, Galahad came to King Mordrains, and at once the king saw him, who had lain blind for a long time. And then he turned towards him, and said, "Galahad, servant of Jesus Christ, whose coming I have waited for so long, now embrace me and let me rest on your breast, so that I may rest between your arms. For you are a pure virgin above all knights, like the flower of the lily, in which virginity is signified, and you are the rose, which is the flower of all good virtues, and in colour like fire. For the fire of the Holy Ghost has taken such hold in you that my flesh, which was all dead with old age, has become young again."

When Galahad heard his words, he embraced him, all his body. Then the king said, "Fair Lord Jesus Christ, now I have my wish. Now I ask You, at this point where I am, to come and visit me." And at once Our Lord heard his prayer: with that the soul departed from the body.

And then Galahad buried him as a king ought to be buried, and so departed, and so came into a perilous forest where he found the spring that boils with great waves, as the tale told before. And as soon as Galahad set his hand to it, it stopped, so that it burned no more, and the heat went away. For its burning was a sign of lechery, which was much practised at that time. But that heat could not withstand his pure virginity. And this was taken in that country for a miracle. And so ever after it was called Galahad's spring.

Then by chance he came into the country of Gore, and into the abbey where Lancelot had been before, and found the tomb of King Bagdemagus, but he was the founder of it, Joseph of Arimathea's son; and the tomb of Simeon, where Lancelot had failed. Then he looked into a vault under the church, and there he saw a tomb that burned most marvellously. Then he asked the brothers what it was.

"Sir," they said, "a marvellous adventure that can never be brought to an end except by him who surpasses in goodness and in knighthood all those of the Round Table."

"I wish," said Galahad, "that you would lead me to it."

"Gladly," they said, and so they led him to a cave. And he went down the steps, and came near the tomb. And then the flames died, and the fire stopped, which for many a day had been great. Then a voice came that said, "You owe great thanks to Our Lord, who has given you a good hour, so that you may draw souls out of earthly pain, and put them into the joys of paradise. I am of your kindred, and I have dwelt in this heat for three hundred and fifty-four years to be purged of the sin that I committed against Joseph of Arimathea."

Then Galahad took the body in his arms and carried it into the church. And that night Galahad lay in the abbey; and in the morning he had a service said for him, and buried him before the high altar.
