Chapter 19: How Sir Percival and Sir Bors met Sir Galahad, and how they came to the castle of Carbonek, and other matters

So he departed from there, and commended the brothers to God; and so he rode for five days until he came to the Maimed King. And all those five days Percival followed him, asking where he had been; and so someone told him how the adventures of Logres had been achieved. So one day it happened that they came out of a great forest, and there they came across Sir Bors, who was riding alone. There is no need to tell whether they were glad; and he greeted them, and they wished him honour and good fortune, and each told the other his news.

Then Bors said, "For more than a year and a half I have not slept ten nights where men live, but only in wild forests and in mountains; but God was always my comfort."

Then they rode a long while until they came to the castle of Carbonek. And when they had entered the castle, King Pelles knew them; then there was great joy, for they knew well by their coming that they had fulfilled the quest of the Holy Grail. Then Eliazar, King Pelles' son, brought before them the broken sword with which Joseph was stabbed through the thigh. Then Bors set his hand to it, to see whether he could join it together again; but it would not be. Then he handed it to Percival, but he had no more power over it than Bors.

"Now you have it," said Percival to Galahad, "for if it is ever achieved by any man of flesh and blood, you must do it."

And then he took the pieces and set them together, and it seemed that they had never been broken, and it was as sound as when it was first forged. And when those in the castle saw that the adventure of the sword was achieved, they gave the sword to Bors, for it could not be better placed; for he was a good knight and a worthy man.

And a little before evening the sword rose up, great and marvellous, and was full of such great heat that many men fell down for fear. And at once a voice came down among them, and said, "Let those who ought not to sit at the table of Jesus Christ rise, for now true knights shall be fed."

So they went away from there, all except King Pelles and Eliazar his son, who were holy men, and a maid who was his niece; and so these three companions and those three were there, and no more. At once they saw knights come in at the hall door, all armed, and they took off their helmets and their armour, and said to Galahad, "Sir, we have hurried hard to be with you at this table, where the holy food shall be shared out."

Then he said, "You are welcome, but where are you from?"

So three of them said they were from Gaul, and another three said they were from Ireland, and the other three said they were from Denmark. And as they sat there, a wooden bed came out of a chamber, carried by four gentlewomen; and in the bed lay a good man, sick, with a crown of gold on his head; and there in the middle of the room they set him down, and went their way again. Then he lifted up his head, and said, "Galahad, knight, you are welcome, for I have greatly longed for your coming, for I have been a long time in such pain and in such anguish. But now I trust in God that the time has come when my pain shall be eased, so that I shall pass out of this world, as was promised me long ago."

With that a voice said, "There are two among you who are not in the quest of the Holy Grail, and therefore leave."
