Chapter 20: How Galahad and his companions were fed by the Holy Grail, and how Our Lord appeared to them, and other things

Then King Pelles and his son departed. And with that it seemed to them that there came a man, and four angels from heaven, a man dressed like a bishop, with a cross in his hand; and these four angels carried him in a chair, and set him down before the table of silver on which the Holy Grail stood. And it seemed that he had letters in the middle of his forehead, which said: "See here Joseph, the first bishop of Christendom, the same whom Our Lord succoured in the city of Sarras in the spiritual place." Then the knights marvelled, for that bishop had been dead more than three hundred years before.

"O knights," he said, "do not marvel, for I was once an earthly man."

With that they heard the chamber door open, and there they saw angels; and two carried candles of wax, and the third a towel, and the fourth a spear which bled marvellously, so that three drops fell into a box which he held in his other hand. And they set the candles on the table, and the third set the towel on the vessel, and the fourth set the holy spear straight upright on the vessel. And then the bishop made as though he were going to the consecration of the mass. And then he took a wafer which was made in the likeness of bread. And at the lifting up there came a figure in the likeness of a child, and the face was as red and as bright as any fire, and he struck himself into the bread, so that they all saw that the bread was formed of a man of flesh; and then he put it into the Holy Vessel again, and then he did all that belonged to a priest to do at a mass. And then he went to Galahad and kissed him, and told him to go and kiss his companions: and so he did at once.

"Now," he said, "servants of Jesus Christ, you shall be fed before this table with sweet food that knights never tasted."

And when he had spoken, he vanished away. And they sat down at the table in great fear, and said their prayers.

Then they looked and saw a man come out of the Holy Vessel, who had all the signs of the Passion of Jesus Christ, bleeding openly, and he said, "My knights, and my servants, and my true children, who have come out of mortal life into spiritual life, I will no longer hide myself from you, but you shall now see a part of my secrets and of my hidden things. Now hold and receive the high food that you have so much desired."

Then he himself took the Holy Vessel and came to Galahad; and he knelt down, and there he received his Saviour, and after him all his companions received it; and they thought it so sweet that it was marvellous to tell. Then he said to Galahad, "Son, do you know what I hold between my hands?"

"No," said Galahad, "unless you will tell me."

"This is," he said, "the holy dish in which I ate the lamb on Maundy Thursday. And now you have seen what you most desired to see, but you have not yet seen it as openly as you shall see it in the city of Sarras in the spiritual place. Therefore you must go from here and carry this Holy Vessel with you; for this night it shall depart from the realm of Logres, so that it shall never be seen here again. And do you know why? Because he is not served nor worshipped as is his due by the people of this land, for they have turned to evil living; therefore I shall strip them of the honour that I have done them. And therefore you three go tomorrow to the sea, where you shall find your ship ready, and take with you the sword with the strange girdles, and no one more with you but Sir Percival and Sir Bors. Also I wish you to take with you some of the blood of this spear, to anoint the Maimed King, both his legs and all his body, and he shall have his health."

"Sir," said Galahad, "why shall these other companions not go with us?"

"For this reason: just as I sent my apostles apart, one here and another there, so I wish you to go apart; and two of you shall die in my service, but one of you shall come back and tell the news."

Then he gave them his blessing and vanished away.
