Chapter 21: How Galahad anointed the Maimed King with the blood of the spear, and of other adventures

And Galahad went at once to the spear which lay on the table, and touched the blood with his fingers, and came afterwards to the Maimed King and anointed his legs.

And with that he dressed himself at once, and leapt to his feet out of his bed a whole man, and thanked Our Lord that He had healed him. And that was not for the world's sake, for he at once gave himself to a house of religion of white monks, and was a most holy man.

That same night, about midnight, a voice came among them which said, "My sons and not my chief sons, my friends and not my warriors, go from here to where you hope to do best, and as I told you."

"Ah, thanks be to You, Lord, that You deign to call us, Your sinners. Now we may well prove that we have not lost our labour."

And at once, in all haste, they took their armour and departed.

But as for the three knights of Gaul, one of them was called Claudine, King Claudas' son, and the other two were men of high birth. Then Galahad asked each of them, if they came to King Arthur's court, to "greet my lord Sir Lancelot, my father, and all the fellowship of the Round Table"; and he asked them, if they came to those parts, not to forget it.

Right so Galahad departed, and Percival and Bors with him; and so they rode three days, and then they came to a shore, and found the ship that the tale spoke of before. And when they came on board, they found in the middle of it the table of silver which they had left with the Maimed King, and the Holy Grail, which was covered with red samite.

Then they were glad to have such things in their company; and so they entered and made great reverence to it; and Galahad prayed a long time to Our Lord that, at whatever time he asked, he should pass out of this world.

He prayed so much that at last a voice said to him, "Galahad, you shall have your request; and when you ask for the death of your body you shall have it, and then you shall find the life of the soul."

Percival heard this, and begged him, by the fellowship that was between them, to tell him why he asked for such things.

"That I will tell you," said Galahad. "The other day, when we saw a part of the adventures of the Holy Grail, I was in such joy of heart that I believe no earthly man was ever so joyful. And therefore I know well that when my body is dead, my soul shall be in great joy, to see the blessed Trinity every day, and the majesty of Our Lord Jesus Christ."

They were in the ship so long that they said to Galahad, "Sir, you ought to lie in this bed, for so the inscription says." And so he lay down and slept a long while; and when he woke he looked before him and saw the city of Sarras. And as they were about to land, they saw the ship in which Percival had put his sister.

"Truly," said Percival, "in the name of God, my sister has kept her promise to us well."

Then they took the table of silver out of the ship, and Galahad gave it to Percival and to Bors to go in front, and Galahad came behind. And right so they went to the city, and at the gate of the city they saw a crooked old man. Then Galahad called him and told him to help carry this heavy thing.

"Truly," said the old man, "it is ten years since I could walk without crutches."

"Never mind that," said Galahad, "but get up and show your good will."

And so he tried, and found himself as whole as he ever was. Then he ran to the table, and took one end of it opposite Galahad. And at once a great stir arose in the city, that a cripple had been made whole by marvellous knights who had entered the city.

Then soon after, the three knights went to the water, and brought Percival's sister up into the palace, and buried her as richly as a king's daughter ought to be buried. And when the king of the city, who was called Estorause, saw the companions, he asked them where they were from, and what it was that they had brought on the table of silver. And they told him the truth of the Holy Grail, and the power which God had sent there. Then the king, who was a tyrant, and came of a line of pagans, took them and put them in prison in a deep pit.
