Chapter 22: How they were fed by the Holy Grail while they were in prison, and how Galahad was made king

But as soon as they were there, Our Lord sent them the Holy Grail, by whose grace they were always filled while they were in prison.

So at the year's end it happened that this King Estorause lay sick, and felt that he would die. Then he sent for the three knights, and they came before him; and he begged their pardon for what he had done to them, and they forgave him graciously; and he died at once. When the king was dead, all the city was dismayed, and did not know who should be their king. Right as they were in council, a voice came among them, and told them to choose the youngest of those three knights to be their king: "For he shall maintain you and all yours well." So they made Galahad king with the full assent of the holy city, and otherwise they would have killed him. And when he had come to look over the land, he had a chest of gold and of precious stones made above the table of silver, which covered the Holy Vessel. And every day, early, the three companions would come before it and say their prayers.

Now at the year's end, on the very same day that Galahad had first worn the crown of gold, he rose early, and his companions with him, and came to the palace, and saw before them the Holy Vessel, and a man kneeling on his knees in the likeness of a bishop, who had about him a great fellowship of angels, as if it had been Jesus Christ himself; and then he rose and began a mass of Our Lady. And when he came to the sacrament of the mass, and had done, he at once called Galahad, and said to him, "Come forward, servant of Jesus Christ, and you shall see what you have so much desired to see."

And then Galahad began to tremble very hard, as his mortal flesh began to behold the spiritual things. Then he held up his hands towards heaven and said, "Lord, I thank You, for now I see what has been my desire for many a day. Now, blessed Lord, I would not live any longer, if it might please You, Lord."

And with that the good man took Our Lord's body between his hands, and offered it to Galahad, and he received it most gladly and meekly.

"Now do you know who I am?" said the good man.

"No," said Galahad.

"I am Joseph of Arimathea, whom Our Lord has sent here to you to keep you company. And do you know why He has sent me rather than any other? Because you have resembled me in two things: in that you have seen the marvels of the Holy Grail, and in that you have been a pure virgin, as I have been and am."

And when he had said these words, Galahad went to Percival and kissed him, and commended him to God; and so he went to Sir Bors and kissed him, and commended him to God, and said, "Fair lord, greet my lord Sir Lancelot, my father, for me, and as soon as you see him, tell him to remember this unstable world."

And with that he knelt down before the table and said his prayers, and then suddenly his soul departed to Jesus Christ, and a great multitude of angels carried his soul up to heaven, so that the two companions could plainly see it. The two companions also saw a hand come from heaven, but they did not see the body. And then it came straight to the Vessel, and took it and the spear, and so carried it up to heaven. Since then there was never any man so bold as to say that he had seen the Holy Grail.
