Chapter 23: Of the sorrow Percival and Bors felt when Galahad was dead, and of how Percival died, and other matters

When Percival and Bors saw Galahad dead, they grieved as much as ever two men did. And if they had not been good men, they might easily have fallen into despair. And the people of the country and of the city were deeply downcast. And then he was buried; and as soon as he was buried, Sir Percival gave himself to a hermitage outside the city, and took the habit of religion. And Bors was always with him, but he never changed out of his secular clothes, because he intended to go back to the realm of Logres. So Sir Percival lived a year and two months in the hermitage, a most holy life, and then passed out of this world; and Bors had him buried beside his sister and beside Galahad in the spiritual place.

When Bors saw that he was in countries as far away as the parts of Babylon, he departed from Sarras, and armed himself and came to the sea, and went on board a ship; and so by good fortune he came into the realm of Logres; and he rode so fast that he came to Camelot, where the king was. And then great joy was made of him in the court, for they had all thought he was dead, since he had been out of the country so long. And when they had eaten, the king had great scholars come before him, so that they could write a chronicle of the high adventures of the good knights. When Bors had told him of the adventures of the Holy Grail, such as had befallen him and his three companions, that is, Lancelot, Percival, Galahad and himself, then Lancelot told the adventures of the Holy Grail that he had seen. All this was written in great books, and stored away in chests at Salisbury.

And at once Sir Bors said to Sir Lancelot, "Galahad, your own son, sent you his greetings by me, and after you King Arthur and all the court, and so did Sir Percival; for I buried them with my own hands in the city of Sarras. Also, Sir Lancelot, Galahad begged you to remember this unstable world, as you promised him when you were together for more than half a year."

"This is true," said Lancelot. "Now I trust to God that his prayer shall help me."

Then Lancelot took Sir Bors in his arms, and said, "Noble cousin, you are most welcome to me, and in all that I can ever do for you and for yours, you shall find my poor body ready at all times, while the spirit is in it; and that I promise you faithfully, and never to fail. And believe me, noble cousin, Sir Bors, you and I will never part from each other while our lives last."

"Sir," he said, "I will do as you will."

Thus ends the history of the Holy Grail, which was briefly drawn out of French into English, and which is a story chronicled as one of the truest and the holiest that is in this world, and which is the seventeenth book.

And here follows the eighteenth book.
