Chapter 1: Of the joy King Arthur and the queen had at the achieving of the Holy Grail, and how Lancelot fell back into his old love

So after the quest of the Holy Grail was fulfilled, and all the knights who were left alive had come back to the Round Table, as the book of the Holy Grail tells, then there was great joy in the court. And above all King Arthur and Queen Guinevere rejoiced greatly over the remnant who had come home, and the king and the queen were exceedingly glad of Sir Lancelot and of Sir Bors, for they had been away an exceedingly long time on the quest of the Holy Grail.

Then, as the book says, Sir Lancelot began to go to Queen Guinevere again, and forgot the promise and the perfection that he had made on the quest. For, as the book says, if Sir Lancelot had not been so set inwardly on the queen, in his private thoughts and in his mind, as he seemed outwardly to be set on God, no knight would have surpassed him in the quest of the Holy Grail. But his thoughts were always secretly on the queen, and so they loved each other more hotly than they had done before, and had so many secret meetings together that many in the court spoke of it, and above all Sir Agravain, Sir Gawain's brother, for he was always loose-tongued.

So it happened that Sir Lancelot had many ladies and damsels coming to him daily, begging him to be their champion, and in all such matters of right Sir Lancelot applied himself daily to do the work for the pleasure of Our Lord Jesus Christ. And as much as ever he could he kept himself away from the company and fellowship of Queen Guinevere, to avoid scandal and rumour; and because of that the queen grew angry with Sir Lancelot. And one day she called Sir Lancelot to her chamber, and said this: "Sir Lancelot, I see and feel every day that your love is beginning to cool, for you take no joy in being in my presence, but you are always away from this court, and you take up quarrels and causes for ladies and gentlewomen nowadays more than you ever used to before."

"Ah, madam," said Lancelot, "in this you must hold me excused, for several reasons. One is that I have only lately come from the quest of the Holy Grail; and I thank God for His great mercy, and never for my own deserving, that on that quest of mine I saw as much as any sinful man ever saw, and so I was told. And if I had not had my private thoughts of returning to your love again, as I do, I would have seen as great mysteries as ever my son Galahad saw, or Percival, or Sir Bors; and so, madam, I have only lately come from that quest. Believe me, madam, the high service in which I did my diligent labour cannot yet be lightly forgotten. Also, madam, believe me, there are many men who speak of our love in this court, and watch you and me closely, such as Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred. And madam, believe me, I fear them more for your sake than for any fear I have of them for myself, for I may manage to escape and get myself clear in a great need, where you must stay and bear everything that will be said to you. And then if you fall into any distress through wilful folly, there is no other remedy or help but through me and my kin. And believe me, madam, the boldness of you and me will bring us to great shame and scandal, and I would be loath to see you dishonoured. And that is the reason I take it upon myself to do more for damsels and maidens than I ever did before: so that men should understand that my joy and my delight and my pleasure is to fight for damsels and maidens."
