Chapter 2: How the queen commanded Sir Lancelot to leave the court, and of the sorrow Lancelot felt

All this while the queen stood still and let Sir Lancelot say what he wished. And when he had said it all she burst into tears, and so she sobbed and wept a long while. And when she could speak she said, "Lancelot, now I understand very well that you are a false, faithless knight and a common lecher, and that you love and keep other ladies, and have nothing but disdain and scorn for me. For believe me," she said, "now I understand your falseness, and so I shall never love you again. And don't you ever dare come into my sight. And here and now I banish you from this court, so that you never come within it; and I forbid you my company, and on pain of your head, see me no more."

At that Sir Lancelot left in great heaviness of heart, so that he could scarcely hold himself up for the grief he made.

Then he called Sir Bors, Sir Ector de Maris and Sir Lionel, and told them how the queen had forbidden him the court, and so he meant to go away into his own country.

"Fair sir," said Sir Bors de Ganis, "you shall not leave this land, if you take my advice. You must remember in what honour you are renowned, and called the noblest knight in the world; and you have many great matters in hand. And women in their haste will often do what they bitterly regret. And so, by my advice, you shall take your horse and ride to the good hermit near here beside Windsor, who was once a good knight, his name is Sir Brasias, and there you shall stay until I send you word of better news."

"Brother," said Sir Lancelot, "believe me, I am very loath to leave this realm, but the queen has forbidden me so sternly that it seems to me she will never be my good lady again as she has been."

"Never say so," said Sir Bors, "for many times before this she has been angry with you, and afterwards she was the first to regret it."

"You speak well," said Lancelot, "for now I will do as you advise, and take my horse and my armour, and ride to the hermit Sir Brasias, and there I will rest until I hear some kind of news from you. But, fair brother, I beg you, win me back the love of my lady Queen Guinevere, if you can."

"Sir," said Sir Bors, "you need not urge me in such matters, for you know well I will do what I can to please you."

And then the noble knight Sir Lancelot left suddenly, with a very heavy heart, so that no living creature knew of him, or where he had gone, except Sir Bors. So when Sir Lancelot had gone, the queen outwardly showed no sort of sorrow to any of his kin or to anyone else. But believe me, inwardly, as the book says, she grieved deeply; but she carried it off with a proud face, as though she felt nothing and feared nothing.
