Chapter 3: How at a dinner the queen gave a knight was poisoned, and Sir Mador laid the blame on the queen

And then the queen had a private dinner made in London for the knights of the Round Table. And it was all to show outwardly that she took as great joy in all the other knights of the Round Table as she did in Sir Lancelot. At that dinner she had only Sir Gawain and his brothers, that is to say Sir Agravain, Sir Gaheris, Sir Gareth and Sir Mordred. Also there were Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Blamore de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Lionel, Sir Palomides, Safere his brother, Sir La Cote Male Taile, Sir Persant, Sir Ironside, Sir Brandiles, Sir Kay the Seneschal, Sir Mador de la Porte, Sir Patrise, a knight of Ireland, Aliduk, Sir Astamore, and Sir Pinel le Savage, who was cousin to Sir Lamorak de Galis, the good knight whom Sir Gawain and his brothers killed by treachery. And so these twenty-four knights were to dine with the queen in a private place by themselves, and a great feast was made of all kinds of delicacies.

But Sir Gawain had a custom that he kept daily at dinner and at supper: he loved all kinds of fruit, and above all apples and pears. And so whoever dined or feasted Sir Gawain would usually provide good fruit for him, and so did the queen, to please Sir Gawain; she had all kinds of fruit provided for him, for Sir Gawain was an exceedingly hot-blooded knight by nature. And this Pinel hated Sir Gawain because of his kinsman Sir Lamorak de Galis; and so, out of pure envy and hate, Sir Pinel poisoned certain apples, to poison Sir Gawain. And so all went well until the end of the meal; and then by misfortune it happened that a good knight named Patrise, cousin to Sir Mador de la Porte, took a poisoned apple. And when he had eaten it he swelled up until he burst, and there Sir Patrise fell down suddenly dead among them.

Then every knight leapt up from the table, ashamed and raging with anger, nearly out of their wits. For they did not know what to say; seeing that Queen Guinevere had made the feast and dinner, they all had suspicion of her.

"My lady the queen," said Gawain, "believe me, madam, this dinner was made for me, for everyone who knows my habits knows that I love fruit, and now I see well that I came near to being killed. And so, madam, I fear you will be put to shame."

Then the queen stood still and was so badly dismayed that she did not know what to say.

"This shall not end like this," said Sir Mador de la Porte, "for here I have lost a very noble knight of my blood; and so for this shame and insult I will be avenged to the uttermost."

And there, openly, Sir Mador accused the queen of the death of his cousin Sir Patrise. Then they all stood still, so that no one would say a word against him, for they all had great suspicion of the queen, because she had had that dinner made. And the queen was so dismayed that she could do nothing else but weep so bitterly that she fell in a faint. At this noise and outcry King Arthur came to them, and when he learned of that trouble he was an exceedingly sorrowful man.
