Chapter 4: How Sir Mador accused the queen of treason, and at first no knight would fight for her

And all the while Sir Mador stood still before the king, and all the while he accused the queen of treason; for the custom at that time was that every kind of shameful killing was called treason.

"Fair lords," said King Arthur, "I am sorry for this trouble, but the case is such that I may not take part in this matter, for I must be a rightful judge; and I am sorry that I may not do battle for my wife, for as I judge it this deed never came from her. And so I suppose she shall not be wholly dishonoured, but that some good knight will put his body in danger for my queen rather than see her burned in a wrongful cause. And so, Sir Mador, do not be so hasty, for it may be that she will not be entirely without friends. And so ask for your day of battle, and she shall provide herself with some good knight who will answer you, or else it would be a great shame to me and to all my court."

"My gracious lord," said Sir Mador, "you must hold me excused, for though you are our king in that rank, you are only a knight as we are, and you are sworn to knighthood just as we are. And so I beg you not to be displeased, for there is not one of the twenty-four knights who were invited to this dinner who does not have great suspicion of the queen. What do you all say, my lords?" said Sir Mador.

Then they answered at once that they could not clear the queen; for she had made the dinner, and either it must have come from her or from her servants.

"Alas," said the queen, "I made this dinner with good intent, and never for any evil, so help me Almighty God in my right, for I never intended to do such evil deeds; and I appeal to God on that."

"My lord the king," said Sir Mador, "I ask you, as you are a righteous king, to give me a day on which I may have justice."

"Well," said the king, "I set the day fifteen days from today, when you are to be ready, armed, on horseback, in the meadow beside Westminster. And if it happens that there is any knight to meet you, then do your best, and God defend the right. And if it happens that there is no knight on that day, then my queen must be burned, and she shall be there, ready to receive her judgement."

"I am answered," said Sir Mador.

And every knight went where he pleased.

So when the king and the queen were together the king asked the queen how this had come about.

The queen answered, "So help me God, I do not know how, or in what way."

"Where is Sir Lancelot?" said King Arthur. "If he were here he would not hesitate to do battle for you."

"Sir," said the queen, "I do not know where he is, but his brother and his kinsmen think that he is not in this realm."

"I am sorry for that," said King Arthur, "for if he were here he would soon stop this strife. Then I will advise you," said the king, "to go to Sir Bors and ask him to do battle for you for Sir Lancelot's sake, and on my life he will not refuse you. For I see well," said the king, "that none of these twenty-four knights who were with you at your dinner, where Sir Patrise was killed, will do battle for you, and not one of them will speak well of you, and that will be a great scandal for you in this court."

"Alas," said the queen, "I cannot help it, but now I miss Sir Lancelot, for if he were here he would soon set my heart at ease."

"What is the matter with you," said the king, "that you cannot keep Sir Lancelot on your side? For believe me," said the king, "whoever has Sir Lancelot on his side has the man of greatest honour in the world on his side. Now go your way," said the king to the queen, "and ask Sir Bors to do battle for you for Sir Lancelot's sake."
