Chapter 5: How the queen asked Sir Bors to fight for her, and how he agreed on a condition, and how he warned Sir Lancelot of it

So the queen left the king, and sent for Sir Bors to come to her chamber. And when he had come she begged him for help.

"Madam," he said, "what would you have me do? For I may not, with my honour, take part in this matter, because I was at the same dinner, for fear that any of those knights would suspect me. Also, madam," said Sir Bors, "now you miss Sir Lancelot, for he would not have failed you either in right or in wrong, as you have well proved when you have been in danger; and now you have driven him out of this country, the man by whom you and all of us were daily honoured. And so, madam, I marvel how you dare for shame ask me to do anything for you, seeing that you have chased him out of your country, the man by whom we were upheld and honoured."

"Alas, fair knight," said the queen, "I put myself wholly in your grace, and all that has been done amiss I will put right as you advise me."

And with that she knelt down on both her knees, and begged Sir Bors to have mercy on her: "Or else I shall have a shameful death, and I never did anything to deserve it."

Just then King Arthur came, and found the queen kneeling before Sir Bors. Then Sir Bors pulled her up, and said, "Madam, you do me great dishonour."

"Ah, noble knight," said the king, "have mercy on my queen, courteous knight, for I am now certain that she is falsely accused. And so, courteous knight," said the king, "promise her to do battle for her, I beg you, for the love of Sir Lancelot."

"My lord," said Sir Bors, "you ask of me the greatest thing that any man could ask of me; and believe me, if I agree to do battle for the queen I shall anger many of my fellowship of the Round Table. But as for that," said Bors, "I will grant it, my lord: for my lord Sir Lancelot's sake, and for your sake, I will be the queen's champion on that day, unless by chance a better knight than I am comes to do battle for her."

"Will you promise me this," said the king, "on your faith?"

"Yes, sir," said Sir Bors, "in that I will not fail you, nor her either, unless a better knight than I am comes, and then he shall have the battle."

Then the king and the queen were exceedingly glad, and so they left, and thanked him heartily.

So then Sir Bors set off secretly one day, and rode to Sir Lancelot where he was with the hermit Sir Brasias, and told him all that had happened.

"Ah, Jesus," said Sir Lancelot, "this has turned out happily, just as I would have it. And so I beg you, make yourself ready to do battle, but see that you wait until you see me come, as long as you can. For I am sure Mador is a hot-tempered knight when he is inflamed, for the longer you hold him off the hastier he will be for the battle."

"Sir," said Bors, "leave him to me. Don't doubt it, you shall have all your will."

Then Sir Bors left him and came back to the court. Then it was rumoured all over the court that Sir Bors was to do battle for the queen; and because of that many knights were displeased with him, that he would take it on himself to do battle in the queen's cause; for there were only a few knights in all the court who did not think the queen was in the wrong, and that she had committed that treason.

So Sir Bors answered his fellows of the Round Table like this: "Believe me, my fair lords, it would be a shame to us all if we stood by and saw the most noble queen in the world shamed openly, considering that her lord and our lord is the man of greatest honour in the world, and the most Christian, and he has always honoured us all in all places."

Many answered him back: "As for our most noble King Arthur, we love him and honour him as well as you do, but as for Queen Guinevere, we do not love her, because she is a destroyer of good knights."

"Fair lords," said Sir Bors, "it seems to me you do not speak as you should. For never yet in all my days have I known, or heard it said, that she was ever a destroyer of any good knight. But at all times, as far as ever I could tell, she was an upholder of good knights; and she has always been generous and open-handed with her goods to all good knights, and the most bountiful lady with her gifts and her good grace that I ever saw or heard tell of. And so it would be a shame," said Sir Bors, "to all of us, toward our most noble king's wife, if we allowed her to be shamefully put to death. And believe me," said Sir Bors, "I will not allow it, for I dare say this much: the queen is not guilty of Sir Patrise's death, for she never bore him any ill will, nor any of the twenty-four knights who were at that dinner. For I dare say she invited us to dinner out of good love, and not out of any evil design, and I have no doubt that will be proved hereafter; for however the game goes, there was treason among us."

Then some said to Sir Bors, "We can well believe what you say."

And so some of them were well pleased, and some were not.
