Chapter 6: How on the day Sir Bors made ready to fight for the queen, and how, as he was about to fight, another knight took his place

The day came on fast, until it was the evening before the battle was to be. Then the queen sent for Sir Bors and asked him what he intended.

"Truly, madam," he said, "I intend just what I promised you, that is to say, I shall not fail you, unless by chance a better knight than I am comes to do battle for you; then, madam, I am released from my promise."

"Do you wish," said the queen, "that I tell my lord Arthur this?"

"Do as you please, madam."

Then the queen went to the king and told him Sir Bors's answer.

"Have no doubt about Sir Bors," said the king, "for I call him now one of the best knights in the world, and the most dependable man."

And so things went on until the morning, and the king and the queen and all the knights who were there at that time made their way to the meadow beside Westminster where the battle was to be. And so when the king had come with the queen and many knights of the Round Table, then the queen was put there in the Constable's custody, and a great fire was made around an iron stake, so that if Sir Mador de la Porte had the better of it, she would be burned. Such was the custom in those days: that neither for favour, nor for love, nor for kinship, should there be anything but righteous judgement, as much upon a king as upon a knight, and as much upon a queen as upon any other poor lady.

So in the meantime Sir Mador de la Porte came in, and swore his oath before the king that the queen had done this treason to his cousin Sir Patrise, and that he would prove his oath with his body, hand to hand, against anyone who said the contrary.

Just then Sir Bors de Ganis came in, and said that as for Queen Guinevere, she was in the right, "and I will make it good with my hands that she is not guilty of this treason that is laid on her."

"Then get ready," said Sir Mador, "and we shall prove whether you are in the right or I am."

"Sir Mador," said Sir Bors, "believe me, I know you for a good knight. Nevertheless I shall not fear you so greatly, but I trust to God I shall be able to withstand your malice. But this much I have promised my lord Arthur and my lady the queen: that I shall do battle for her in this cause to the uttermost, unless a better knight than I am comes and releases me."

"Is that all?" said Sir Mador. "Either come out and do battle with me, or else say no."

"Take your horse," said Sir Bors, "and, as I suppose, you shall not wait long before you are answered."

Then each of them went to his tent and made ready for horseback as he thought best. And at once Sir Mador came into the field with his shield on his shoulder and his spear in his hand; and so he rode around the place, calling out to Arthur, "Tell your champion to come out, if he dares."

Then Sir Bors was ashamed, and took his horse and came to the end of the lists. And then he saw, coming from a wood close by, a knight all armed, on a white horse, with a strange shield bearing strange arms. And he came riding as fast as his horse could run, and so he came to Sir Bors, and said this: "Fair knight, I beg you not to be displeased, for here a better knight than you must have this battle; and so I beg you to withdraw. For believe me, I have made a very long journey today, and this battle ought to be mine, and so I promised you when I last spoke with you; and with all my heart I thank you for your good will."

Then Sir Bors rode to King Arthur and told him how a knight had come who wanted to have the battle, to fight for the queen.

"What knight is he?" said the king.

"I do not know," said Sir Bors, "but he made an agreement with me to be here this day. Now, my lord," said Sir Bors, "here I am released."
