Chapter 7: How Sir Lancelot fought against Sir Mador for the queen, and how he overcame Sir Mador and cleared the queen

Then the king called to that knight, and asked him if he would fight for the queen.

Then he answered the king, "That is why I came here. And so, sir king," he said, "do not delay me any longer, for I may not stay. For as soon as I have finished this battle I must leave here, for I have many matters to deal with elsewhere. For believe me," said that knight, "it is a dishonour to all you knights of the Round Table, to see and know so noble a lady and so courteous a queen as Queen Guinevere is, rebuked and shamed like this among you."

Then they all marvelled what knight that might be who took the battle on himself like that. For there was not one who knew him, unless it was Sir Bors.

Then Sir Mador de la Porte said to the king, "Now let me know who it is I am to fight with."

And then they rode to the ends of the lists, and there they levelled their spears, and ran together with all their might. And Sir Mador's spear broke all to pieces, but the other's spear held, and bore Sir Mador's horse and all over backward to the earth, a great fall. But strongly and swiftly he got clear of his horse and put his shield before him, and then drew his sword, and told the other knight to dismount and do battle with him on foot. Then that knight got down from his horse nimbly, like a valiant man, and put his shield before him and drew his sword. And so they came eagerly to battle, and each gave the other many great strokes, circling and sidestepping, slashing and thrusting, and crashing together with their swords as if they were wild boars. So they fought for nearly an hour, for this Sir Mador was a strong knight, and well proved in many hard battles. But at last this knight struck Sir Mador face down upon the earth, and the knight stepped close to him to have pulled Sir Mador flat on the ground; and with that Sir Mador suddenly got up, and as he rose he struck that knight through the thick of the thighs, so that the blood ran out fiercely. And when the knight felt himself so wounded, and saw his blood, he let him get up on his feet. And then he gave him such a blow on the helm that he fell flat to the earth, and with that he strode to him to pull his helm off his head. And then Sir Mador begged that knight to spare his life, and so he yielded himself as beaten, and released the queen from his accusation.

"I will not grant you your life," said that knight, "except on condition that you freely release the queen for ever, and that no mention be made upon Sir Patrise's tomb that Queen Guinevere ever consented to that treason."

"All this shall be done," said Sir Mador. "I give up my accusation entirely, for ever."

Then the knights who were the marshals of the lists took up Sir Mador and led him to his tent, and the other knight went straight to the foot of the stairs where King Arthur sat. And by that time the queen had come to the king, and they kissed each other heartily. And when the king saw that knight, he stooped down to him and thanked him, and so did the queen; and the king begged him to take off his helmet, and to rest, and to take some bread soaked in wine. And then he took off his helm to drink, and then every knight knew that it was Sir Lancelot du Lake. As soon as the king knew that, he took the queen by the hand, and went to Sir Lancelot, and said, "Sir, many thanks for the great labour you have had this day for me and for my queen."

"My lord," said Sir Lancelot, "believe me, by right I ought always to do battle in your cause, and in my lady the queen's cause. For you are the man who gave me the high order of knighthood, and that day my lady your queen did me great honour, or else I would have been shamed. For that same day that you made me a knight, through my haste I lost my sword, and my lady your queen found it, and wrapped it in her train, and gave me my sword when I needed it; or else I would have been shamed among all knights. And so, my lord Arthur, I promised her that day to be her knight for ever, in right or in wrong."

"Many thanks," said the king, "for this day's work. And believe me," said the king, "I shall repay your goodness."

And all the while the queen gazed at Sir Lancelot, and wept so tenderly that she almost sank to the ground, for sorrow that he had done her such great goodness when she had shown him great unkindness. Then the knights of his kin gathered around him, and there they all rejoiced greatly over one another. And so all the knights of the Round Table who were there at that time came and welcomed him. And then Sir Mador was taken to be cared for by the doctors, and Sir Lancelot was healed of his wound. And then there was great joy and merriment in that court.
