Chapter 8: How the truth was made known by the Damsel of the Lake, and of several other matters

And so it happened that the Damsel of the Lake, whose name was Nimue, who had married the good knight Sir Pelleas, came to the court; for she always did great good to King Arthur and to all his knights through her sorcery and enchantments. And so when she heard how the queen was in trouble over the death of Sir Patrise, then she said openly that the queen was never guilty; and there she revealed by whom it was done, and named him, Sir Pinel; and why he did it was openly revealed there too. And so the queen was cleared, and the knight Pinel fled into his own country. Then it was openly known that Sir Pinel had poisoned the apples at the feast with the intention of killing Sir Gawain, because Sir Gawain and his brothers had killed Sir Lamorak de Galis, to whom Sir Pinel was cousin. Then Sir Patrise was buried in a tomb in the church of Westminster, and on it was written: "Here lies Sir Patrise of Ireland, killed by Sir Pinel le Savage, who poisoned apples to kill Sir Gawain; and by misfortune Sir Patrise ate one of those apples, and then suddenly he burst." Also it was written upon the tomb that Queen Guinevere was accused of treason over the death of Sir Patrise by Sir Mador de la Porte; and an account was given there of how Sir Lancelot fought with him for Queen Guinevere, and overcame him in open battle. All this was written upon the tomb of Sir Patrise to clear the queen. And then Sir Mador sued daily and for a long time to have the queen's good grace; and so, through Sir Lancelot, he was brought back into the queen's good grace, and all was forgiven.

So things went on until the feast of Our Lady's Assumption. Within fifteen days of that feast the king had a great jousting and a tournament proclaimed, to be held on that day at Camelot, that is, Winchester; and the king had it proclaimed that he and the King of Scots would joust against all who would come against them. And when this proclamation was made, many knights came there. So there came the King of North Wales, and King Anguish of Ireland, and the King with the Hundred Knights, and Galahalt, the high prince, and the King of Northumberland, and many other noble dukes and earls of various countries. So King Arthur made ready to leave for these jousts, and would have had the queen with him, but at that time she would not go, she said, for she was sick and could not ride at that time.

"I am sorry for that," said the king, "for in these seven years you have not seen such a noble company together, except at Whitsun when Galahad left the court."

"Truly," said the queen to the king, "you must hold me excused. I cannot be there, and I am sorry for it."

And many thought the queen would not be there because of Sir Lancelot du Lake; for Sir Lancelot would not ride with the king, for he said that he was not healed of the wound that Sir Mador had given him. Because of that the king was downcast and exceedingly angry. And so he set off toward Winchester with his company; and so on the way the king lodged in a town called Astolat, which in English is now called Guildford, and there the king stayed in the castle.

So when the king had gone, the queen called Sir Lancelot to her, and said this: "Sir Lancelot, you are greatly to blame for staying behind my lord like this. What do you suppose your enemies and mine will say and think? Nothing else but, 'See how Sir Lancelot always stays behind the king, and so does the queen, so that they can have their pleasure together.' And that is what they will say," said the queen to Sir Lancelot, "have no doubt of it."
