Chapter 9: How Sir Lancelot rode to Astolat, and took a sleeve to wear on his helmet at a maiden's request

"Madam," said Sir Lancelot, "I praise your good sense; it has come to you only lately that you are so wise. And therefore, madam, this time I will be ruled by your advice, and tonight I will take my rest, and tomorrow early I will take my way toward Winchester. But you may be sure," said Sir Lancelot to the queen, "that at those jousts I will be against the king, and against all his fellowship."

"You may do there as you please," said the queen, "but by my advice you will not be against your king and your fellowship. For among them are very many hardy knights of your own blood, as you know well enough; there is no need to name them over."

"Madam," said Sir Lancelot, "I beg you not to be displeased with me, for I will take whatever chance God sends me."

And so early the next morning Sir Lancelot heard mass and broke his fast, and so took his leave of the queen and departed. And then he rode on and on until he came to Astolat, that is Guildford; and there it happened that in the evening he came to the house of an old baron who was called Sir Bernard of Astolat. And as Sir Lancelot went into his lodging, King Arthur saw him as he was walking in a garden beside the castle, saw how he took his lodging, and knew him very well.

"Well, now," said King Arthur to the knights who were with him in that garden beside the castle, "I have just seen a knight who will play his part at the jousts we are going to. I promise you he will do marvels."

"Who is that? Tell us, we beg you," said many knights who were there at that time.

"You won't learn it from me," said the king, "not at this time."

And so the king smiled, and went to his lodging.

So when Sir Lancelot was in his lodging, and had taken off his armour in his chamber, the old baron came to him, bowing respectfully, and welcomed him in the best manner; but the old knight did not know Sir Lancelot.

"Fair sir," said Sir Lancelot to his host, "I would ask you to lend me a shield that is not commonly known, for mine is well known."

"Sir," said his host, "you shall have your wish, for it seems to me you are one of the likeliest knights in the world, and therefore I will show you friendship. Sir, you may be sure I have two sons who were made knights only lately, and the elder is called Sir Tirre, and he was hurt the very day he was made a knight, so that he cannot ride; and you shall have his shield, for that is not known, I dare say, anywhere but here. And my younger son is called Lavaine, and if it pleases you, he shall ride with you to those jousts; and he is strong and vigorous for his age. For my heart tells me strongly that you must be a noble knight, and therefore I beg you, tell me your name," said Sir Bernard.

"As for that," said Sir Lancelot, "you must hold me excused for now; and if God gives me grace to do well at the jousts, I will come back and tell you. But I beg you," said Sir Lancelot, "by all means let me have your son, Sir Lavaine, with me, and let me have his brother's shield."

"All this shall be done," said Sir Bernard.

This old baron had a daughter who in those days was called the Fair Maiden of Astolat. And all the while she gazed at Sir Lancelot in wonder; and as the book says, she set such a love upon Sir Lancelot that she could never take her love back, and of it she died; and her name was Elaine le Blank. So as she came and went she was so hot in her love that she begged Sir Lancelot to wear a token of hers at the jousts.

"Fair damsel," said Sir Lancelot, "if I grant you that, you may say I do more for love of you than I ever did for lady or damsel."

Then he remembered that he meant to go to the jousts in disguise. And because he had never before that time worn any kind of token of any damsel, he thought that he would wear one of hers, so that none of his own blood would know him by it; and then he said, "Fair maiden, I will grant you that, to wear a token of yours on my helmet; and so whatever it is, show it to me."

"Sir," she said, "it is a red sleeve of mine, of scarlet, finely embroidered with great pearls." And so she brought it to him.

So Sir Lancelot took it, and said, "Never before did I do so much for any damsel."

And then Sir Lancelot gave his shield into the fair maiden's keeping, and asked her to keep it until he came back; and so that night he had a merry rest and a warm welcome, for the damsel Elaine was always about Sir Lancelot for as long as she was allowed to be.
