Chapter 10: How the tournament began at Winchester, and what knights were at the jousts, and other things

So one day, in the morning, King Arthur and all his knights departed, for their king had waited there three days for his noble knights. And so when the king had ridden off, Sir Lancelot and Sir Lavaine made themselves ready to ride, and each of them had a white shield, and Sir Lancelot had the red sleeve carried with him. And so they took their leave of Sir Bernard, the old baron, and of his daughter, the Fair Maiden of Astolat. And then they rode on until they came to Camelot, which at that time was called Winchester; and there was a great crowd of kings, dukes, earls and barons, and many noble knights. But there Sir Lancelot was lodged in secret, through Sir Lavaine's arranging, with a rich townsman, so that no one in that town knew who they were. And so they rested there until Our Lady's Day of the Assumption, when the great feast was to be held. So then the trumpets blew to call them to the field, and King Arthur was seated high up on a stand to watch who did best. But as the French book says, the king would not allow Sir Gawain to leave his side, for Sir Gawain never got the better of things if Sir Lancelot was in the field; and many times Sir Gawain had been put to shame when Lancelot came into any jousts in disguise.

Then some of the kings, such as King Anguish of Ireland and the King of Scots, had at that time come over to King Arthur's side. And then on the other side were the King of North Wales, and the King with the Hundred Knights, and the King of Northumberland, and Sir Galahalt, the high prince. But these three kings and this duke were far too weak to hold out against King Arthur's side, for with him were the noblest knights in the world. So then each side drew back from the other, and every man made himself ready in his best manner to do what he could.

Then Sir Lancelot made himself ready, and put the red sleeve on his head, and fastened it tight; and so Sir Lancelot and Sir Lavaine left Winchester in secret, and rode to a little leafy wood behind the side that held against King Arthur's side, and there they kept still until the two sides crashed together. And then the King of Scots and the King of Ireland came in on Arthur's side, and against them came the King of Northumberland; and the King with the Hundred Knights struck down the King of Northumberland, and the King with the Hundred Knights struck down King Anguish of Ireland. Then Sir Palomides, who was on Arthur's side, met Sir Galahalt, and each of them struck the other down, and each side helped its lords back on horseback. So a hard attack began on both sides. And then in came Sir Brandiles, Sir Sagramore le Desirous, Sir Dodinas le Savage, Sir Kay the Seneschal, Sir Griflet le Fise de Dieu, Sir Mordred, Sir Meliot de Logres, Sir Ozanna le Cure Hardy, Sir Safere, Sir Epinogris and Sir Galleron of Galway. All these fifteen knights were knights of the Round Table. So these, with others besides, came in together, and beat back the King of Northumberland and the King of North Wales. When Sir Lancelot saw this, as he waited in the little leafy wood, he said to Sir Lavaine, "Look over there, at that company of good knights; they hold together like boars that are worried by dogs."

"That is true," said Sir Lavaine.
