Chapter 11: How Sir Lancelot and Sir Lavaine entered the field against the knights of King Arthur's court, and how Lancelot was wounded

"Now," said Sir Lancelot, "if you will help me a little, you shall see that company over there, which is now chasing these men on our side, go back as fast as they came forward."

"Sir, don't hold back," said Sir Lavaine, "for I will do what I can."

Then Sir Lancelot and Sir Lavaine came in at the thickest of the fighting, and there Sir Lancelot struck down Sir Brandiles, Sir Sagramore, Sir Dodinas, Sir Kay and Sir Griflet, and all this he did with one spear; and Sir Lavaine struck down Sir Lucan the butler and Sir Bedivere. And then Sir Lancelot got another spear, and there he struck down Sir Agravain, Sir Gaheris, and Sir Mordred, and Sir Meliot de Logres; and Sir Lavaine struck down Ozanna le Cure Hardy. And then Sir Lancelot drew his sword, and there he struck on the right hand and on the left, and by great force he unhorsed Sir Safere, Sir Epinogris and Sir Galleron; and then the knights of the Round Table drew back, after they had got their horses again as best they could.

"Oh, Jesus have mercy," said Sir Gawain, "what knight is that over there, who does such marvellous deeds of arms in that field?"

"I know well who he is," said King Arthur, "but at this time I will not name him."

"Sir," said Sir Gawain, "I would say it was Sir Lancelot, by his riding and by the blows I see him deal, but still it seems to me it cannot be he, because he wears the red sleeve on his head; for I never knew him wear a token at any jousts, of lady or gentlewoman."

"Let him be," said King Arthur. "He will be better known, and do more, before he leaves."

Then the side that was against King Arthur took heart, and then those who before had been badly beaten held together. Then Sir Bors, Sir Ector de Maris and Sir Lionel called to them the knights of their blood, such as Sir Blamore de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Aliduke, Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin and Sir Bellangere le Beuse. So these nine knights of Sir Lancelot's kin thrust in mightily, for they were all noble knights; and out of the great hatred and resentment they had toward him, they meant to put that noble knight Sir Lancelot to shame, and Sir Lavaine too, for they did not know them; and so they came crashing in together, and struck down many knights of North Wales and of Northumberland. And when Sir Lancelot saw them doing so, he got a spear in his hand; and there Sir Bors, Sir Ector and Sir Lionel all met him at once, and all three of them struck him at once with their spears. And with the force of themselves they struck Sir Lancelot's horse to the ground; and by misfortune Sir Bors struck Sir Lancelot through the shield into the side, and the spear broke, and the head was left in his side.

When Sir Lavaine saw his master lying on the ground, he ran at the King of Scots and struck him to the ground; and by great force he took his horse, and brought it to Sir Lancelot, and in spite of them all he got him to mount that horse. And then Lancelot got a spear in his hand, and there he struck Sir Bors, horse and man, to the ground. In the same way he served Sir Ector and Sir Lionel; and Sir Lavaine struck down Sir Blamore de Ganis. And then Sir Lancelot drew his sword, for he felt himself so badly hurt that he expected to have his death there. And then he gave Sir Bleoberis such a blow on the helmet that he fell down to the ground in a faint. And in the same way he served Sir Aliduke and Sir Galihud. And Sir Lavaine struck down Sir Bellangere, who was the son of Alisander le Orphelin.

And by this time Sir Bors was on horseback again, and then he came with Sir Ector and Sir Lionel, and all three of them struck with their swords on Sir Lancelot's helmet. And when he felt their blows, and his wound, which was so grievous, then he resolved to do what he could while he could last. And then he gave Sir Bors such a blow that he made him bow his head exceedingly low; and with that he tore off his helmet, and might have killed him; and so he pulled him down, and in the same way he served Sir Ector and Sir Lionel. For as the book says, he might have killed them, but when he saw their faces his heart would not let him do it, and he left them there. And then afterwards he crashed into the thickest of the crowd of them all, and did there the most marvellous deeds of arms that any man ever saw or heard tell of, and Sir Lavaine, the good knight, was with him all the while. And there Sir Lancelot with his sword struck down and pulled down, as the French book tells, more than thirty knights, and most of them were of the Round Table; and Sir Lavaine did very well that day, for he struck down ten knights of the Round Table.
