Chapter 12: How Sir Lancelot and Sir Lavaine left the field, and what danger Lancelot was in

"Jesus have mercy," said Sir Gawain to Arthur, "I wonder what knight he is, the one with the red sleeve."

"Sir," said King Arthur, "he will be known before he leaves."

And then the king had the horns blown to send them to their lodgings, and the heralds gave the prize to the knight with the white shield who wore the red sleeve. Then the King with the Hundred Knights, the King of North Wales, the King of Northumberland, and Sir Galahalt, the high prince, came and said to Sir Lancelot, "Fair knight, God bless you, for you have done much for us this day; and so we beg you to come with us, so that you may receive the honour and the prize, as you have honourably deserved."

"My fair lords," said Sir Lancelot, "believe me, if I have earned thanks I have paid dearly for them, and I regret it, for I am not likely ever to escape with my life. And so, fair lords, I beg you to allow me to go where I please, for I am badly hurt. I care nothing for any honour, for I would rather rest than be lord of all the world."

And with that he groaned pitifully, and rode off from them at a great gallop until he came under the edge of a wood.

And when he saw that he was nearly a mile from the field, so that he was sure he could not be seen, then he said in a loud voice, "Oh, noble knight, Sir Lavaine, help me get this broken spear shaft out of my side, for it sticks in so hard that it is nearly killing me."

"Oh, my own lord," said Sir Lavaine, "I would gladly do whatever would please you, but I am badly afraid that if I pull out the broken shaft you will be in danger of death."

"I charge you," said Sir Lancelot, "as you love me, draw it out."

And with that he got down from his horse, and so did Sir Lavaine; and at once Sir Lavaine drew the broken shaft out of his side, and he gave a great shriek and a terrible, ghastly groan, and the blood burst out, nearly a pint at once, so that at last he sank down on his buttocks, and so fainted, pale as death.

"Alas," said Sir Lavaine, "what shall I do?"

And then he turned Sir Lancelot into the wind; but even so he lay there nearly half an hour as if he were dead.

And so at last Sir Lancelot opened his eyes, and said, "Oh, Lavaine, help me get on my horse, for close by here, within two miles, there is a good hermit who was once a very noble knight and a great lord of estates. And out of great goodness he has taken himself to voluntary poverty, and given up many lands; and his name is Sir Baudwin of Brittany, and he is a very fine surgeon and a good doctor. Now let us see; help me up so that I can get there, for my heart always tells me that I shall never die at my first cousin's hands."

And then with great pain Sir Lavaine helped him onto his horse. And then they rode together at a great gallop, and all the while Sir Lancelot bled so that it ran down to the ground; and so by good fortune they came to that hermitage, which stood under a wood, with a great cliff on the other side, and a fair stream running below it. And then Sir Lavaine beat on the gate with the butt of his spear, and cried out hard, "Let us in, for Jesus' sake!"

And a handsome boy came to them, and asked them what they wanted.

"Fair son," said Sir Lavaine, "go and beg your lord, the hermit, for God's sake to let in a knight here who is very badly wounded; and tell your lord that this day I saw him do more deeds of arms than I ever heard tell that any man did."

So the boy went in quickly, and then he brought the hermit, who was an exceedingly good man. When Sir Lavaine saw him he begged him for God's sake for help.

"What knight is he?" said the hermit. "Is he of King Arthur's household, or not?"

"I don't know," said Sir Lavaine, "who he is, or what his name is, but I know well that I saw him do marvellously this day in deeds of arms."

"On whose side was he?" said the hermit.

"Sir," said Sir Lavaine, "he was against King Arthur this day, and there he won the prize over all the knights of the Round Table."

"I have seen the day," said the hermit, "when I would have loved him the less for being against my lord, King Arthur, for once I was one of the fellowship of the Round Table; but I thank God that now I am of another mind. But where is he? Let me see him."

Then Sir Lavaine brought the hermit to him.
