Chapter 13: How Lancelot was brought to a hermit to be healed of his wound, and of other matters

And when the hermit looked at him, as he sat leaning on his saddlebow, bleeding pitifully all the while, the knight-hermit kept thinking that he ought to know him, but he could not place him, because he was so pale from bleeding.

"What knight are you," said the hermit, "and where were you born?"

"My fair lord," said Sir Lancelot, "I am a stranger and a knight-errant, who travels through many realms to win honour."

Then the hermit looked at him more carefully, and saw by a wound on his cheek that he was Sir Lancelot.

"Alas," said the hermit, "my own lord, why do you hide your name from me? Truly, I ought by rights to know you, for you are the noblest knight in the world, for I know you well for Sir Lancelot."

"Sir," he said, "since you know me, help me if you can, for God's sake, for I would be out of this pain at once, one way or the other, to death or to life."

"Have no fear," said the hermit, "you shall live and do very well."

And so the hermit called two of his servants to him, and so he and his servants carried him into the hermitage, and quickly took off his armour, and laid him in his bed. And then at once the hermit stopped his bleeding, and made him drink good wine, so that Sir Lancelot was well refreshed and came to himself. For in those days it was not the custom of hermits as it is nowadays, for there were no hermits in those days who had not been men of honour and of prowess; and those hermits kept great households, and gave relief to people who were in distress.

Now we turn to King Arthur, and leave Sir Lancelot in the hermitage. So when the kings of both sides had come together, and the great feast was to be held, King Arthur asked the King of North Wales and his fellowship where that knight was who had worn the red sleeve. "Bring him before me, so that he may have his praise, and honour, and the prize, as is right."

Then Sir Galahalt, the high prince, and the King with the Hundred Knights spoke: "We think that knight has come to harm, and that he is never likely to see you or any of us again, and that is the greatest pity we ever knew of any knight."

"Alas," said Arthur, "how can this be? Is he so badly hurt? What is his name?" said King Arthur.

"Truly," they all said, "we do not know his name, or where he came from, or where he was going."

"Alas," said the king, "this is the worst news that has come to me in these seven years, for I would not for all the lands I rule have it known to me that that noble knight was dead."

"Do you know him?" they all said.

"As for that," said Arthur, "whether I know him or not, you shall not learn from me what man he is; but may Almighty Jesus send me good news of him."

And so said they all.

"By my head," said Sir Gawain, "if the good knight is so badly hurt, it is a great loss and a pity to all this land, for he is one of the noblest knights I ever saw handle a spear or a sword in the field; and if he can be found, I will find him, for I am sure he is not far from this town."

"You will have done well," said King Arthur, "if you can find him, unless he is in such a state that he cannot help himself."

"Jesus forbid," said Sir Gawain, "but I will know who he is, if I can find him."

At once Sir Gawain took a squire with him, on small riding horses, and rode all around Camelot for six or seven miles; but he came back again and could hear no word of him. Then within two days King Arthur and all the fellowship returned to London again. And so as they rode along the way it happened that Sir Gawain lodged at Astolat with Sir Bernard, where Sir Lancelot had lodged. And so as Sir Gawain was in his chamber resting, Sir Bernard, the old baron, came to him, and his daughter Elaine, to entertain him and to ask him what news there was, and who did best at that tournament of Winchester.

"So help me God," said Sir Gawain, "there were two knights who carried two white shields, but one of them wore a red sleeve on his head, and certainly he was one of the best knights I ever saw joust in the field. For I dare say," said Sir Gawain, "that that one knight with the red sleeve struck down forty knights of the Round Table, and his companion did very well and honourably."

"Now blessed be God," said the Fair Maiden of Astolat, "that that knight did so well, for he is the first man in the world I ever loved, and truly he will be the last that I ever love."

"Now, fair maid," said Sir Gawain, "is that good knight your love?"

"Certainly, sir," she said, "you may be sure he is my love."

"Then do you know his name?" said Sir Gawain.

"No, truly," said the damsel, "I don't know his name, or where he comes from; but as for saying that I love him, I promise you, and God, that I love him."

"How did you first come to know him?" said Sir Gawain.
