Chapter 14: How Sir Gawain lodged with the lord of Astolat, and there learned that it was Sir Lancelot who wore the red sleeve

Then she told him all that you have heard before, and how her father gave him her brother to serve him, and how her father lent him her brother Sir Tirre's shield. "And he left his own shield here with me."

"For what reason did he do that?" said Sir Gawain.

"For this reason," said the damsel: "his shield was too well known among many noble knights."

"Ah, fair damsel," said Sir Gawain, "if you please, let me have a sight of that shield."

"Sir," she said, "it is in my chamber, in a cover, and if you will come with me you shall see it."

"No," said Sir Bernard to his daughter, "have it sent for."

So when the shield had come, Sir Gawain took off the cover, and when he looked at that shield he knew at once that it was Sir Lancelot's shield, and his own coat of arms.

"Ah, Jesus have mercy," said Sir Gawain, "now my heart is heavier than it ever was before."

"Why?" said Elaine.

"Because I have good cause," said Sir Gawain. "Is the knight who owns this shield your love?"

"Yes, truly," she said, "he is my love. I wish to God I were his."

"So God help me," said Sir Gawain, "fair damsel, you have chosen well, for if he is your love, you love the most honourable knight in the world, and the man of most renown."

"So I always thought," said the damsel, "for never before that time did I love any knight, of all the knights I ever saw."

"God grant," said Sir Gawain, "that each of you may have joy of the other, but that is a great hazard. But truly," said Sir Gawain to the damsel, "you may count yourself very fortunate, for I have known that noble knight these twenty-four years, and never before that day did I, or any other knight, I will swear to it, see or hear tell that he ever wore a token or sign of any lady, gentlewoman or maiden, at any jousts or tournament. And therefore, fair maiden," said Sir Gawain, "you are much obliged to him and owe him thanks. But I fear," said Sir Gawain, "that you will never see him in this world, and that is the greatest pity there ever was for any earthly knight."

"Alas," she said, "how can this be? Is he dead?"

"I don't say so," said Sir Gawain, "but you may be sure he is grievously wounded, by every kind of sign, and by the look of things more likely to be dead than alive; and you may be sure he is the noble knight Sir Lancelot, for I know him by this shield."

"Alas," said the Fair Maiden of Astolat, "how can this be, and what was his wound?"

"Truly," said Sir Gawain, "the man in the world who loved him best wounded him so; and I dare say," said Sir Gawain, "that if the knight who wounded him knew for certain that he had wounded Sir Lancelot, it would be the greatest sorrow that ever came to his heart."

"Now, dear father," said Elaine then, "I beg you to give me leave to ride and look for him, or else I know well I shall go out of my mind; for I will never stop until I find him and my brother, Sir Lavaine."

"Do as you please," said her father, "for I am deeply sorry for the hurt of that noble knight."

At once the maiden made herself ready, grieving greatly in front of Sir Gawain.

Then in the morning Sir Gawain came to King Arthur, and told him how he had found Sir Lancelot's shield in the keeping of the Fair Maiden of Astolat.

"I knew all that beforehand," said King Arthur, "and that was why I would not let you fight in the great jousts; for I saw him," said King Arthur, "when he came to his lodging in Astolat very late in the evening. But I do marvel," said Arthur, "that he would ever wear the token of any damsel, for before now I never heard or knew that he ever wore a token of any earthly woman."

"By my head," said Sir Gawain, "the Fair Maiden of Astolat loves him marvellously well; what it means I cannot say; and she has ridden after him to look for him."

So the king and all of them came to London, and there Sir Gawain told the whole court openly that it was Sir Lancelot who had jousted best.
