Chapter 15: Of the sorrow Sir Bors felt at Lancelot's wound, and of the anger the queen felt because Lancelot wore the sleeve

And when Sir Bors heard that, you may be sure he was a downcast man, and so were all his kinsmen. But when Queen Guinevere learned that Sir Lancelot had worn the red sleeve of the Fair Maiden of Astolat, she was nearly out of her mind with anger. And then she sent for Sir Bors de Ganis in all the haste there could be. So when Sir Bors had come before the queen, she said, "Ah, Sir Bors, have you heard how falsely Sir Lancelot has betrayed me?"

"Alas, madam," said Sir Bors, "I am afraid he has betrayed himself, and all of us."

"No matter," said the queen, "even if he is destroyed, for he is a false traitor of a knight."

"Madam," said Sir Bors, "I beg you, do not say so, for believe me, I cannot hear such language about him."

"Why, Sir Bors," she said, "should I not call him a traitor, when he wore the red sleeve on his head at Winchester, at the great jousts?"

"Madam," said Sir Bors, "I bitterly regret that sleeve-wearing, but I dare say he did it with no evil intent; he wore the red sleeve for this reason, so that none of his blood would know him. For before then, neither we nor any of us ever knew him to wear a token or sign of maiden, lady or gentlewoman."

"Shame on him," said the queen. "Yet for all his pride and boastfulness, there you proved yourself his better."

"No, madam, never say so again, for he beat me and my fellows, and could have killed us if he had wanted to."

"Shame on him," said the queen, "for I heard Sir Gawain say in front of my lord Arthur that it would be a marvel to tell of the great love there is between the Fair Maiden of Astolat and him."

"Madam," said Sir Bors, "I cannot stop Sir Gawain from saying what he pleases; but I dare say, as for my lord Sir Lancelot, that he loves no lady, gentlewoman or maiden, but loves them all alike. And therefore, madam," said Sir Bors, "you may say what you will, but believe me, I will hurry to look for him, and find him wherever he is, and God send me good news of him."

And so we leave them there, and speak of Sir Lancelot, who lay in great danger.

So when fair Elaine came to Winchester she searched all about there, and by good fortune Sir Lavaine had ridden out for exercise, to warm up his horse. And as soon as Elaine saw him she knew him, and then she called out loudly to him. And when he heard her he came to her at once, and then she asked her brother how my lord Sir Lancelot was.

"Who told you, sister, that my lord's name was Sir Lancelot?"

Then she told him how Sir Gawain had known him by his shield. So they rode together until they came to the hermitage, and at once she dismounted.

So Sir Lavaine brought her in to Sir Lancelot; and when she saw him lying so sick and pale in his bed she could not speak, but suddenly fell down to the ground in a faint, and there she lay a long while. And when she had recovered, she shrieked and said, "My lord Sir Lancelot, alas, why are you in this state?" And then she fainted again.

And then Sir Lancelot asked Sir Lavaine to lift her up: "And bring her to me."

And when she came to herself Sir Lancelot kissed her, and said, "Fair maiden, why do you carry on like this? You put me to pain; and so make no more such a show of grief, for if you have come to comfort me, you are very welcome; and from this little hurt that I have, I shall be well again very quickly, by the grace of God. But I wonder," said Sir Lancelot, "who told you my name?"

Then the fair maiden told him all about how Sir Gawain had lodged with her father. "And there he found out your name by your shield."

"Alas," said Sir Lancelot, "I regret that my name is known, for I am sure it will turn to anger."

And then Sir Lancelot turned it over in his mind that Sir Gawain would tell Queen Guinevere how he had worn the red sleeve, and for whom; and he knew well that would turn to great anger.

So this maiden Elaine never left Sir Lancelot, but watched over him day and night, and tended him so well that the French book says there was never a woman who did more kindly for a man than she. Then Sir Lancelot asked Sir Lavaine to set watchers in Winchester for Sir Bors, in case he came there, and told him the signs he would know him by: a wound in his forehead.

"For I am quite sure," said Sir Lancelot, "that Sir Bors will look for me, for he is the same good knight who wounded me."
