Chapter 16: How Sir Bors searched for Lancelot and found him in the hermitage, and of their lamenting together

Now we turn to Sir Bors de Ganis, who came to Winchester to look for his cousin Sir Lancelot. And so when he came to Winchester, there were men there whom Sir Lavaine had set to lie in wait for such a man, and at once Sir Lavaine had word of it; and then Sir Lavaine came to Winchester and found Sir Bors, and there he told him who he was, and whom he was with, and what that man's name was.

"Now, fair knight," said Sir Bors, "I beg you to bring me to my lord, Sir Lancelot."

"Sir," said Sir Lavaine, "take your horse, and within this hour you shall see him."

And so they set off, and came to the hermitage.

And when Sir Bors saw Sir Lancelot lying in his bed, pale and drained of colour, at once Sir Bors lost his composure, and out of the love of kin and out of pity he could not speak, but wept tenderly for a long while. And then, when he could speak, he said this: "Oh, my lord Sir Lancelot, God bless you, and send you a quick recovery. And very heavy-hearted I am at my misfortune and my ill luck, for now I may call myself ill-fated. And I fear that God is greatly displeased with me, that He would allow me such a shame as to wound you, who are the leader of us all, and all our honour; and therefore I call myself ill-fated. Alas that ever such a wretched knight as I am should have the power, by ill luck, to wound the noblest knight in the world! When I so shamefully set upon you and overpowered you, and when you might have killed me, you spared me; and I did not do the same, for I and your own blood did our uttermost against you. I marvel," said Sir Bors, "that my heart or my blood would let me do it. And so, my lord Sir Lancelot, I ask your forgiveness."

"Fair cousin," said Sir Lancelot, "you are very welcome; and believe me, you say too much in order to please me, and it does not please me, for I got just what I was asking for. For I meant in my pride to overcome you all, and there in my pride I was nearly killed, and that was through my own fault, for I might have given you warning that I was there. And then I would have had no hurt; for it is an old saying that there is hard battle where kin and friends fight against each other: there can be no mercy, only war to the death. Therefore, fair cousin," said Sir Lancelot, "let this talk pass, and all that God sends shall be welcome; and let us leave this matter and speak of something cheerful, for what is done cannot be undone; and let us find a remedy, so that I may be well as soon as possible."

Then Sir Bors leaned on his bedside, and told Sir Lancelot how the queen was exceedingly angry with him because he had worn the red sleeve at the great jousts; and there Sir Bors told him all about how Sir Gawain had found it out: "By your shield, which you left with the Fair Maiden of Astolat."

"Then the queen is angry," said Sir Lancelot, "and so I am very heavy-hearted, for I deserved no anger; all that I did was so that I would not be known."

"That is just how I excused you," said Sir Bors, "but it was all in vain, for she said a great deal more to me than I am telling you now. But is this she," said Sir Bors, "who is so busy about you, the one they call the Fair Maiden of Astolat?"

"That is she," said Sir Lancelot, "and I can find no way to put her from me."

"Why should you put her from you?" said Sir Bors. "She is an exceedingly beautiful damsel, and fine-looking, and well brought up; and I wish to God, fair cousin," said Sir Bors, "that you could love her; but as to that, I cannot and dare not advise you. But I see well," said Sir Bors, "by her care for you, that she loves you with her whole heart."

"I am sorry for that," said Sir Lancelot.

"Sir," said Sir Bors, "she is not the first who has wasted her pains on you, and that is the more pity."

And so they talked of many more things. And so within three or four days Sir Lancelot was big and strong again.
