Chapter 17: How Sir Lancelot put on his armour to test whether he could bear arms, and how his wounds burst open again

Then Sir Bors told Sir Lancelot how a great tournament and jousts had been sworn between King Arthur and the King of North Wales, to be held on All Hallows' Day, near Winchester.

"Is that true?" said Sir Lancelot. "Then you shall stay with me a little while longer, until I am well, for I feel myself very big and strong."

"God be blessed," said Sir Bors.

Then they were there together nearly a month, and all the while this maiden Elaine worked diligently for Sir Lancelot night and day, so that there was never a child or a wife more meek to her father or her husband than that Fair Maiden of Astolat was; and so Sir Bors was greatly pleased with her.

So one day, by the agreement of Sir Lancelot, Sir Bors and Sir Lavaine, they had the hermit go into the woods to look for various herbs, and so Sir Lancelot had fair Elaine gather herbs for him to make him a bath. Meanwhile Sir Lancelot had himself armed in every piece; and there he meant to test his armour and his spear, to see whether his wound would let him or not. And so when he was on his horse he spurred him fiercely, and the horse was exceedingly lively and fresh, because he had not been worked for a month before. And then Sir Lancelot levelled that spear in the rest. That warhorse leapt mightily when he felt the spurs; and the man on him (and it was the noblest horse in the world) held him in mightily and steadily, and kept the spear still in the rest; and with that Sir Lancelot strained himself so hard, with such great force, to get the horse forward, that the seal of his wound burst open both inside and out; and with that the blood came out so fiercely that he felt himself so weak that he could not sit on his horse. And then Sir Lancelot cried out to Sir Bors, "Ah, Sir Bors and Sir Lavaine, help, for I have come to my end!" And with that he fell down on one side to the earth like a dead body. And then Sir Bors and Sir Lavaine came to him, grieving beyond measure. And so by chance the maiden Elaine heard their mourning, and then she came there; and when she found Sir Lancelot there in that place in his armour, she cried and wept as if she had gone mad; and then she kissed him, and did what she could to wake him. And then she rebuked her brother and Sir Bors, and called them false traitors, and asked why they would take him out of his bed; and there she cried, and said she would accuse them of his death.

With this the holy hermit came, Sir Baudwin of Brittany, and when he found Sir Lancelot in that state he said little, but you may be sure he was angry; and then he told them, "Let us get him inside." And so they all carried him to the hermitage, and took off his armour, and laid him in his bed; and all the while his wound bled pitifully, but he did not stir a limb. Then the knight-hermit put something in his nose and a little water in his mouth. And then Sir Lancelot woke from his faint, and then the hermit stopped his bleeding. And when he could speak, the hermit asked Sir Lancelot why he had put his life in danger.

"Sir," said Sir Lancelot, "because I thought I was strong, and also Sir Bors told me that there would be great jousts at All Hallows between King Arthur and the King of North Wales, and so I thought I would test for myself whether I could be there or not."

"Ah, Sir Lancelot," said the hermit, "your heart and your spirit will never be done until your last day, but now you shall do as I advise. Let Sir Bors leave you, and let him do what he can at that tournament. And by the grace of God," said the knight-hermit, "by the time the tournament is over and you come back here," he said to Sir Bors, "Sir Lancelot shall be as whole as you are, provided he will be ruled by me."
