Chapter 18: How Sir Bors returned and brought news of Sir Lancelot, and of the tournament, and to whom the prize was given

Then Sir Bors made ready to leave Sir Lancelot; and then Sir Lancelot said, "Fair cousin, Sir Bors, commend me to all those I ought to be commended to. And I beg you, exert yourself at those jousts so that you may be the best, for love of me; and I shall wait for you here, at the mercy of God, until you come again."

And so Sir Bors left and came to the court of King Arthur, and told them where he had left Sir Lancelot.

"I am sorry for that," said the king, "but since he will live, we may all thank God."

And there Sir Bors told the queen what danger Sir Lancelot had been in when he tried to test his horse. "And all that he did, madam, was for love of you, because he wanted to be at this tournament."

"Shame on him, the recreant knight," said the queen, "for believe me, I am very sorry that he will live."

"He will live," said Sir Bors, "and anyone who wished otherwise, except you, madam, we who are of his blood would help to cut their lives short. But madam," said Sir Bors, "you have often been displeased with my lord Sir Lancelot, but every time, in the end, you find him a true knight." And so he left.

And then every knight of the Round Table who was there at that time made ready to be at those jousts at All Hallows, and many knights of various countries made their way there. And as All Hallows drew near, the King of North Wales came there, and the King with the Hundred Knights, and Sir Galahalt, the high prince, of Surluse; and King Anguish of Ireland came there, and the King of Scots. So these three kings came on King Arthur's side. And so that day Sir Gawain did great deeds of arms, and began first. And the heralds counted that Sir Gawain struck down twenty knights. Then Sir Bors de Ganis came in at the same time, and he was counted as striking down twenty knights; and so the prize was shared between them both, for they began first and lasted longest. Also Sir Gareth, as the book says, did great deeds of arms that day, for he struck down and pulled down thirty knights. But when he had done these deeds he did not stay, but left at once, and so he lost his prize. And Sir Palomides did great deeds of arms that day, for he struck down twenty knights, but he left suddenly, and men thought that Sir Gareth and he had ridden off together after some adventure or other.

So when this tournament was over Sir Bors left and rode until he came to Sir Lancelot, his cousin; and then he found him walking on his feet, and there each rejoiced greatly in the other; and so Sir Bors told Sir Lancelot all about the jousts, just as you have heard.

"I wonder," said Sir Lancelot, "that Sir Gareth would not stay, when he had done such deeds of arms."

"We all wondered at it," said Sir Bors, "for unless it were you, or Sir Tristram, or Sir Lamorak de Galis, I never saw a knight bear down so many in so little a while as Sir Gareth did; and at once he was gone, we did not know where."

"By my head," said Sir Lancelot, "he is a noble knight, and a mighty man, and has great staying power; and if he were well tested," said Sir Lancelot, "I would judge he was a match for any knight alive. And he is a well-bred knight, courteous, true and generous, meek and mild, and in him there is no kind of malice or deceit, but he is plain, faithful and true."

So then they made ready to leave the hermit. And so one morning they took their horses, and Elaine le Blank with them; and when they came to Astolat they were well lodged there, and had a warm welcome from Sir Bernard, the old baron, and from Sir Tirre, his son. And so in the morning, when Sir Lancelot was to leave, fair Elaine brought her father with her, and Sir Lavaine, and Sir Tirre, and this is what she said:
