Chapter 19: Of the great lament of the Fair Maid of Astolat when Lancelot was to leave, and how she died for love of him

"My lord, Sir Lancelot," said fair Elaine, "now I see you are going to leave; now, fair knight and courteous knight, have mercy on me, and do not let me die for love of you."

"What would you have me do?" said Sir Lancelot.

"I would have you for my husband," said Elaine.

"Fair damsel, I thank you," said Sir Lancelot, "but truly," he said, "I have resolved never to be a married man."

"Then, fair knight," she said, "will you be my lover?"

"God forbid," said Sir Lancelot, "for then I would repay your father and your brother very badly for their great goodness."

"Alas," she said, "then I must die for love of you."

"You shall not," said Sir Lancelot, "for believe me, fair maiden, I could have been married if I had wished, but I have never set myself to marry yet. But because, fair damsel, you love me as you say you do, I will show you some kindness for your good will and kindness, and it is this: wherever you choose to set your heart on some good knight who will marry you, I shall give you, the two of you together, a thousand pounds a year, to you and to your heirs. This much I will give you, fair madam, for your kindness, and always, while I live, I will be your own knight."

"I will have none of all this," said the maiden, "for unless you will marry me, or else be my lover at the least, believe me, Sir Lancelot, my good days are done."

"Fair damsel," said Sir Lancelot, "you must forgive me these two things."

Then she shrieked shrilly, and fell down in a faint; and then women carried her into her room, and there she grieved beyond all bounds. And then Sir Lancelot wanted to leave, and there he asked Sir Lavaine what he would do.

"What should I do," said Sir Lavaine, "but follow you, unless you drive me away, or order me to go from you?"

Then Sir Bernard came to Sir Lancelot and said to him, "I can see nothing else but that my daughter Elaine will die for your sake."

"I cannot help it," said Sir Lancelot, "for I am deeply sorry for it, for I appeal to you yourself that my offer is fair; and I regret," said Sir Lancelot, "that she loves me as she does. I was never the cause of it, for I appeal to your son that early or late I never offered her favours or fair promises; and as for me," said Sir Lancelot, "I dare do all that a knight should do to prove that she is a pure maiden as far as I am concerned, both in deed and in will. And I am very grieved at her distress, for she is a very fair maiden, good and well-bred, and well brought up."

"Father," said Sir Lavaine, "I dare swear she is a pure maiden as far as my lord Sir Lancelot is concerned; but she is doing as I do, for since I first saw my lord Sir Lancelot I could never leave him, and I never will, if I can follow him."

Then Sir Lancelot took his leave, and so they left, and came to Winchester. And when Arthur knew that Sir Lancelot had come safe and sound, the king rejoiced greatly over him, and so did Sir Gawain and all the knights of the Round Table except Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred. But Queen Guinevere was mad with anger at Sir Lancelot, and would by no means speak with him, but kept herself away from him; and Sir Lancelot tried every way he could to speak with the queen, but it could not be.

Now we speak of the Fair Maiden of Astolat, who grieved so day and night that she never slept, ate or drank, and all the while she made her lament for Sir Lancelot. So when she had gone on like this for ten days, and grew so weak that she must surely pass out of this world, then she made a full confession, and received her Creator. And still she went on lamenting for Sir Lancelot. Then her confessor told her to leave such thoughts.

Then she said, "Why should I leave such thoughts? Am I not an earthly woman? And as long as the breath is in my body I may lament, for I believe I do no wrong though I love an earthly man; and I take God as my witness that I never loved anyone but Sir Lancelot du Lake, and never shall, and I am a pure maiden, for him and for all others. And since it is God's will that I shall die for the love of so noble a knight, I beseech the High Father of Heaven to have mercy on my soul, and that my countless pains that I suffered may be a lightening of part of my sins. For, sweet Lord Jesus," said the fair maiden, "I take You as my witness, I was never a great offender against Your laws, except that I loved this noble knight, Sir Lancelot, beyond measure, and of myself, good Lord, I could not withstand the burning love from which I have my death."

And then she called her father, Sir Bernard, and her brother, Sir Tirre, and earnestly begged her father that her brother might write a letter just as she would dictate it; and so her father granted it. And when the letter had been written word for word as she composed it, then she begged her father that she might be watched over until she was dead. "And while my body is still warm, let this letter be put in my right hand, and my hand tied fast around the letter until I am cold; and let me be put in a fine bed with all the richest clothes I have around me, and so let my bed and all my richest clothes be carried with me in a cart to the nearest place on the Thames; and there let me be put in a barge, with only one man with me, someone you trust to steer me there, and let my barge be covered all over with black samite. Father, I beg you, let this be done."

So her father faithfully promised her that everything would be done just as she had planned. Then her father and her brother grieved greatly, for when this was done she died at once. And so when she was dead, the body and the bed and all were taken the nearest way to the Thames, and there the man, and the body, and everything were put on the Thames; and so the man steered the barge to Westminster, and there he rowed to and fro a long while before anyone noticed it.
