Chapter 20: How the body of the Maid of Astolat arrived before King Arthur, and of the burial, and how Sir Lancelot made the offering at her Mass

So by chance King Arthur and Queen Guinevere were talking together at a window, and so as they looked out on the Thames they saw this black barge, and wondered what it meant. Then the king called Sir Kay, and showed it to him.

"Sir," said Sir Kay, "you may be sure there is some news here."

"Go there," said the king to Sir Kay, "and take Sir Brandiles and Agravain with you, and bring me back word quickly of what is there."

Then these four knights left and came to the barge and went aboard; and there they found the fairest body lying in a rich bed, and a poor man sitting in the end of the barge, and he would not speak a word. So these four knights went back to the king, and told him what they had found.

"I will see that fair body," said the king. And so then the king took the queen by the hand, and went there.

Then the king had the barge held fast, and then the king and the queen went aboard, with certain knights with them; and there he saw the fairest woman lying in a rich bed, covered to her waist with many rich cloths, and all of them were cloth of gold, and she lay as though she were smiling. Then the queen noticed a letter in her right hand, and told the king. Then the king took it and said, "Now I am sure this letter will tell who she was, and why she has come here." So then the king and the queen left the barge, and ordered a certain man to keep watch over it.

And so when the king had come into his chamber, he called many knights around him, and said that he wanted to know openly what was written in that letter. Then the king broke the seal, and had a clerk read it, and this was what the letter said: "Most noble knight, Sir Lancelot, now death has set us two at odds over my love for you. I was your lover, the one men called the Fair Maiden of Astolat; so to all ladies I make my lament. Yet pray for my soul, and at least bury me, and make the offering at my Mass: this is my last request. And I died a pure maiden, I take God as my witness. Pray for my soul, Sir Lancelot, as you are peerless." This was all the substance of the letter. And when it had been read, the king, the queen and all the knights wept for pity at its sorrowful lament. Then Sir Lancelot was sent for; and when he had come, King Arthur had the letter read to him.

And when Sir Lancelot had heard it word for word, he said, "My lord Arthur, believe me, I am very grieved at the death of this fair damsel. God knows I was never the cause of her death by my will, and I appeal to her own brother on that: here he is, Sir Lavaine. I will not deny," said Sir Lancelot, "that she was both fair and good, and I was much beholden to her, but she loved me beyond measure."

"You might have shown her," said the queen, "some kindness and courtesy that might have saved her life."

"Madam," said Sir Lancelot, "she would take no other answer but that she would be my wife, or else my lover; and of these two I would grant her neither. But for the good love she showed me I offered her a thousand pounds a year, to her and to her heirs, and to marry whatever knight she could find that she loved best in her heart. For, madam," said Sir Lancelot, "I do not like to be forced to love; for love must rise from the heart, and not by any force."

"That is the truth," said the king, "and many a knight's love is free in itself, and will never be bound, for where he is bound he loses himself."

Then the king said to Sir Lancelot, "It will be to your honour to see that she is buried honourably."

"Sir," said Sir Lancelot, "that shall be done as best I can arrange it."

And so many knights went there to look at that fair maiden. And so in the morning she was buried richly, and Sir Lancelot made the offering at her Mass; and all the knights of the Round Table who were there at that time made their offering with Sir Lancelot. And then the poor man went away again with the barge. Then the queen sent for Sir Lancelot, and begged his pardon, because she had been angry with him without cause.

"This is not the first time," said Sir Lancelot, "that you have been displeased with me without cause. But, madam, I must always bear with you, and whatever sorrow I endure, I care nothing for it."

So this went on all that winter, with all kinds of hunting and hawking, and there were many jousts and tournaments between many great lords; and everywhere Sir Lavaine won great honour, so that he was nobly renowned among many knights of the Round Table.
