Chapter 21: Of great jousts held all through Christmas, and of great jousting and a tournament proclaimed by King Arthur, and of Sir Lancelot

So it went on until Christmas, and then every day there were jousts held for a diamond, so that whoever jousted best should have a diamond. But Sir Lancelot would not joust unless it was at great jousts that had been proclaimed. But Sir Lavaine jousted there all that Christmas exceedingly well, and was praised as the best, for there were only a few who did so well. And so knights of every kind judged that Sir Lavaine should be made a knight of the Round Table at the next feast of Pentecost. So after Christmas King Arthur called many knights to him, and there they planned together to set up sides and a great tournament and jousts. And the King of North Wales said to Arthur that he would have on his side King Anguish of Ireland, and the King with the Hundred Knights, and the King of Northumberland, and Sir Galahalt, the high prince. And so these four kings and this mighty duke took sides against King Arthur and the knights of the Round Table. And it was proclaimed that the day of the jousts should be near Westminster, on Candlemas Day, and many knights were glad of it, and made ready to be at those jousts in the finest fashion.

Then Queen Guinevere sent for Sir Lancelot, and said this: "I warn you not to ride any more in any jousts or tournaments unless your kinsmen can know you. And at these jousts that are coming you shall have a sleeve of gold from me; and I beg you, for my sake, exert yourself there, so that men may speak of your honour. But I charge you, as you want my love, to warn your kinsmen that you will wear that sleeve of gold on your helmet that day."

"Madam," said Sir Lancelot, "it shall be done."

And so each rejoiced greatly in the other. And when Sir Lancelot saw his moment, he told Sir Bors that he would leave, and take no one with him but Sir Lavaine, to the good hermit who lived in that forest of Windsor; his name was Sir Brasias; and there he meant to rest, and take all the rest he could, because he wanted to be fresh on that day of the jousts.

So Sir Lancelot and Sir Lavaine left, so that no living creature knew what had become of him, except the noblemen of his blood. And when he had come to the hermitage, you may be sure he had a good welcome. And so every day Sir Lancelot would go to a spring close by the hermitage, and there he would lie down, and watch the spring well up and bubble, and sometimes he slept there. Now at that time there was a lady living in that forest, and she was a great huntress, and she hunted every day, and always carried her bow with her; and no men ever went with her, but always women, and they were archers, and could kill a deer well, both by stalking it and by lying in wait for it; and every day they carried bows and arrows, horns and hunting knives, and they had many good dogs, both for tracking on the leash and for running down the game. So it happened that this lady the huntress had loosed her dog for the bow at a barren hind, and so this barren hind took flight over hedges and woods. And all the while this lady and some of her women kept up with the hind, and followed it by the noise of the hounds, meaning to meet the hind at some water; and so it happened that the hind came to the spring where Sir Lancelot was sleeping and dozing. And so when the hind came to the spring, she went into the water because of the heat, and there she lay a long while; and the dog came after, and cast about, for she had lost the true scent of the hind. Just then the lady huntress came, who knew by the dog she had that the hind had taken to the water at that spring; and she came up boldly and found the hind, and she put a broad arrow to her bow, and shot at the hind, and overshot the hind; and so by mischance the arrow struck Sir Lancelot in the thick of the buttock, in past the barbs. When Sir Lancelot felt himself so hurt, he leapt up wildly, and saw the lady who had shot him. And when he saw she was a woman, he said this: "Lady or damsel, whatever you are, it was an evil hour you took up a bow. The devil made you an archer!"
