Chapter 22: How Lancelot, after he was wounded by a lady, came to a hermit, and of other matters

"Now, mercy, fair sir," said the lady. "I am a gentlewoman who hunts here in this forest, and God knows I did not see you; but there was a barren hind here in the water at this spring, and I thought I was doing well, but my hand swerved."

"Alas," said Sir Lancelot, "you have done me harm."

And so the lady left, and Sir Lancelot pulled out the arrow as best he could, and left the head still in his buttock, and so he went weakly to the hermitage, bleeding all the way as he went. And when Sir Lavaine and the hermit saw that Sir Lancelot was hurt, you may be sure they were exceedingly downcast, but Sir Lavaine did not know how he had been hurt or by whom. And then they were angry beyond measure.

Then with great difficulty the hermit got the arrowhead out of Sir Lancelot's buttock, and he lost much of his blood, and the wound was exceedingly painful, and unluckily struck, for it was in such a place that he could not sit in any saddle.

"Jesus have mercy," said Sir Lancelot. "I may call myself the unluckiest man alive, for always, when I most want to win honour, some unlucky thing befalls me. Now, so help me Jesus," said Sir Lancelot, "even if no one but God were willing, I shall be in the field at the jousts on Candlemas Day, whatever comes of it." So everything that could be got to heal Sir Lancelot was got.

So when the day came, Sir Lancelot had himself arrayed, and Sir Lavaine, and their horses, as though they were Saracens; and so they left and came near the field. The King of North Wales came with a hundred knights, and the King of Northumberland brought a hundred good knights with him, and King Anguish of Ireland brought a hundred good knights with him ready to joust, and Sir Galahalt, the high prince, brought a hundred good knights with him, and the King with the Hundred Knights brought as many with him, and all these were proven good knights. Then King Arthur's side came in; and the King of Scots came in with a hundred knights, and King Uriens of Gore brought a hundred knights with him, and King Howell of Brittany brought a hundred knights with him, and Chaleins of Clarance brought a hundred knights with him, and King Arthur himself came into the field with two hundred knights, and most of them were knights of the Round Table, who were proven noble knights; and old knights were set in the stands with the queen, to judge who did best.
