Chapter 23: How Sir Lancelot bore himself at the jousts, and other men too

Then they sounded the trumpets for the field; and there the King of North Wales met the King of Scots, and there the King of Scots took a fall; and the King of Ireland struck down King Uriens; and the King of Northumberland struck down King Howell of Brittany; and Sir Galahalt, the high prince, struck down Chaleins of Clarance. And then King Arthur was mad with anger, and charged at the King with the Hundred Knights, and there King Arthur struck him down; and afterwards, with that same spear, King Arthur struck down three other knights. And then, when his spear was broken, King Arthur did exceedingly well; and so with that Sir Gawain and Sir Gaheris came in, and Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred, and there each of them struck down a knight, and Sir Gawain struck down four knights. And then a fierce fight began, for then the knights of Lancelot's blood came in, and Sir Gareth and Sir Palomides with them, and many knights of the Round Table, and they began to press the four kings and the mighty duke so hard that they were routed. But this Duke Galahalt, the high prince, was a noble knight, and by his mighty prowess in arms he held the knights of the Round Table hard pressed.

Sir Lancelot saw all this, and then he came into the field with Sir Lavaine like thunder. And then at once Sir Bors and the knights of his blood saw Sir Lancelot, and Sir Bors said to them all, "I warn you, beware of the man with the sleeve of gold on his head, for he is Sir Lancelot du Lake himself." And out of great goodness Sir Bors warned Sir Gareth.

"I am well pleased," said Sir Gareth, "that I know him."

"But who is he," they all said, "who rides with him in the same array?"

"That is the good and well-bred knight Sir Lavaine," said Sir Bors.

So Sir Lancelot met Sir Gawain, and there by force Sir Lancelot struck down Sir Gawain and his horse to the earth; and so he struck down Sir Agravain and Sir Gaheris, and he also struck down Sir Mordred, and all this with one spear. Then Sir Lavaine met Sir Palomides, and they met each other so hard and so fiercely that both their horses fell to the earth. And then they were horsed again, and then Sir Lancelot met Sir Palomides, and there Sir Palomides took a fall; and so Sir Lancelot, before he ever stopped, as fast as he could get spears, struck down thirty knights, and most of them were knights of the Round Table. And all the while the knights of his blood drew off, and found their fighting in other places where Sir Lancelot did not come.

And then King Arthur was angry when he saw Sir Lancelot do such deeds; and then the king called to him Sir Gawain, Sir Mordred, Sir Kay, Sir Griflet, Sir Lucan the butler, Sir Bedivere, Sir Palomides, and Sir Safere, his brother; and so the king, with these nine knights, made ready to set upon Sir Lancelot, and upon Sir Lavaine. Sir Bors and Sir Gareth saw all this.

"Now I am very much afraid," said Sir Bors, "that my lord Sir Lancelot will be hard matched."

"By my head," said Sir Gareth, "I will ride to my lord Sir Lancelot to help him, come what may to me, for he is the man who made me a knight."

"You shall not," said Sir Bors, "if you take my advice, unless you were disguised."

"You shall see me disguised," said Sir Gareth. And with that he saw a Welsh knight where he had gone to rest, and he had been badly hurt earlier by Sir Gawain; and Sir Gareth rode to him, and begged him, by his knighthood, to lend him his shield in exchange for his own.

"Gladly," said the Welsh knight.

And when Sir Gareth had his shield, the book says it was green, with a maiden painted in it. Then Sir Gareth came driving at Sir Lancelot as hard as he could, and said, "Knight, look to yourself, for there comes King Arthur with nine noble knights with him to put you to shame; and so I have come to keep you company, for the old love you have shown me."

"Many thanks," said Sir Lancelot.

"Sir," said Sir Gareth, "you take on Sir Gawain, and I shall take on Sir Palomides; and let Sir Lavaine match himself with the noble King Arthur. And when we have dealt with them, let us three hold steadfastly together."

Then King Arthur came with his nine knights, and Sir Lancelot met Sir Gawain, and gave him such a blow that the saddlebow of his saddle burst, and Sir Gawain fell to the earth. Then Sir Gareth met the good knight Sir Palomides, and he gave him such a blow that both his horse and he crashed to the earth. Then King Arthur met Sir Lavaine, and there each of them struck the other to the earth, horse and all, so that they lay there a long while. Then Sir Lancelot struck down Sir Agravain, and Sir Gaheris, and Sir Mordred; and Sir Gareth struck down Sir Kay, and Sir Safere, and Sir Griflet. And then Sir Lavaine was horsed again, and he struck down Sir Lucan the butler and Sir Bedivere; and then a great throng of good knights began.

Then Sir Lancelot crashed here and there, and tore off helmets and pulled them away, so that at that time no one could stand a blow from him, with spear or with sword. And Sir Gareth did such deeds of arms that all men wondered what knight he was with the green shield, for that day he struck down and pulled down more than thirty knights. And, as the French book says, Sir Lancelot wondered, when he saw Sir Gareth do such deeds, what knight he could be; and Sir Lavaine pulled down and struck down twenty knights. Sir Lancelot did not know Sir Gareth, either; for if Sir Tristram de Liones or Sir Lamorak de Galis had been alive, Sir Lancelot would have thought he was one of those two. So all the while Sir Lancelot, Sir Gareth and Sir Lavaine fought, and on the one side Sir Bors, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Lionel, Sir Lamorak de Galis, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin, Sir Pelleas, and more of King Ban's blood with them fought on another side of the field, and held the King with the Hundred Knights and the King of Northumberland hard pressed.
