Chapter 24: How King Arthur marvelled at the jousting in the field, and how he rode out and found Sir Lancelot

So this tournament and these jousts lasted a long time, until it was nearly night, for the knights of the Round Table kept rallying to King Arthur; for the king was angry beyond measure that he and his knights could not prevail that day.

Then Sir Gawain said to the king, "I wonder where Sir Bors de Ganis and his company of Sir Lancelot's blood have been all this day; I wonder that all this day they have not been around you. It is for some reason," said Sir Gawain.

"By my head," said Sir Kay, "Sir Bors has been over there on the right-hand side of this field all day, and there he and his kin are doing more honourably than we are."

"That may well be," said Sir Gawain, "but I am always afraid of trickery; for on pain of my life," said Sir Gawain, "this knight with the red sleeve of gold is Sir Lancelot himself, I can see it well by his riding and by his great strokes; and the other knight in the same colours is the good young knight Sir Lavaine. Also, that knight with the green shield is my brother Sir Gareth, and he has disguised himself, for no one will ever make him go against Sir Lancelot, because Sir Lancelot made him a knight."

"By my head," said Arthur, "nephew, I believe you; so tell me now what your best advice is."

"Sir," said Sir Gawain, "you shall have my advice: have the trumpets sound the retreat to quarters. For if he is Sir Lancelot du Lake, with my brother Sir Gareth beside him, and with the help of that good young knight Sir Lavaine, believe me truly, it will be no use to fight with them, unless we were to fall on one knight ten or twelve at a time, and that would be no honour, but shame."

"You speak the truth," said the king; "and to tell the truth," said the king, "it would be a shame to us, as many as we are, to set upon them any more. For believe me," said King Arthur, "they are three good knights, and especially that knight with the sleeve of gold."

So then they sounded the retreat to quarters; but straight away King Arthur sent word to the four kings and to the mighty duke, and asked them not to let the knight with the sleeve of gold leave them, so that the king might speak with him. Then straight away King Arthur dismounted and took off his armour, and took a little riding horse and rode after Sir Lancelot, for all the while he had kept a watch on him. And so he found him among the four kings and the duke; and there the king invited them all to supper, and they said they would come gladly. And when they had taken off their armour, then King Arthur knew Sir Lancelot, Sir Lavaine and Sir Gareth.

"Ah, Sir Lancelot," said King Arthur, "you have given me and my knights hot work today."

So they all went to Arthur's lodging together, and there was a great feast and great revelry, and the prize was given to Sir Lancelot; and the heralds declared that he had struck down fifty knights, and Sir Gareth thirty-five, and Sir Lavaine twenty-four knights. Then Sir Lancelot told the king and the queen how the lady huntress had shot him in the forest of Windsor, in the buttock, with a broad arrow, and how the wound from it had at that time been six inches deep, and as long. Also Arthur blamed Sir Gareth because he had left his company and held with Sir Lancelot.

"My lord," said Sir Gareth, "he made me a knight, and when I saw him so hard pressed, I thought it was to my honour to help him; for I saw him do so much, and so many noble knights against him. And when I understood that he was Sir Lancelot du Lake, I was ashamed to see so many knights against him alone."

"Truly," said King Arthur to Sir Gareth, "you speak well, and you have done honourably, and won great honour for yourself; and all the days of my life," said King Arthur to Sir Gareth, "you may be sure I shall love you and trust you all the better. For always," said Arthur, "it is an honourable knight's deed to help another honourable knight when he sees him in great danger; for an honourable man will always be loath to see an honourable man shamed. And the man who has no honour, and goes about with cowardice, will never show courtesy, nor any kind of goodness, where he sees a man in any danger, for a coward will never show mercy; and a good man will always do to another man as he would have done to himself."

So then there were great feasts for kings and dukes, and revelry, games and sport, and every kind of nobility was practised; and whoever was courteous, true and faithful to his friend was cherished in that time.
