Chapter 25: How true love is likened to summer

And so it went on from Candlemas until after Easter, until the month of May had come, when every lively heart begins to blossom and to bring forth fruit. For just as herbs and trees bring forth fruit and flourish in May, in the same way every joyful heart that is in any way a lover springs up and flourishes in vigorous deeds. For that joyful month of May gives all lovers heart, in something to drive him to some kind of thing more in that month than in any other month, for various reasons. For then all herbs and trees renew a man and woman, and in the same way lovers call back to mind old courtesy and old service, and many kind deeds that were forgotten through neglect. For just as the wasting of winter always wipes out and defaces green summer, so it goes with unstable love in man and woman. For in many people there is no steadfastness; for we may see every day that, at a little blast of winter's wasting, at once we deface and put aside true love, which cost so much, for little or nothing. This is no wisdom or steadfastness, but it is weakness of nature and great dishonour, whoever does it. And so, just as the month of May flowers and flourishes in many gardens, in the same way let every man of honour make his heart flourish in this world, first towards God, and next towards the joy of the one he promised his faith to. For there was never an honourable man or an honourable woman but they loved one better than another; and honour in arms may never be put to shame, but first keep the honour for God, and secondly the quarrel must come from your lady. And such love I call virtuous love.

But nowadays men cannot love for a week without having all their desires. That love cannot last by reason; for where they are quickly agreed, and the heat is hasty, it soon cools. Just so it goes with love nowadays, soon hot, soon cold: this is no steadfastness. But the old love was not like that. Men and women could love each other seven years, and there was no lecherous lust between them, and then there was love, truth and faithfulness. And look, in the same way love was practised in King Arthur's days. And so I liken love nowadays to summer and winter; for just as the one is hot and the other cold, so it goes with love nowadays. So all you who are lovers, call to your remembrance the month of May, like Queen Guinevere, of whom I make a little mention here, because while she lived she was a true lover, and therefore she had a good end.

Here ends the eighteenth book.

And here follows the nineteenth book.
