Chapter 1: How Queen Guinevere rode out Maying with certain knights of the Round Table, all dressed in green

So it happened in the month of May that Queen Guinevere called her knights of the Round Table to her, and she gave them notice that early the next morning she would ride out Maying, to gather the May greenery in the woods and fields near Westminster.

"And I warn you that there must be none of you who is not well horsed, and that you must all be dressed in green, either in silk or in cloth. And I will bring ten ladies with me, and every knight shall have a lady riding behind him, and every knight shall have a squire and two yeomen. And I want you all to be well horsed," she said.

So they made themselves ready in the brightest and freshest way. And these were the names of the knights: Sir Kay le Seneschal, Sir Agravain, Sir Brandiles, Sir Sagramore le Desirous, Sir Dodinas le Savage, Sir Ozanna le Cure Hardy, Sir Ladinas of the Forest Savage, Sir Persant of Inde, Sir Ironside, who was called the Knight of the Red Launds, and Sir Pelleas, the lover. And these ten knights made themselves ready in the brightest and freshest way to ride with the queen. And so in the morning they mounted their horses with the queen, and rode Maying in the woods and meadows as it pleased them, in great joy and delight. For the queen had planned to be back with King Arthur by ten o'clock at the latest, and that was her intention at the time.

Now there was a knight called Meliagaunce, and he was the son of King Bagdemagus, and at that time this knight held a castle, the gift of King Arthur, within seven miles of Westminster. And this knight, Sir Meliagaunce, loved Queen Guinevere exceedingly well, and so he had done for many long years. And the book says he had been lying in wait to carry off the queen, but he always held back because of Sir Lancelot; for he would on no account meddle with the queen if Sir Lancelot was in her company, or anywhere near her. And at that time it was the custom that the queen never rode out without a great company of men-at-arms about her, and many of them were good knights, and most of them were young men who wanted to win honour. And they were called the Queen's Knights. And in no battle, tournament or joust did any of them ever bear any sign of their own coats of arms, but only plain white shields, and that was why they were called the Queen's Knights. And then, when any of them happened to win great honour by his noble deeds, at the next Feast of Pentecost, if any had been killed or had died (and there was never a year that passed without some dying), the man of greatest honour among those called the Queen's Knights was chosen in the dead man's place. And this was how they all first rose, before they were famous men of honour, both Sir Lancelot and all the rest of them.

But this knight, Sir Meliagaunce, had watched the queen closely and learned her plans, and that Sir Lancelot was not with her, and that she had no men-at-arms with her, only the ten noble knights all dressed in green for Maying. Then he provided himself with some twenty men-at-arms and a hundred archers to destroy the queen and her knights, for he thought that this was the best time to take the queen.
