Chapter 2: How Sir Meliagaunce captured the queen and her knights, who were badly wounded in the fighting

So when the queen and all her knights had gone Maying, and all of them were decked with herbs, mosses and flowers in the best and freshest way, just then Sir Meliagaunce came out of a wood with some eight score men, a hundred and sixty, well armed, as if they were going to fight a pitched battle. And he ordered the queen and her knights to stay where they were, for they would stay whether they liked it or not.

"Traitor knight," said Queen Guinevere, "what do you mean to do? Will you shame yourself? Remember that you are a king's son, and a knight of the Round Table, and here you are about to dishonour the noble king who made you a knight. You shame all knighthood and yourself. And me, let me tell you, you shall never shame, for I would rather cut my own throat in two than let you dishonour me."

"As for all this talk," said Sir Meliagaunce, "let it be as it may. For believe me, madam, I have loved you for many a year, and never before now could I get you at such an advantage as I have you now, and so I will take you as I find you."

Then all ten of the noble knights spoke at once, and said, "Sir Meliagaunce, you may be sure that you are about to put your honour in danger of disgrace, and you also mean to put our lives in danger, though we are unarmed. You have us at a great advantage, for it seems you have been lying in wait for us. But rather than let you bring shame on the queen and on us all, we would just as soon lose our lives, for if we did otherwise, we would be shamed for ever."

Then Sir Meliagaunce said, "Defend yourselves as well as you can, and keep the queen."

Then the ten knights of the Round Table drew their swords, and the others charged at them with their spears, and the ten knights stood up to them manfully, and struck their spears aside so that no spear did them any harm. Then they laid into each other with swords, and very soon Sir Kay, Sir Sagramore, Sir Agravain, Sir Dodinas, Sir Ladinas and Sir Ozanna were struck to the ground with terrible wounds. Then Sir Brandiles, and Sir Persant, Sir Ironside and Sir Pelleas fought long, and they were badly wounded. For these ten knights, before ever they were laid on the ground, killed forty men of the boldest and best of them.

So when the queen saw her knights so grievously wounded, and that they must be killed in the end, then out of pity and sorrow she cried out to Sir Meliagaunce, "Don't kill my noble knights, and I will go with you on this condition: that you spare them, and let them be hurt no more, and that they are taken with me wherever you take me. For I will kill myself rather than go with you, unless these noble knights of mine may stay in my presence."

"Madam," said Meliagaunce, "for your sake they shall be taken with you into my own castle, provided that you do as you are told, and ride with me."

Then the queen begged the four knights to stop fighting, and said that she and they would not be parted.

"Madam," said Sir Pelleas, "we will do as you do, for as for me, I care nothing for my life or death."

For, as the French book says, Sir Pelleas dealt such blows there that no armour could withstand him.
