Chapter 3: How Sir Lancelot got word that the queen had been captured, and how Sir Meliagaunce laid an ambush for Lancelot

Then at the queen's command they left off fighting, and set the wounded knights on horseback, some sitting up, some slung across their horses, so that it was pitiful to see them. And then Sir Meliagaunce ordered the queen and all her knights that none of her company should leave her; for he was badly afraid of Sir Lancelot du Lake, in case he should get any word of it. The queen saw all this, and secretly she called to her a page of her chamber who had a swift horse.

"Go," she said to him, "when you see your chance, and take this ring to Sir Lancelot du Lake, and beg him, as he loves me, to come to me and rescue me, if he ever wants to have joy of me. And don't spare your horse," said the queen, "for water or for land."

So the boy watched for his chance, and swiftly he put the spurs to his horse, and rode away as fast as he could. And when Sir Meliagaunce saw him flee like that, he understood that it was by the queen's command, to warn Sir Lancelot. Then the best mounted of them chased him and shot at him, but the boy got clear of them all in no time.

And then Sir Meliagaunce said to the queen, "Madam, you mean to betray me, but I will make arrangements for Sir Lancelot, so that he shall not get to you easily."

And then he rode with her, and all of them, to his castle, in all the haste they could. And on the way Sir Meliagaunce set the best archers he could find in his country in an ambush, thirty of them, to lie in wait for Sir Lancelot, ordering them that if they saw a knight of that kind come along the road on a white horse, they must on no account fail to kill his horse, but on no account fight him hand to hand, "for he is too bold to be overcome."

So this was done, and they came to his castle. But the queen would on no account let any of the ten knights or her ladies out of her sight, but they were always in her presence. For the book says that Sir Meliagaunce did not dare to use force, for fear of Sir Lancelot, since he believed that Lancelot had been warned.

So when the boy had got away from Sir Meliagaunce's company, within a while he came to Westminster, and at once he found Sir Lancelot. And when he had given his message, and handed him the queen's ring, "Alas," said Sir Lancelot, "now I am shamed for ever, unless I can rescue that noble lady from dishonour."

Then he eagerly called for his armour. And all the while the boy told Sir Lancelot how the ten knights had fought marvellously, and how Sir Pelleas, and Sir Ironside, and Sir Brandiles, and Sir Persant of Inde had fought strongly, but above all Sir Pelleas, whom no one could withstand; and how they had all fought until at last they were laid on the ground; and how then the queen had made terms to save their lives, and had gone with Sir Meliagaunce.

"Alas," said Sir Lancelot, "that most noble lady, that she should be so ruined! I would rather," said Sir Lancelot, "than have all France, that I had been there well armed."

So when Sir Lancelot was armed and on his horse, he asked the page of the queen's chamber to tell Sir Lavaine how suddenly he had left, and for what reason. "And beg him, as he loves me, to hurry after me, and not to stop until he comes to the castle where Sir Meliagaunce stays, or lives. For there," said Sir Lancelot, "he shall hear of me, if I am a living man, and I will rescue the queen and the ten knights whom he has treacherously taken, and I will prove that on his head, and on all who side with him."
