Chapter 4: How Sir Lancelot's horse was killed, and how Sir Lancelot rode in a cart to rescue the queen

Then Sir Lancelot rode as fast as he could, and the book says he took to the water at Westminster Bridge, and made his horse swim over the Thames to Lambeth. And then within a while he came to the very place where the ten noble knights had fought with Sir Meliagaunce. And then Sir Lancelot followed the track until he came to a wood, and there was a narrow way, and there the thirty archers ordered Sir Lancelot to turn back, and follow that track no further.

"What authority do you have," said Sir Lancelot, "to make me, a knight of the Round Table, leave my rightful way?"

"You'll leave this way, or else you'll go it on foot, for be sure of this, your horse will be killed."

"That's no great feat," said Sir Lancelot, "to kill my horse. But as for myself, when my horse is killed, I don't give a straw for you, not if you were five hundred more."

So then they shot Sir Lancelot's horse, and struck him with many arrows. And then Sir Lancelot got clear of his horse, and went on foot. But there were so many ditches and hedges between them and him that he could not get at any of them.

"Alas, for shame," said Lancelot, "that ever one knight should betray another knight! But it is an old saying: a good man is never in danger except when he is in the power of a coward."

Then Sir Lancelot walked a while, and then he was badly weighed down by his armour, his shield, and his spear, and all that belonged to him. Believe me, he was sorely troubled, and he was very unwilling to leave behind anything that belonged to him, for he greatly feared the treachery of Sir Meliagaunce.

Then by chance a cart came by him, which had come there to fetch wood.

"Tell me, carter," said Sir Lancelot, "what shall I give you to let me jump into your cart, and for you to take me to a castle two miles from here?"

"You're not getting into my cart," said the carter, "for I've been sent to fetch wood for my lord, Sir Meliagaunce."

"He is the one I want to speak with," said Sir Lancelot.

"You're not coming with me," said the carter.

Then Sir Lancelot leapt at him, and gave him such a blow that he fell to the ground stone dead. Then the other carter, his companion, was afraid, and expected to go the same way. And then he cried, "Fair lord, save my life, and I will take you wherever you like."

"Then I order you," said Sir Lancelot, "to drive me and this cart straight to Sir Meliagaunce's gate."

"Jump up into the cart," said the carter, "and you'll be there in no time."

So the carter drove on at a great gallop, and Sir Lancelot's horse followed the cart, with more than forty arrows in him, broad-headed and rough.

And for more than an hour and a half Dame Guinevere had been waiting in a bay window with her ladies, and she saw an armed knight standing in a cart.

"Look, madam," said a lady, "there's a fine armed knight riding in a cart. I suppose he's riding to his hanging."

"Where?" said the queen.

Then she saw by his shield that it was he himself, Sir Lancelot du Lake. And then she saw his horse coming along behind that cart, all the way, and all the way it trod its own guts and its belly under its feet.

"Alas," said the queen, "now I see and know well that happy is the man who has a trusty friend. Ah, most noble knight," said Queen Guinevere, "I see you are in a hard spot, when you ride in a cart."

Then she rebuked the lady who had likened Sir Lancelot riding in a cart to riding to his hanging. "It was foul-mouthed," said the queen, "and an evil comparison, to liken the most noble knight in the world to such a shameful death. O Jesus defend him and keep him," said the queen, "from any harmful end."

By this time Sir Lancelot had come to the gates of that castle, and there he got down, and shouted, so that the whole castle rang with it, "Where are you, false traitor, Sir Meliagaunce, and knight of the Round Table? Come out here now, you traitor knight, you and your company with you; for here I am, Sir Lancelot du Lake, who will fight with you."

And with that he flung the gate wide open on the porter, and struck him under the ear with his gauntlet, so that his neck broke in two.
