Chapter 5: How Sir Meliagaunce begged the queen's forgiveness, and how she calmed Sir Lancelot, and other matters

When Sir Meliagaunce heard that Sir Lancelot was there, he ran to Queen Guinevere, and fell on his knee, and said, "Mercy, madam! Now I put myself wholly at your mercy."

"What's the matter with you now?" said Queen Guinevere. "Truly, I might well have known that some good knight would avenge me, even if my lord Arthur knew nothing of this work of yours."

"Madam," said Sir Meliagaunce, "all that is amiss on my part shall be put right exactly as you yourself decide, and I put myself wholly at your mercy."

"What would you have me do?" said the queen.

"I would ask no more," said Meliagaunce, "than that you take it all into your own hands, and that you govern my lord Sir Lancelot. And whatever welcome can be given him in this poor castle, you and he shall have until tomorrow, and then you and all of them may go back to Westminster. And my body and all that I have I will put at your command."

"You speak well," said the queen, "and peace is always better than war, and the less talk there is, the greater my honour."

Then the queen and her ladies went down to the knight, Sir Lancelot, who stood in the inner court, angry beyond measure, waiting for battle. And all the while he kept calling, "You traitor knight, come out!"

Then the queen came to him and said, "Sir Lancelot, why are you so worked up?"

"Ah, madam," said Sir Lancelot, "why do you ask me that? It seems to me," said Sir Lancelot, "that you ought to be angrier than I am, for you have suffered the harm and the dishonour. For believe me, madam, my harm is only small, the killing of a mare's son, a mere horse; but the insult grieves me far more than all my harm."

"Truly," said the queen, "you speak the truth. But I thank you with all my heart," said the queen, "but you must come in with me peaceably, for everything has been put in my hands, and all that is evil shall turn out for the best. For the knight bitterly repents of the misdeed that he has fallen into."

"Madam," said Sir Lancelot, "since it is so that you have come to terms with him, as for me I cannot go against it, even though Sir Meliagaunce has acted very shamefully towards me, and like a coward. Ah, madam," said Sir Lancelot, "if I had known you would come to terms with him so soon, I would not have made such haste to you."

"Why do you say that?" said the queen. "Do you regret your good deeds? Believe me," said the queen, "I never came to terms with him for any favour or love I had for him, but to put a stop to every shameful rumour."

"Madam," said Sir Lancelot, "you know very well that I was never willing or glad to have shameful slander or rumour. And there is neither king, queen nor knight alive, except my lord King Arthur, and you, madam, who could stop me from making Sir Meliagaunce's heart go very cold before ever I left this place."

"That I know well," said the queen, "but what more do you want? You shall have everything arranged just as you wish to have it."

"Madam," said Sir Lancelot, "so long as you are pleased, I don't mind. As for me, you will soon please me."

Just then the queen took Sir Lancelot by his bare hand, for he had taken off his gauntlet, and so she went with him to her chamber; and then she ordered him to be unarmed. And then Sir Lancelot asked where the ten knights were who had been badly wounded. So she showed them to Sir Lancelot, and there they rejoiced greatly at his coming, and Sir Lancelot grieved greatly over their wounds, and lamented them deeply. And there Sir Lancelot told them how in his cowardice and treachery Meliagaunce had set archers to kill his horse, and how he had been forced to put himself in a cart. So they all complained to each other; and they would very gladly have been avenged, but they held their peace because of the queen. Then, as the French book says, Sir Lancelot was called for many a day afterwards le Chevaler du Chariot, the Knight of the Cart, and did many deeds, and had great adventures. And so we leave this tale of le Chevaler du Chariot, and turn to this tale.

So Sir Lancelot had a warm welcome from the queen, and then Sir Lancelot made a promise with the queen that the same night Sir Lancelot would come to a window that faced out onto a garden. And that window was barred with iron, and there Sir Lancelot promised to meet her when everyone was asleep.

So then Sir Lavaine came riding hard to the gates, shouting, "Where is my lord, Sir Lancelot du Lake?"

Then he was sent for, and when Sir Lavaine saw Sir Lancelot, he said, "My lord, I could see well you were in a hard spot, for I found your horse that was killed with arrows."

"As for that," said Sir Lancelot, "I beg you, Sir Lavaine, speak of other things, and let this pass, and we will put it right another time when we best can."
