Chapter 6: How Sir Lancelot came to the queen in the night and lay with her, and how Sir Meliagaunce accused the queen of treason

Then the knights who were hurt had their wounds probed, and soft salves were laid on their wounds. And so the time passed until supper, and all the welcome that could be given them there was given to the queen and all her knights. Then, when it was time, they went to their rooms. But the queen would on no account allow the wounded knights to be away from her, so they were laid in alcoves beside her chamber, on beds and pillows, so that she could see to them herself, and see that they lacked nothing.

So when Sir Lancelot was in the room that had been assigned to him, he called Sir Lavaine to him, and told him that he must go that night to speak with his lady, Dame Guinevere.

"Sir," said Sir Lavaine, "let me go with you, if you please, for I am badly afraid of the treachery of Sir Meliagaunce."

"No," said Sir Lancelot, "I thank you, but I will have nobody with me."

Then Sir Lancelot took his sword in his hand, and went secretly to a place where he had noticed a ladder beforehand, and he took it under his arm, and carried it through the garden, and set it up against the window. And there the queen was ready at once to meet him. And then they made their complaints to each other about many different things, and then Sir Lancelot wished that he could come in to her.

"Believe me," said the queen, "I would like it as much as you, that you could come in to me."

"Would you, madam," said Sir Lancelot, "with all your heart, that I were with you?"

"Yes, truly," said the queen.

"Now I will prove my strength," said Sir Lancelot, "for your love."

And then he set his hands on the bars of iron, and he pulled at them with such strength that he burst them clean out of the stone walls, and with that one of the iron bars cut through the flesh of his hand to the bone. And then he leapt into the chamber to the queen.

"Make no noise," said the queen, "for my wounded knights are lying here close by me."

So, to pass on with this tale, Sir Lancelot went to bed with the queen, and he paid no attention to his hurt hand, but took his pleasure and his delight until the dawning of the day. And believe me, he did not sleep but kept watch, and when he saw that the time had come when he could stay no longer, he took his leave and left by the window, and put it back together as well as he could, and so went off to his own room. And there he told Sir Lavaine how he was hurt. Then Sir Lavaine dressed his hand and stopped the bleeding, and put a glove on it, so that it would not be noticed. And so the queen lay long in her bed, until nine o'clock.

Then Sir Meliagaunce went to the queen's chamber, and found her ladies there already dressed.

"Jesus have mercy," said Sir Meliagaunce, "what is the matter with you, madam, that you sleep so long?"

And with that he opened the bed-curtain to look at her. And then he saw where she lay, and all the sheet and pillow were bloodied with the blood of Sir Lancelot and his hurt hand. When Sir Meliagaunce saw that blood, he judged that she had been false to the king, and that one of the wounded knights had lain with her all that night.

"Ah, madam," said Sir Meliagaunce, "now I have found you a false traitress to my lord Arthur. For now I can prove well that it was not for nothing that you had these wounded knights laid within the bounds of your chamber. And so I will accuse you of treason before my lord, King Arthur. And now I have caught you, madam, in a shameful deed; and that they are all false, or some of them, I will make good by combat, for a wounded knight has lain with you this night."

"That is false," said the queen, "and I appeal to them all as witnesses."

Then, when the ten knights heard Sir Meliagaunce's words, they all spoke with one voice and said to Sir Meliagaunce, "You lie, and you wrongly accuse us of such a deed, and any one of us will make that good by combat. Choose whichever of us you like, when we are healed of our wounds."

"You will not," said Sir Meliagaunce. "Away with your proud talk, for here you can all see," said Sir Meliagaunce, "that a wounded knight has lain with the queen this night."

Then they were all ashamed when they saw that blood. And believe me, Sir Meliagaunce was exceedingly glad that he had the queen at such an advantage, for he thought that by this he could cover up his own treason. So, in the middle of this uproar, Sir Lancelot came in, and found them all in a great commotion.
