Chapter 7: How Sir Lancelot answered for the queen and pledged to fight Sir Meliagaunce, and how Sir Lancelot was caught in a trap

"What is all this?" said Sir Lancelot.

Then Sir Meliagaunce told them what he had found, and showed them the queen's bed.

"Truly," said Sir Lancelot, "you did not act rightly, or like a knight, in touching a queen's bed while its curtains were drawn and she was lying in it. For I dare say my lord Arthur himself would not have drawn back her curtains while she was in her bed, unless it had pleased him to lie down beside her. And so you have acted dishonourably and shamefully, to your own disgrace."

"I don't know what you mean," said Sir Meliagaunce, "but I am quite sure that one of her wounded knights has lain with her this night, and so I will prove with my hands that she is a traitress to my lord Arthur."

"Be careful what you do," said Lancelot, "for if you say so, and will prove it, your challenge will be taken up."

"My lord, Sir Lancelot," said Sir Meliagaunce, "I advise you to be careful what you do. For though you are as good a knight as any, and you know well that you are renowned as the best knight in the world, still you should think twice before doing battle in a wrong quarrel, for God will have a stroke in every battle."

"As for that," said Sir Lancelot, "God is to be feared. But to that I say no, plainly: that this night none of these ten wounded knights lay with my lady Queen Guinevere, and I will prove with my hands that what you say is untrue."

"Take it," said Sir Meliagaunce, "here is my glove, as pledge that she is a traitress to my lord, King Arthur, and that this night one of the wounded knights lay with her."

"And I accept your glove," said Sir Lancelot.

And so the pledges were sealed with their seal rings, and handed over to the ten knights.

"On what day shall we do battle together?" said Sir Lancelot.

"A week from today," said Sir Meliagaunce, "in the field beside Westminster."

"I agree," said Sir Lancelot.

"But now," said Sir Meliagaunce, "since it is so that we must fight together, I beg you, as you are a noble knight, to plan no treachery against me, and no foul play, in the meantime, and to let no one do so on your behalf."

"So help me God," said Sir Lancelot, "you shall know very well that I was never a man of that character. For I appeal to all knights who have ever known me: I never dealt in treachery, nor did I ever love the company of any man who dealt in treachery."

"Then let us go to dinner," said Meliagaunce, "and after dinner you and the queen and all of you may ride to Westminster."

"Gladly," said Sir Lancelot.

Then Sir Meliagaunce said to Sir Lancelot, "Would you like to see the passages of this castle?"

"With pleasure," said Sir Lancelot.

And then they went together from room to room, for Sir Lancelot feared no dangers. For a man of honour and of prowess always fears dangers least, because he thinks every man is as he is himself; but the man who deals in treachery often puts another man in great danger. So it happened to Sir Lancelot, who feared no danger, that as he went with Sir Meliagaunce he stepped on a trapdoor and the board tipped over, and Sir Lancelot fell down more than ten fathoms into a cave full of straw. And then Sir Meliagaunce went away, and made no fuss, as if he did not know where he was.

And when Sir Lancelot was missed like this, they wondered what had become of him. And then the queen and many of them thought that he had left, as he often used to do, suddenly. For Sir Meliagaunce quickly had Sir Lavaine's horse taken away and put aside, so that they would all believe Sir Lancelot had left suddenly. So the time passed until after dinner. And then Sir Lavaine would not rest until he had arranged litters for the wounded knights, so that they could be laid in them; and so, with the queen and all of them, both ladies and gentlewomen and others, they went to Westminster. And there the knights told King Arthur how Meliagaunce had accused the queen of high treason, and how Sir Lancelot had accepted his glove, "and a week from today they will do battle before you."

"By my head," said King Arthur, "I fear Sir Meliagaunce has taken a heavy task upon himself. But where is Sir Lancelot?" said the king.

"Sir," they all said, "we don't know where he is, but we think he has ridden off to some adventure, as he very often does, for he has Sir Lavaine's horse."

"Let him be," said the king. "He will turn up, unless he has been trapped by some treachery."
