Chapter 8: How Sir Lancelot was freed from prison by a lady, and took a white warhorse and came to keep his appointed day

So we leave Sir Lancelot lying in that cave in great pain. And every day a lady came and brought him his food and his drink, and wooed him, wanting to lie with him; and always the noble knight, Sir Lancelot, told her no.

"Sir Lancelot," she said, "you are not wise, for you can never get out of this prison unless you have my help. And besides, your lady, Queen Guinevere, will be burned through your failing, unless you are there on the day of the battle."

"God forbid," said Sir Lancelot, "that she should be burned through my failing. And if it turns out," said Sir Lancelot, "that I cannot be there, it will be well understood, by the king and by the queen and by all men of honour, that I am dead, sick, or in prison. For all men who know me will say for me that I am in some bad trouble if I am not there that day. And I know well there is some good knight, either of my blood or some other who loves me, who will take up my quarrel. And therefore," said Sir Lancelot, "you may be sure you will not frighten me; and if there were no other woman in all this land but you, I would not lie with you."

"Then you're shamed," said the lady, "and ruined for ever."

"As for the world's shame, Jesus defend me from it; and as for my distress, it is welcome, whatever it is that God sends me."

So she came to him on the same day that the battle was to be, and said, "Sir Lancelot, I think you are too hard-hearted. But if you would only kiss me once, I would set you free, and give you your armour, and the best horse in Sir Meliagaunce's stable."

"As for kissing you," said Sir Lancelot, "I may do that and lose no honour. And believe me, if I thought there were any dishonour in kissing you, I would not do it."

Then he kissed her, and then she got him out, and brought him to his armour. And when he was armed, she took him to a stable where twelve good warhorses stood, and told him to choose the best. Then Sir Lancelot looked at a white warhorse that pleased him best; and at once he ordered the grooms to saddle him quickly with the best war saddle there was; and it was done as he ordered. Then he took his spear in his hand, and his sword by his side, and commended the lady to God, and said, "Lady, for this good deed I will do you service, if it is ever in my power."
