Chapter 9: How Sir Lancelot arrived just as Sir Meliagaunce was waiting for him in the field, and made ready for battle

Now we leave Sir Lancelot galloping as fast as he could, and speak of Queen Guinevere, who was brought to a fire to be burned. For Sir Meliagaunce was sure, so he thought, that Sir Lancelot would not be at that battle; and so he kept crying out to King Arthur to do him justice, or else bring out Sir Lancelot du Lake. Then the king and all the court were sorely dismayed and ashamed that the queen should be burned through Sir Lancelot's failing.

"My lord Arthur," said Sir Lavaine, "you may understand that all is not well with my lord Sir Lancelot. For if he were alive, and not sick or in prison, believe me, he would be here; for you never heard that he ever failed in his part for anyone he was to do battle for. And therefore," said Sir Lavaine, "my lord King Arthur, I beg you to give me leave to do battle here this day for my lord and master, and to save my lady the queen."

"Many thanks, noble Sir Lavaine," said King Arthur, "for I dare say that everything Sir Meliagaunce charges against my lady the queen is false. For I have spoken with all ten of the wounded knights, and there is not one of them, if he were whole and able to do battle, who would not prove on Sir Meliagaunce's body that what he charges against my queen is false."

"So will I," said Sir Lavaine, "in the defence of my lord Sir Lancelot, if you will give me leave."

"Now I give you leave," said King Arthur, "and do your best, for I dare well say there has been some treason done to Sir Lancelot."

Then Sir Lavaine was armed and horsed, and quickly he rode to the end of the lists to carry out this battle. And just as the heralds were about to cry, "Lesses les aler!", which is to say, "Let them go!", at that very moment in came Sir Lancelot, driving with all the force of his horse. And then Arthur cried, "Ho!" and "Hold!" Then Sir Lancelot was called on horseback before King Arthur, and there he told openly before the king and everyone how Sir Meliagaunce had treated him from first to last. And when the king and the queen and all the lords knew of the treason of Sir Meliagaunce, they were all ashamed on his behalf. Then Queen Guinevere was sent for, and set beside the king, in great trust in her champion. And then there was nothing more to say, but Sir Lancelot and Sir Meliagaunce squared up to each other for battle, and took their spears. And so they came together like thunder, and there Sir Lancelot bore him down clean over his horse's rump. And then Sir Lancelot dismounted and set his shield on his shoulder, with his sword in his hand, and Sir Meliagaunce in the same way squared up to him. And there they struck many great strokes at each other; and at last Sir Lancelot struck him such a blow on the helmet that he fell sideways to the ground. And then he cried out to him aloud, "Most noble knight, Sir Lancelot du Lake, save my life, for I yield myself to you. And I beg you, as you are a knight and a fellow of the Round Table, do not kill me, for I yield myself as beaten; and whether I live or die, I put myself in the king's hands and yours."

Then Sir Lancelot did not know what to do, for he would rather have had his revenge on Sir Meliagaunce than all the riches of the world. And Sir Lancelot looked up at Queen Guinevere, to see if he could tell by any sign or look what she would have done. And then the queen nodded at Sir Lancelot, as though she would say, "Kill him." Sir Lancelot knew full well by the nod of her head that she wanted him dead. Then Sir Lancelot told him to get up, for shame, and fight that battle to the uttermost.

"No," said Sir Meliagaunce, "I will never get up until you accept me as yielded and recreant."

"I will make you a generous offer," said Sir Lancelot. "That is to say, I will take the armour off my head and off the left quarter of my body, all that can be unarmed, and have my left hand tied behind me, so that it cannot help me; and just so I will do battle with you."

Then Sir Meliagaunce sprang to his feet, and said aloud, "My lord Arthur, take note of this offer, for I will take it. And let him be unarmed and bound according to his offer."

"What do you say?" said King Arthur to Sir Lancelot. "Will you stand by your offer?"

"Yes, my lord," said Sir Lancelot, "I will never go back on what I have once said."

Then the marshals of the field took the armour off Sir Lancelot, first from his head, and then from his left arm and his left side, and they bound his left arm behind his back, without a shield or anything, and then they were set against each other. Believe me, many a lady and knight marvelled that Sir Lancelot would put himself in danger like that. Then Sir Meliagaunce came with his sword raised high, and Sir Lancelot showed him openly his bare head and his bare left side. And when he thought he would strike him on the bare head, then swiftly Sir Lancelot drew back his left leg and his left side, and put his right hand and his sword to meet that stroke, and so turned it aside with great skill. And then, with great force, Sir Lancelot struck him such a blow on the helmet that the stroke split the head in two. Then there was no more to do, but he was dragged out of the field. And at the earnest request of the knights of the Round Table, the king allowed him to be buried, with an inscription over him telling who killed him and for what cause he was killed. And then the king and the queen made more of Sir Lancelot du Lake, and he was more cherished, than ever he had been before.
