Chapter 10: How Sir Urre came to Arthur's court to be healed of his wounds, and how King Arthur would be the first to handle him

Then, as the French book tells, there was a good knight in the land of Hungary, and his name was Sir Urre. And he was a knight-errant, and wherever he could hear of any deeds of honour, there he would be. So it happened that in Spain there was an earl's son whose name was Alphegus; and at a great tournament in Spain this Sir Urre, the knight of Hungary, and Sir Alphegus of Spain met each other out of sheer envy, and each took on the other to the uttermost. And by chance Sir Urre killed Sir Alphegus, the earl's son of Spain. But this knight who was killed had given Sir Urre, before ever he was killed, seven great wounds, three on the head, and four on his body and on his left hand. And this Sir Alphegus had a mother, who was a great sorceress; and she, in spite for her son's death, worked by her subtle arts so that Sir Urre should never be whole, but his wounds should always fester at one time and bleed at another, so that he should never be whole until the best knight in the world had probed his wounds. And so she boasted of it, and through that it became known that Sir Urre would never be whole.

Then his mother had a horse-litter made, and put him in it between two palfreys. And then she took Sir Urre's sister with him, a very beautiful damsel, whose name was Felelolie; and then she took a page with them to look after their horses; and so they led Sir Urre through many countries. For, as the French book says, she led him like this for seven years through all the Christian lands, and she could never find a knight who could ease her son. So she came into Scotland and into the lands of England, and by chance she came, near the feast of Pentecost, to King Arthur's court, which at that time was held at Carlisle. And when she came there, she made it openly known that she had come into that land to heal her son.

Then King Arthur had that lady called, and asked her the reason why she had brought that wounded knight into that land.

"My most noble king," said that lady, "believe me, I brought him here to be healed of his wounds, which for all these seven years could not be made whole."

And then she told the king where he was wounded, and by whom, and how the dead knight's mother had revealed in her pride how she had brought it about by enchantment, so that he should never be whole until the best knight in the world had probed his wounds. "And so I have passed through all the Christian lands to have him healed, except this land. And if I fail to heal him here in this land, I will never take any more trouble over it; and that is a pity, for he was a good knight, and of great nobility."

"What is his name?" said Arthur.

"My good and gracious lord," she said, "his name is Sir Urre of the Mount."

"In good time," said the king, "and since you have come into this land, you are very welcome. And believe me, here your son shall be healed, if ever any Christian man can heal him. And to give all other men of honour heart, I myself will try to handle your son, and so shall all the kings, dukes and earls who are here with me at this time. I will command them to it, and I know well they will obey and do as I command. And believe me," said King Arthur to Urre's sister, "I will begin to handle him, and probe his wounds as well as I can, not presuming that I am worthy enough to heal your son by my deeds; but I will encourage other men of honour to do as I do."

And then the king commanded all the kings, dukes and earls, and all the noble knights of the Round Table who were there at that time, to come into the meadow of Carlisle. And at that time there were only a hundred and ten of the Round Table there, for forty knights were away. And so here we must begin with King Arthur, as it is natural to begin with him who was the man of greatest honour of any christened man at that time.
