Chapter 11: How King Arthur handled Sir Urre, and after him many other knights of the Round Table

Then King Arthur looked at Sir Urre, and the king thought he would be a very fine man when he was whole. And then King Arthur had him taken down off the litter and laid him on the ground, and a cushion of gold was laid there for him to kneel on.

And then noble Arthur said, "Fair knight, I am sorry for your hurt, and to encourage all the other noble knights I will ask you gently to allow me to handle your wounds."

"Most noble Christian king," said Urre, "do as you wish, for I am at the mercy of God, and at your command."

So then Arthur gently handled him, and then some of his wounds began to bleed again. Then King Clarence of Northumberland probed them, and it would not be. And then Sir Barant le Apres, who was called the King with the Hundred Knights, tried and failed; and so did King Uriens of the land of Gore; so did King Anguish of Ireland; so did King Nentres of Garlot; so did King Carados of Scotland; so did the Duke Galahalt, the high prince; so did Constantine, who was Sir Cador's son of Cornwall; so did Duke Chaleins of Clarance; so did the Earl Ulbause; so did the Earl Lambaile; so did the Earl Aristause.

Then in came Sir Gawain with his three sons, Sir Gingalin, Sir Florence and Sir Lovel (these two were begotten on Sir Brandiles' sister); and they all failed. Then in came Sir Agravain, Sir Gaheris, Sir Mordred, and the good knight Sir Gareth, who in true knighthood was worth all his brothers. So came the knights of Lancelot's kin; but Sir Lancelot was not at court at that time, for he was away then on his adventures. Then came Sir Lionel, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Blamore de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, Sir Gahalantine, Sir Galihodin, Sir Menaduke, Sir Villiers the Valiant, Sir Hebes le Renoumes. All these were of Sir Lancelot's kin, and they all failed. Then in came Sir Sagramore le Desirous, Sir Dodinas le Savage, Sir Dinadan, Sir Bruin le Noire, whom Sir Kay named La Cote Male Taile, and Sir Kay the seneschal, Sir Kay de Stranges, Sir Meliot de Logres, Sir Petipase of Winchelsea, Sir Galleron of Galway, Sir Melion of the Mountain, Sir Cardok, Sir Uwain les Avoutres, and Sir Ozanna le Cure Hardy.

Then in came Sir Astamor, and Sir Gromere, Grummor's son, Sir Crosselm, and Sir Servause le Breuse, who was said to be an exceedingly strong knight. For, as the book says, the chief Lady of the Lake feasted Sir Lancelot and Servause le Breuse, and when she had feasted them both, at different times, she asked each of them to grant her a favour. And they granted it her. And then she asked Sir Servause to promise her never to do battle against Sir Lancelot du Lake, and in the same way she asked Sir Lancelot never to do battle against Sir Servause; and so each of them promised her. For the French book says that Sir Servause never had the heart or the desire to do battle against any man, except against giants, and against dragons and wild beasts. So we pass on to those who, at the king's request, all made ready, all who were there at that high feast of the knights of the Round Table, to probe Sir Urre's wounds; and the king did it with this intent, to learn which was the noblest knight among them.

Then came Sir Aglovale, Sir Durnore, and Sir Tor, who was begotten on the wife of Aries the cowherd, though he was begotten before Aries married her; and King Pellinore fathered them all: first Sir Tor, Sir Aglovale, Sir Durnore, Sir Lamorak, one of the noblest knights that ever was in Arthur's days as a knight of this world, and Sir Percival, who was peerless, except for Sir Galahad, in holy deeds; but they died in the quest of the Holy Grail. Then came Sir Griflet le Fise de Dieu, Sir Lucan the butler, Sir Bedivere his brother, Sir Brandiles, Sir Constantine, Sir Cador's son of Cornwall, who was king after Arthur's days, and Sir Clegis, Sir Sadok, Sir Dinas the seneschal of Cornwall, Sir Fergus, Sir Driant, Sir Lambegus, Sir Clarrus of Clermont, Sir Cloddrus, Sir Hectimere, Sir Edward of Caernarvon, Sir Dinas, Sir Priamus, who was christened by Sir Tristram, the noble knight, and these three were brothers; Sir Helin le Blank, who was Sir Bors's son, whom he fathered on King Brandegore's daughter, and Sir Brian de Listinoise; Sir Gaunter, Sir Raynold and Sir Gilmere, three brothers whom Sir Lancelot overcame on a bridge when he wore Sir Kay's armour. Sir Guyart le Petite, Sir Bellangere le Beuse, who was the son of the good knight Sir Alisander le Orphelin, who was killed by the treason of King Mark. That same traitor king also killed the noble knight Sir Tristram, with a sharp sword, as he sat harping before his lady Isolde the Fair; and his death was mourned by every knight there ever was in Arthur's days. There were never any so mourned as Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak, for they were treacherously killed, Sir Tristram by King Mark, and Sir Lamorak by Sir Gawain and his brothers. And this Sir Bellangere avenged the death of his father Alisander, and of Sir Tristram, for he killed King Mark; and Isolde the Fair died swooning on the body of Sir Tristram, and that was a great pity. And all who were with King Mark and had agreed to the death of Sir Tristram were killed, such as Sir Andred and many others.

Then came Sir Hebes, Sir Morganore, Sir Sentraile, Sir Suppinabilis, Sir Bellangere le Orgulous, whom the good knight Sir Lamorak overcame in open battle; Sir Neroveus and Sir Plenorius, two good knights whom Sir Lancelot overcame; Sir Darras, Sir Harry le Fise Lake, Sir Erminide, brother to King Hermaunce, for whom Sir Palomides fought at the Red City against two brothers; and Sir Selises of the Dolorous Tower, Sir Edward of Orkney, Sir Ironside, who was called the noble Knight of the Red Launds, whom Sir Gareth overcame for the love of Dame Lionesse, Sir Arrok de Grevaunt, Sir Degrane Saunce Velany, who fought with the giant of the Black Hill, and Sir Epinogris, who was the son of the King of Northumberland. Sir Pelleas, who loved the lady Ettard, and he would have died for love of her had it not been for one of the Ladies of the Lake, whose name was Dame Nimue; and she married Sir Pelleas, and she kept him safe so that he was never killed; and he was a very noble knight. And Sir Lamiel of Cardiff, who was a great lover. Sir Plaine de Fors, Sir Melias de Lile, Sir Bohart le Cure Hardy, who was King Arthur's son, Sir Mador de la Porte, Sir Colgrevance, Sir Hervise de la Forest Savage, Sir Marrok, the good knight who was betrayed by his wife, for she made him a werewolf, a man turned into a wolf by magic, for seven years; Sir Persant, Sir Pertolepe, his brother, who was called the Green Knight, and Sir Perimones, brother to them both, who was called the Red Knight, whom Sir Gareth overcame when he was called Beaumains. All these hundred and ten knights probed Sir Urre's wounds by the command of King Arthur.
