Chapter 12: How Sir Lancelot was commanded by Arthur to handle his wounds, and at once he was completely whole, and how they thanked God

"Jesus have mercy," said King Arthur, "where is Sir Lancelot du Lake, that he is not here at this time?"

And as they stood and talked of many things, someone spotted Sir Lancelot riding towards them, and told the king.

"Quiet," said the king. "Let nothing at all be said until he has come to us."

So when Sir Lancelot saw King Arthur, he dismounted from his horse and came to the king, and greeted him and all of them. As soon as the maiden, Sir Urre's sister, saw Sir Lancelot, she ran to her brother where he lay in his litter, and said, "Brother, a knight has come here to whom my heart goes out greatly."

"Fair sister," said Sir Urre, "my heart too grows light towards him, and I truly hope now to be healed; for my heart goes out to him more than to all these who have probed my wounds."

Then Arthur said to Sir Lancelot, "You must do as we have done," and told Sir Lancelot what they had done, and showed him all of them who had probed his wounds.

"Jesus defend me," said Sir Lancelot, "that I should presume, when so many kings and knights have tried and failed, to achieve what all of you, my lords, could not achieve."

"You have no choice," said King Arthur, "for I will command you to do as we have all done."

"My most renowned lord," said Sir Lancelot, "you know well I dare not, and cannot, disobey your command. But if I could or dared, believe me, I would not take it upon myself to touch that wounded knight with the intent of surpassing all other knights. Jesus defend me from that shame."

"You take it wrongly," said King Arthur. "You shall not do it out of any presumption, but to keep us company, since you are a fellow of the Round Table. And believe me," said King Arthur, "if you do not prevail and heal him, I dare say there is no knight in this land who can heal him. And therefore I beg you, do as we have done."

And then all the kings and knights, for the most part, begged Sir Lancelot to probe his wounds. And then the wounded knight, Sir Urre, sat himself up weakly, and begged Sir Lancelot with all his heart, saying, "Courteous knight, I beg you for God's sake heal my wounds; for it seems to me that ever since you came here my wounds do not pain me."

"Ah, my fair lord," said Sir Lancelot, "would to Jesus that I could help you. I am sorely ashamed that I should be put to this, for I was never worthy enough to do so high a thing."

Then Sir Lancelot knelt down by the wounded knight, saying, "My lord Arthur, I must do your command, which is much against my heart."

And then he held up his hands, and looked to the east, saying secretly to himself, "Blessed Father, Son and Holy Ghost, I beseech You of Your mercy that my simple honour and good name be kept safe; and You, blessed Trinity, may give power to heal this sick knight by Your great power and grace, but, good Lord, never of myself."

And then Sir Lancelot asked Sir Urre to let him see his head. And then, kneeling devoutly, he probed the three wounds, so that they bled a little; and at once all the wounds healed cleanly, and looked as if they had been whole for seven years. And in the same way he probed the other three wounds on his body, and they healed in the same way. And then, last of all, he probed the one that was in his hand, and at once it healed cleanly.

Then King Arthur and all the kings and knights knelt down and gave thanks and praise to God and to His Blessed Mother. And all the while Sir Lancelot wept like a child that has been beaten. Then King Arthur had priests and clergy arrayed in the most devout manner, to bring Sir Urre into Carlisle with singing and praise to God. And when this was done, the king had him dressed in the richest clothes that could be imagined; and then there were few better built knights in all the court, for he was exceedingly well made and strongly built. And Arthur asked Sir Urre how he felt.

"My good lord," he said, "I never felt so vigorous."

"Will you joust and do deeds of arms?" said King Arthur.

"Sir," said Urre, "if I had all that belongs to jousting, I would soon be ready."
