Chapter 13: How a match was made of a hundred knights against a hundred knights, and of other matters

Then Arthur set up a side of a hundred knights to be against another hundred knights. And so the next morning they jousted for a diamond; but none of the haughty knights jousted there. And so, to cut the tale short, Sir Urre and Sir Lavaine jousted best that day, for there was not one of them who did not overthrow and pull down thirty knights. And then, by the assent of all the kings and lords, Sir Urre and Sir Lavaine were made knights of the Round Table. And Sir Lavaine set his love on Dame Felelolie, Sir Urre's sister, and then they were married with great joy, and King Arthur gave each of them a barony of lands. And this Sir Urre would never leave Sir Lancelot, but he and Sir Lavaine always attended on him; and in all the court they were counted good knights, and very eager in arms; and they did many noble deeds, for they would have no rest, but always sought adventures.

So they lived at that court in great nobility and joy for a long time. But every night and day Sir Agravain, Sir Gawain's brother, kept watch on Queen Guinevere and Sir Lancelot du Lake, to bring them to rebuke and shame. And so I leave this tale here, and pass over great books of Sir Lancelot du Lake, of the great adventures he did when he was called Le Chevaler du Chariot. For, as the French book says, because of the scorn of knights and ladies who called him the knight who rode in the cart, as if he were being taken to the gallows, he rode in a cart for a twelvemonth, in scorn of all those who called him so; for, a little after he had killed Sir Meliagaunce in the queen's quarrel, he never came on horseback for a twelvemonth. And, as the French book says, in that twelvemonth he fought more than forty battles. And because I have lost the true story of Le Chevaler du Chariot, I depart from the tale of Sir Lancelot, and here I go on to the death of King Arthur; and Sir Agravain was the cause of that.

Here ends the nineteenth book.

And here follows the most piteous history of the death of King Arthur, which is the twentieth book.
