Chapter 1: How Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred kept pressing Sir Gawain to expose the love between Sir Lancelot and Queen Guinevere

In May, when every vigorous heart flourishes and buds (for as the season is joyful to look on, and comforting, so men and women rejoice and are glad that summer is coming with its fresh flowers, while winter, with its rough winds and blasts, makes a vigorous man and woman cower and sit close by the fire), so in this season, in the month of May, there came about a great anger and misfortune that did not stop until the flower of chivalry of all the world was destroyed and slain. And it was all because of two ill-fated knights, who were called Agravain and Sir Mordred, and who were brothers of Sir Gawain. For this Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred had always had a secret hatred of the queen, Dame Guinevere, and of Sir Lancelot, and day and night they were always watching Sir Lancelot.

So it happened, by ill luck, that Sir Gawain and all his brothers were in King Arthur's chamber. And then Sir Agravain said this openly, and not in any private counsel, so that many knights might hear it: "I wonder that we are not all ashamed both to see and to know how Sir Lancelot lies with the queen day and night, and we all know it is so; and it is shameful of us all that we allow so noble a king as King Arthur is to be shamed like this."

Then Sir Gawain spoke, and said, "Brother Sir Agravain, I beg you and order you, raise no such matters in front of me any more, for believe me," said Sir Gawain, "I will have no part in your plans."

"God help me," said Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth, "we will have nothing to do with your doings, brother Agravain."

"Then I will," said Sir Mordred.

"I can well believe that," said Sir Gawain, "for you will always agree to any mischief, brother Sir Mordred. And I wish you would leave all this, and not make yourself so busy, for I know," said Sir Gawain, "what will come of it."

"Let come of it what may," said Sir Agravain, "I will reveal it to the king."

"Not with my consent," said Sir Gawain, "for if war and ruin rise between Sir Lancelot and us, believe me, brother, many kings and great lords will hold with Sir Lancelot. Also, brother Sir Agravain," said Sir Gawain, "you must remember how many times Sir Lancelot has rescued the king and the queen; and the best of us all would have been stone cold at the heart's root if Sir Lancelot had not been a better man than we are, and he has proved that many a time. And as for my part," said Sir Gawain, "I will never be against Sir Lancelot, for one day's deed: when he rescued me from King Carados of the Dolorous Tower, and killed him, and saved my life. Also, brother Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred, in the same way Sir Lancelot rescued you both, and sixty-two others, from Sir Turquine. It seems to me, brother, that such kind deeds and kindness should be remembered."

"Do as you please," said Sir Agravain, "for I will hide it no longer."

With these words King Arthur came up to them.

"Now, brother, stop your noise," said Sir Gawain.

"We will not," said Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred.

"Is that so?" said Sir Gawain. "Then God speed you, for I will not listen to your tales or have any part in your plans."

"Nor will I," said Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris, "for we will never speak evil of that man. Because," said Sir Gareth, "Sir Lancelot made me a knight, I ought in no way to speak ill of him."

And with that the three of them left, grieving greatly.

"Alas," said Sir Gawain and Sir Gareth, "now this realm is wholly brought to ruin, and the noble fellowship of the Round Table will be scattered."

And so they left.
