Chapter 2: How Sir Agravain revealed their love to King Arthur, and how King Arthur gave them leave to take Sir Lancelot

And then Sir Arthur asked them what the noise was about.

"My lord," said Agravain, "I will tell you what I can keep in no longer. Here I am, and my brother Sir Mordred, and we told my brothers Sir Gawain, Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth this, which we all know: that Sir Lancelot is keeping your queen, and has done for a long time. And we are your sister's sons, and we can put up with it no longer. And we all know that you ought to be above Sir Lancelot, and you are the king who made him a knight; and so we will prove it, that he is a traitor to your person."

"If it is so," said Sir Arthur, "believe me, he is nothing else. But I would be loath to begin such a thing unless I had proof of it. For Sir Lancelot is a bold knight, and you all know he is the best knight among us all; and unless he is taken in the act, he will fight with whoever brings up the accusation, and I know no knight who is able to match him. So if it is true, as you say, I would want him taken in the act."

For, as the French book says, the king was very loath that any rumour should touch Sir Lancelot and his queen. For the king had a suspicion, but he would not hear of it, for Sir Lancelot had done so much for him and for the queen so many times that, believe me, the king loved him exceedingly.

"My lord," said Sir Agravain, "tomorrow you will ride out hunting, and you need not doubt that Sir Lancelot will not go with you. Then, when it draws towards night, you can send the queen word that you will stay out all that night, and so you can send for your cooks. And then, on pain of death, we will take him that night with the queen, and either we will bring him to you dead or alive."

"Very well," said the king. "Then I advise you," said the king, "to take a trusty company with you."

"Sir," said Agravain, "my brother Sir Mordred and I will take twelve knights of the Round Table with us."

"Be careful," said King Arthur, "for I warn you, you will find him strong."

"Leave it to us," said Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred.

So in the morning King Arthur rode out hunting, and sent word to the queen that he would be out all that night. Then Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred got twelve knights together, and hid themselves in a chamber in the Castle of Carlisle, and these were their names: Sir Colgrevance, Sir Mador de la Porte, Sir Gingaline, Sir Meliot de Logres, Sir Petipase of Winchelsea, Sir Galleron of Galway, Sir Melion of the Mountain, Sir Astamore, Sir Gromore Somir Joure, Sir Curselaine, Sir Florence, Sir Lovel. So these twelve knights were with Sir Mordred and Sir Agravain, and all of them were from Scotland, either of Sir Gawain's kin or well-wishers to his brothers.

So when the night came, Sir Lancelot told Sir Bors that he was going that night to speak with the queen.

"Sir," said Sir Bors, "if you take my advice, you will not go tonight."

"Why?" said Sir Lancelot.

"Sir," said Sir Bors, "I am always afraid of Sir Agravain, who watches you day by day to bring shame on you and on all of us. And never yet has my heart been set against any going of yours, any time you went to the queen, as much as now. For I suspect that the king is away from the queen tonight because perhaps he has set some watch for you and the queen, and so I badly fear treason."

"Have no fear," said Sir Lancelot, "for I will go and come back, and make no delay."

"Sir," said Sir Bors, "I am sorry for it, for I badly fear that your going out tonight will bring grief on us all."

"Fair nephew," said Sir Lancelot, "I wonder very much why you say this, since the queen has sent for me. And believe me, I will not be such a coward that she should not know I will come to her at her good pleasure."

"God speed you well," said Sir Bors, "and send you back safe and sound."
