Chapter 3: How Sir Lancelot was spied in the queen's chamber, and how Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred came with twelve knights to kill him

So Sir Lancelot left, and took his sword under his arm, and so, in his cloak, that noble knight put himself in great danger. And so he went on until he came to the queen's chamber, and then Sir Lancelot was quickly let into the chamber. And then, as the French book says, the queen and Lancelot were together. And whether they were in bed or at other kinds of pastime, I don't care to make any mention of it here, for love in those days was not as it is nowadays. But as they were together like this, Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred came, with twelve knights of the Round Table with them, and they shouted, "Traitor knight, Sir Lancelot du Lake, now you're caught!"

And they shouted this so loudly that all the court might hear it; and all fourteen of them were armed at every point as if they were to fight in a battle.

"Alas," said Queen Guinevere, "now we are both ruined."

"Madam," said Sir Lancelot, "is there any armour here in your chamber that I could cover my poor body with? If there is any, give it to me, and I will soon put a stop to their malice, by the grace of God."

"Truly," said the queen, "I have no armour, shield, sword or spear. And so I badly fear our long love has come to a disastrous end, for I can hear by their noise that there are many noble knights, and I know very well they are fully armed, and against them you can put up no resistance. So you are likely to be killed, and then I shall be burned. For if you could escape them," said the queen, "I would have no doubt that you would rescue me from whatever danger I stood in."

"Alas," said Sir Lancelot, "never in all my life was I in such a hard spot as this, that I should be killed so shamefully for lack of my armour."

But all the while Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred kept shouting, "Traitor knight, come out of the queen's chamber! For you can be sure you're so surrounded that you will not escape."

"Oh, Jesus have mercy," said Sir Lancelot, "I cannot bear this shameful cry and noise, for death at once would be better than to endure this pain."

Then he took the queen in his arms, and kissed her, and said, "Most noble Christian queen, I beg you, as you have always been my special good lady, and I at all times your true poor knight as far as I was able, and as I never failed you in right or in wrong since the first day King Arthur made me a knight, that you will pray for my soul if I am killed here. For I am quite sure that Sir Bors, my nephew, and all the rest of my kin, with Sir Lavaine and Sir Urre, will not fail to rescue you from the fire. And so, my own lady, take comfort, whatever becomes of me, and go with Sir Bors, my nephew, and Sir Urre, and they will all do everything they can or may to please you, so that you shall live like a queen upon my lands."

"No, Lancelot," said the queen, "believe me, I will never live after your days. But if you are killed I will take my death as meekly, for Jesus Christ's sake, as ever any Christian queen did."

"Well, madam," said Lancelot, "since the day has come that our love must part, believe me, I will sell my life as dearly as I can. And I am a thousand times more grieved," said Sir Lancelot, "for you than for myself. And now I would rather have good armour on me, so that men might speak of my deeds before ever I am killed, than be lord of all Christendom."

"Truly," said the queen, "I wish it might please God that they would take me and kill me, and let you escape."

"That shall never be," said Sir Lancelot. "God keep me from such a shame! But Jesus, be You my shield and my armour!"
