Chapter 4: How Sir Lancelot slew Sir Colgrevance and put on his armour, and afterwards slew Sir Agravain and twelve of his companions

And with that Sir Lancelot wrapped his cloak around his arm well and securely. And by then they had brought a great bench out of the hall, and with it they battered at the door.

"Fair lords," said Sir Lancelot, "stop your noise and your battering, and I will open this door, and then you can do with me whatever you please."

"Come on, then," they all said, "and do it, for it does you no good to fight against us all. So let us into this chamber, and we will spare your life until you come to King Arthur."

Then Lancelot unbarred the door, and with his left hand he held it open a little, so that only one man could come in at a time. And so there came striding in a good knight, a big man and a large one, and his name was Colgrevance of Gore, and he struck at Sir Lancelot mightily with a sword. And Sir Lancelot turned the stroke aside, and gave him such a blow on the helmet that he fell flat on his face, dead, inside the chamber door. And then Sir Lancelot with great strength dragged that dead knight inside the chamber door; and with the help of the queen and her ladies Sir Lancelot was quickly armed in Sir Colgrevance's armour.

And all the while Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred stood there shouting, "Traitor knight, come out of the queen's chamber!"

"Stop your noise," said Sir Lancelot to Sir Agravain, "for believe me, Sir Agravain, you will not take me prisoner tonight. And so, if you take my advice, all of you go away from this chamber door, and stop making such shouting and such slander as you are doing. For I promise you on my knighthood, if you will go away and make no more noise, I will appear before you all tomorrow in front of the king, and then let it be seen which of you, or all of you together, will accuse me of treason. And there I will answer you as a knight should: that I came here to the queen with no kind of evil intent, and I will prove that and make it good on you with my own hands."

"Shame on you, traitor," said Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred. "We'll have you whether you like it or not, and kill you if we please. For we'll have you know we have King Arthur's leave to spare you or to kill you."

"Ah, sirs," said Sir Lancelot, "is there no other mercy to be had from you? Then look to yourselves."

So then Sir Lancelot threw the chamber door wide open, and mightily and knightly he strode in among them; and at once, at the first blow, he killed Sir Agravain. And twelve of his companions after him, within a little while, he laid cold on the ground, for there was none of the twelve who could withstand one blow from Sir Lancelot. Sir Lancelot also wounded Sir Mordred, and he fled with all his might.

And then Sir Lancelot went back to the queen, and said, "Madam, now you may be sure all our true love is brought to an end, for from now on King Arthur will always be my enemy. And so, madam, if it pleases you to let me take you with me, I will save you from every kind of danger."

"That is not the best course," said the queen. "It seems to me that now you have done so much harm, it will be best for you to hold still for now. And if you see that tomorrow they mean to put me to death, then you can rescue me as you think best."

"Gladly," said Sir Lancelot, "for have no doubt, while I am alive I will rescue you."

And then he kissed her, and each gave the other a ring; and so he left the queen there, and went to his lodging.
