Chapter 5: How Sir Lancelot came to Sir Bors, and told him how he had fared, and what danger he had been in, and how he had escaped

When Sir Bors saw Sir Lancelot, he was never so glad of his homecoming as he was then.

"Jesus have mercy," said Sir Lancelot, "why are you all armed? What does this mean?"

"Sir," said Sir Bors, "after you had left us, all of us who are of your blood and who wish you well were so troubled that some of us leapt out of our beds naked, and some in their dreams caught naked swords in their hands. So," said Sir Bors, "we judge there is some great strife at hand. And then we all judged that you had been trapped by some treason, and so we made ourselves ready like this, whatever need you might be in."

"My fair nephew," said Sir Lancelot to Sir Bors, "now you shall know everything: that tonight I was in a harder spot than ever I was in my life, and yet I escaped."

And so he told them all how, and in what manner, as you have heard before.

"And so, my companions," said Sir Lancelot, "I beg you all to be of good heart in whatever need I stand, for now war has come to us all."

"Sir," said Bors, "all is welcome that God sends us. We have had much good fortune with you, and much honour, and so we will take the bad with you as we have taken the good."

"And so," they all said (there were many good knights there), "see that you take no discouragement, for there are no bands of knights under heaven but we shall be able to hurt them as much as they can hurt us. And so don't lose heart in any way, and we will gather together those we love and who love us, and whatever you want done shall be done. And so, Sir Lancelot," they said, "we will take the bad with the good."

"Many thanks," said Sir Lancelot, "for your good comfort, for in my great distress, my fair nephew, you comfort me greatly, and I am much beholden to you. But this, my fair nephew, I would like you to do, in all the haste you can, before it is broad day: look in the lodgings of those who are lodged here near the king, and see which will hold with me and which will not. For now I want to know my friends from my foes."

"Sir," said Sir Bors, "I will do my best, and before seven o'clock I will know, of those you have spoken of, who will hold with you."

Then Sir Bors called to him Sir Lionel, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Blamore de Ganis, Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, Sir Gahalantine, Sir Galihodin, Sir Galihud, Sir Menadeuke, Sir Villiers the Valiant, Sir Hebes le Renoumes, Sir Lavaine, Sir Urre of Hungary, Sir Nerounes, Sir Plenorius. These two knights Sir Lancelot had made, and one of them he had won on a bridge, and so they would never be against him. And Harry le Fise du Lake, and Sir Selises of the Dolorous Tower, and Sir Melias de Lile, and Sir Bellangere le Beuse, who was the son of Sir Alisander le Orphelin; and because his mother, Alice la Beale Pilgrim, was kin to Sir Lancelot, he held with him. So there came Sir Palomides and Sir Safere, his brother, to hold with Sir Lancelot, and Sir Clegis of Sadok, and Sir Dinas, and Sir Clarrus of Clermont. So these twenty-two knights drew together, and by then they were armed and on horseback, and promised Sir Lancelot to do whatever he wanted. Then there joined them, from North Wales and from Cornwall together, for Sir Lamorak's sake and for Sir Tristram's sake, as many as eighty knights.

"My lords," said Sir Lancelot, "believe me, ever since I came into this country I have wished my lord King Arthur well, and my lady Queen Guinevere, as far as I was able. And tonight, because my lady the queen sent for me to speak with her, I think it was arranged by treason (though I dare fully clear her of it herself), for I was there nearly killed by a plot laid beforehand. But as Jesus provided for me, I escaped all their malice and treason."

And then that noble knight Sir Lancelot told them all how he had been in a hard spot in the queen's chamber, and how and in what manner he escaped from them.

"And so," said Sir Lancelot, "believe me, my fair lords, I am sure there is nothing but war for me and mine. And because I have killed these knights tonight, I know very well (Sir Agravain, Sir Gawain's brother, among them, and at least twelve of his companions), for this reason I am now sure of mortal war, for these knights were sent and appointed by King Arthur to betray me. And so the king, in his heat and malice, will condemn the queen to the fire, and I cannot allow that, that she should be burned for my sake. For if I may be heard and allowed and taken at my word, I will fight for the queen, that she is a true lady to her lord. But I fear the king, in his heat, will not take me as I ought to be taken."
