Chapter 6: Of the counsel and advice taken by Sir Lancelot and his friends to save the queen

"My lord Sir Lancelot," said Sir Bors, "my advice is that you take the bad with the good, and take it with patience, and thank God for it. And since it has turned out as it has, I advise you to look after yourself, for if you will stand up for yourself, there is no company of Christian knights that shall do you wrong. Also I will advise you, my lord Sir Lancelot, that if my lady Queen Guinevere is in distress, seeing that she is in trouble for your sake, you rescue her like a knight. If you did otherwise, all the world would speak shame of you to the world's end. Since you were taken with her, whether you did right or wrong, it is now your part to hold with the queen, so that she is not killed and put to a disastrous death; for if she dies like that, the shame will be yours."

"Jesus keep me from shame," said Sir Lancelot, "and keep and save my lady the queen from dishonour and a shameful death, and may she never be destroyed through my failing. So, my fair lords, my kin and my friends," said Sir Lancelot, "what will you do?"

Then they all said, "We will do as you do."

"I put this to you," said Sir Lancelot, "that if my lord Arthur, through evil counsel, tomorrow in his heat puts my lady the queen to the fire, to be burned there, now I beg you, advise me what is best to do."

Then they all said at once, with one voice, "Sir, we think it best that you rescue the queen like a knight, seeing that if she is burned it is for your sake. And it is to be supposed that if you could be laid hands on, you would have the same death, or a more shameful one. And, sir, we all say that you have many times rescued her from death in other men's quarrels; it seems to us all the more to your honour that you rescue the queen from this peril, since she has it for your sake."

Then Sir Lancelot stood still, and said, "My fair lords, believe me, I would be loath to do anything that would dishonour you or my blood; and believe me, I would be loath that my lady the queen should die a shameful death. But if it is so that you advise me to rescue her, I must do a great deal of harm before I rescue her. And perhaps I shall destroy some of my best friends there, which I would much regret. And perhaps there are some who, if they could well bring it about, or dared disobey my lord King Arthur, would soon come over to me, and I would be loath to hurt them. And if it turns out that I rescue her, where shall I keep her?"

"That will be the least of our cares," said Sir Bors. "How did the noble knight Sir Tristram manage, with your good will? Did he not keep Isolde the Fair with him for nearly three years in Joyous Gard? That was done by the advice of you all, and that same place is your own. And in the same way you can do so, if you please, and carry the queen off quickly, if it turns out that the king condemns her to be burned. And in Joyous Gard you can keep her long enough until the king's heat is past. And then you shall bring the queen back to the king with great honour; and then perhaps you will have thanks for bringing her home, and love and thanks where others will have ill will."

"That is hard to do," said Sir Lancelot, "for I can take a warning from Sir Tristram. For when, by means of negotiations, Sir Tristram brought Isolde the Fair back from Joyous Gard to King Mark, look what happened in the end: how shamefully that false traitor King Mark killed him as he sat harping before his lady Isolde the Fair. With a sharpened blade he thrust him from behind, to the heart. It grieves me," said Sir Lancelot, "to speak of his death, for all the world cannot find such a knight."

"All this is true," said Sir Bors, "but there is one thing that ought to hearten you and all of us. You know well that King Arthur and King Mark were never alike in character, for there was never yet a man who could prove King Arthur false to his promise."

So, to cut a long story short, they all agreed that, for better or for worse, if it turned out that the queen was brought to the fire that morning, they would all rescue her at once. And so, on Sir Lancelot's advice, they all set themselves in ambush in a wood, as near Carlisle as they could, and there they waited quietly, to learn what the king would do.
