Chapter 7: How Sir Mordred rode in haste to the king, to tell him of the fight and the death of Sir Agravain and the other knights

Now we turn back to Sir Mordred, who, when he had escaped from the noble knight Sir Lancelot, at once got his horse and mounted it, and rode to King Arthur, badly wounded and beaten, and bled all over; and there he told the king everything, how it had gone, and how they had all been killed except himself alone.

"Jesus have mercy, how can this be?" said the king. "Did you take him in the queen's chamber?"

"Yes, God help me," said Sir Mordred. "There we found him unarmed, and there he killed Colgrevance, and armed himself in his armour."

And he told the king all this from the beginning to the end.

"Jesus have mercy," said the king, "he is a marvellous knight of prowess. Alas, I bitterly regret," said the king, "that Sir Lancelot should ever be against me. Now I am sure the noble fellowship of the Round Table is broken for ever, for many a noble knight will hold with him. And now it has turned out so," said the king, "that I cannot, with my honour, do otherwise: the queen must suffer death."

So then, in this heat, great preparation was made for the queen to be condemned to death. And the law was such in those days that whoever they were, of whatever rank or degree, if they were found guilty of treason there should be no other remedy but death; and either witnesses or being taken in the act was to be the cause of their swift judgment. And just so was it ordained for Queen Guinevere, because Sir Mordred had escaped badly wounded, and because of the death of thirteen knights of the Round Table. These proofs and evidences caused King Arthur to command the queen to the fire, to be burned there.

Then Sir Gawain spoke, and said, "My lord Arthur, I would advise you not to be over-hasty, but to put off this judgment of my lady the queen, for many reasons. One is that, though it is true that Sir Lancelot was found in the queen's chamber, yet it may be that he came there for no evil. For you know, my lord," said Sir Gawain, "that the queen is much beholden to Sir Lancelot, more than to any other knight, for many times he has saved her life, and fought for her when all the court refused the queen. And perhaps she sent for him for good, and for no evil, to reward him for the good deeds he had done for her in times past. And perhaps my lady the queen sent for him with the intention that Sir Lancelot should come to her privately and secretly, thinking it was best to do so in order to avoid and guard against slander. For often we do many things that we think are for the best, and yet perhaps they turn out for the worst. For I dare say," said Sir Gawain, "my lady your queen is both good and true to you. And as for Sir Lancelot," said Sir Gawain, "I dare say he will make it good on any knight living who will lay dishonour or shame on him, and in the same way he will make it good for my lady Dame Guinevere."

"That I well believe," said King Arthur, "but I will not go that way with Sir Lancelot, for he trusts so much in his hands and his strength that he fears no man. And so he shall never fight for my queen again, for she shall have the law. And if I can get Sir Lancelot, believe me, he shall have a shameful death."

"Jesus forbid," said Sir Gawain, "that I should ever see it."

"Why do you say that?" said King Arthur. "Truly, you have no reason to love Sir Lancelot, for this very night just past he killed your brother Sir Agravain, a very good knight, and he almost killed your other brother Sir Mordred, and he also killed thirteen noble knights there. And also, Sir Gawain, remember he killed two sons of yours, Sir Florence and Sir Lovel."

"My lord," said Sir Gawain, "I know of all this, and I bitterly regret their deaths. But since I gave them warning, and told my brothers and my sons beforehand what would come of it in the end, and since they would not take my advice, I will not meddle in it, nor take any revenge for their deaths; for I told them it was no use fighting with Sir Lancelot. All the same, I am sorry for the death of my brothers and of my sons, for they are the cause of their own deaths. For many times I warned my brother Sir Agravain, and I told him of the perils that have now come about."
