Chapter 8: How Sir Lancelot and his kinsmen rescued the queen from the fire, and how he slew many knights

Then the noble King Arthur said to Sir Gawain, "Dear nephew, I ask you to make yourself ready in your best armour, with your brothers Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth, to bring my queen to the fire, there to have her judgment and receive her death."

"No, my most noble lord," said Sir Gawain, "that I will never do. For believe me, I will never be in that place where so noble a queen as my lady Dame Guinevere comes to a shameful end. For believe me," said Sir Gawain, "my heart will never let me see her die; and it shall never be said that I was ever of your counsel in her death."

Then the king said to Sir Gawain, "Allow your brothers Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth to be there."

"My lord," said Sir Gawain, "believe me, they will be unwilling to be there, because of the many things that are likely to happen there; but they are young, and hardly able to say no to you."

Then Sir Gaheris and the good knight Sir Gareth spoke to Arthur. "Sir, you may well command us to be there, but believe me, it will be sorely against our will. But if we are there by your strict command, you must plainly hold us excused: we will be there peaceably, and wear no armour of war."

"In the name of God," said the king, "then make yourselves ready, for she shall have her judgment very soon."

"Alas," said Sir Gawain, "that I should ever live to see this woeful day."

So Sir Gawain turned away and wept bitterly, and so he went into his room. And then the queen was led out of Carlisle, and there she was stripped to her shift. And so then her confessor was brought to her, so that she could confess her misdeeds and be absolved. Then there was weeping and wailing and wringing of hands among many lords and ladies; but there were only a few, by comparison, who would wear any armour to uphold the queen's death.

Then there was a man whom Sir Lancelot had sent to that place to watch for the time when the queen should go to her death. And as soon as he saw the queen stripped to her shift, and confessed, he gave Sir Lancelot warning. Then there was nothing but spurring and snatching up of horses, and at once they came to the fire. And whoever stood against them was killed there; no one could withstand Sir Lancelot, and so all who bore arms and stood against them were killed there, a great many noble knights. For there were killed Sir Belliance le Orgulous, Sir Segwarides, Sir Griflet, Sir Brandiles, Sir Aglovale, Sir Tor; Sir Gaunter, Sir Gilmere and Sir Raynold, three brothers; Sir Damas, Sir Priamus, Sir Kay the Stranger, Sir Driant, Sir Lambegus, Sir Herminde; Sir Pertolepe and Sir Perimones, two brothers who were called the Green Knight and the Red Knight. And so in this rushing and crashing, as Sir Lancelot pushed his way here and there, it was his misfortune to kill Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth, the noble knight, for they were unarmed and off their guard. For, as the French book says, Sir Lancelot struck Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris on the skull, so that they were killed in the field; though in very truth Sir Lancelot did not see them, and so they were found dead in the thickest of the press.

Then, when Sir Lancelot had done this, and had killed or put to flight all who would stand against him, he rode straight to Dame Guinevere, and had a coat and a gown thrown over her; and then he had her set up behind him, and begged her to take heart. Believe me, the queen was glad that she had escaped death. And then she thanked God and Sir Lancelot; and so he rode away with the queen, as the French book says, to Joyous Gard, and there he kept her as a noble knight should. And many great lords and some kings sent Sir Lancelot many good knights, and many noble knights came over to Sir Lancelot. When it was known openly that King Arthur and Sir Lancelot were at strife, many knights were glad of their strife, and many were very sorrowful at it.
