Chapter 9: Of the sorrow and lament of King Arthur for the death of his nephews and other good knights, and also for the queen, his wife

So we turn back to King Arthur. When he was told how, and in what manner, the queen had been taken away from the fire, and when he heard of the death of his noble knights, and above all of the deaths of Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth, the king fainted from pure sorrow. And when he came out of his faint, he said, "Alas that I ever wore a crown upon my head! For now I have lost the fairest fellowship of noble knights that ever a Christian king held together. Alas, my good knights are killed and taken from me: within these two days I have lost forty knights, and also the noble fellowship of Sir Lancelot and his kin, for now I can never hold them together again with my honour. Alas that this war ever began!"

"Now, good companions," said the king, "I order you that no man tell Sir Gawain of the death of his two brothers. For I am sure," said the king, "when Sir Gawain hears that Sir Gareth is dead, he will go nearly out of his mind. Jesus have mercy," said the king, "why did he kill Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris? For I dare say that Sir Gareth loved Sir Lancelot above all men on earth."

"That is true," said some knights, "but they were killed in the crush, as Sir Lancelot pushed his way into the thick of the press; and since they were unarmed, he struck them and did not know whom he struck, and so they were killed by ill luck."

"Their deaths," said Arthur, "will cause the greatest deadly war there ever was. I am sure that if Sir Gawain knew Sir Gareth had been killed, I would never have any peace from him until I had destroyed Sir Lancelot's kin and himself too, or else he destroyed me. And therefore," said the king, "believe me, my heart was never so heavy as it is now. And I am much sorrier for the loss of my good knights than for the loss of my fair queen; for I could have queens enough, but such a fellowship of good knights will never be together in any company again. And now I dare say," said King Arthur, "there was never a Christian king who held such a fellowship together. And alas that Sir Lancelot and I should ever be at strife. Ah, Agravain, Agravain," said the king, "Jesus forgive your soul for it, for the ill will that you and your brother Sir Mordred had towards Sir Lancelot has caused all this sorrow."

And all the while, among these laments, the king wept and fainted.

Then a man came to Sir Gawain and told him how the queen had been led away by Sir Lancelot, and nearly twenty-four knights killed.

"Jesus protect my brothers!" said Sir Gawain. "For I knew very well that Sir Lancelot would rescue her, or else die in that field. And to tell the truth, he would not have been a man of honour if he had not rescued the queen that day, since she was to have been burned for his sake. And in that," said Sir Gawain, "he has done only what a knight should, and what I would have done myself if I had stood in his place. But where are my brothers?" said Sir Gawain. "I am surprised I hear nothing of them."

"Truly," said the man, "Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris are killed."

"Jesus forbid!" said Sir Gawain. "Not for the whole world would I want them killed, and above all my good brother Sir Gareth."

"Sir," said the man, "he is killed, and that is a great pity."

"Who killed him?" said Sir Gawain.

"Sir," said the man, "Lancelot killed them both."

"That I cannot believe," said Sir Gawain, "that he ever killed my brother Sir Gareth. For I dare say my brother Gareth loved him better than me, and all his brothers, and the king too. And I dare say too that if Sir Lancelot had asked my brother Sir Gareth, he would have been on his side against the king and all of us. And so I can never believe that Sir Lancelot killed my brother."

"Sir," said the man, "it is reported that he killed him."
