Chapter 10: How King Arthur, at Sir Gawain's request, decided to make war on Sir Lancelot, and laid siege to his castle called Joyous Gard

"Alas," said Sir Gawain, "now my joy is gone."

And then he fell down in a faint, and he lay there a long time as if he were dead. And then, when he came out of his faint, he cried out sorrowfully, "Alas!" And at once Sir Gawain ran to the king, crying and weeping. "O King Arthur, my uncle, my good brother Sir Gareth is killed, and so is my brother Sir Gaheris, who were two noble knights."

Then the king wept, and Gawain too; and so they fainted. And when they had revived, Sir Gawain spoke. "Sir, I will go and see my brother Sir Gareth."

"You may not see him," said the king, "for I had him buried, and Sir Gaheris too. For I well understood that you would grieve beyond all bounds, and the sight of Sir Gareth would have doubled your sorrow."

"Alas, my lord," said Sir Gawain, "how did he kill my brother Sir Gareth? My own good lord, I beg you, tell me."

"Truly," said the king, "I will tell you as it was told to me. Sir Lancelot killed him, and Sir Gaheris too."

"Alas," said Sir Gawain, "neither of them bore any arms against him, not either of them."

"I do not know how it was," said the king, "but as it is said, Sir Lancelot killed them both in the thickest of the press and did not know them. And therefore let us work out a remedy to avenge their deaths."

"My king, my lord, and my uncle," said Sir Gawain, "believe me, now I will make you a promise that I will keep by my knighthood: from this day on I will never let Sir Lancelot be, until one of us has killed the other. And therefore I ask you, my lord and king, prepare yourself for war, for believe me, I will be avenged on Sir Lancelot. And therefore, as you want my service and my love, hurry to it now, and call on your friends. For I promise to God," said Sir Gawain, "that for the death of my brother Sir Gareth I will seek Sir Lancelot through seven kings' realms, until I kill him or else he kills me."

"You will not need to seek him so far," said the king, "for, as I hear, Sir Lancelot will wait for me and you in Joyous Gard; and many people are flocking to him, as I hear."

"That I can believe," said Sir Gawain. "But, my lord," he said, "call on your friends, and I will call on mine."

"It shall be done," said the king, "and I expect I shall be strong enough to drag him out of the biggest tower of his castle."

So then the king sent letters and writs throughout all England, through its length and its breadth, to summon all his knights. And so many knights, dukes and earls came to Arthur, so that he had a great army. And when they were assembled, the king told them how Sir Lancelot had robbed him of his queen. Then the king and all his army made ready to lay siege to Sir Lancelot, where he lay inside Joyous Gard. Sir Lancelot heard of it, and provided himself with many good knights, for many knights held with him, some for his own sake and some for the queen's sake. So both sides were well stocked and armed with every kind of thing that belonged to war. But King Arthur's army was so big that Sir Lancelot would not wait for him in the open field, for he was very unwilling to do battle against the king. But Sir Lancelot withdrew to his strong castle with every kind of provision, and as many noble men as he could keep within the town and the castle. Then King Arthur came with Sir Gawain and a huge army, and laid siege all around Joyous Gard, both to the town and to the castle, and there they made fierce war on both sides. But for a long time Sir Lancelot would on no account ride out or go out of his castle; nor would he let any of his good knights sally out, nor any of the town or of the castle, until fifteen weeks had passed.
