Chapter 11: Of the talk between King Arthur and Sir Lancelot, and how King Arthur reproached him

Then it happened one day at harvest time that Sir Lancelot looked over the walls, and called down aloud to King Arthur and Sir Gawain. "My lords both, believe me, all that you do at this siege is in vain, for here you win no honour, only blame and dishonour. For if I cared to come out myself, with my good knights, I would very soon make an end of this war."

"Come out," said Arthur to Lancelot, "if you dare, and I promise you I will meet you in the middle of the field."

"God forbid," said Sir Lancelot, "that I should ever fight with the most noble king who made me a knight."

"To hell with your fair talk," said the king. "For believe me, and trust it, I am your mortal enemy, and always will be until the day I die. For you have killed my good knights, and very noble men of my blood, whom I can never get back again. And you have lain with my queen, and kept her for many winters, and then, like a traitor, taken her from me by force."

"My most noble lord and king," said Sir Lancelot, "you may say what you like, for you know well that I will not quarrel with you yourself. But where you say I have killed your good knights, I know well that I have done so, and I bitterly regret it; but I was forced to fight them to save my life, or else I would have had to let them kill me. And as for my lady Queen Guinevere: except for your own royal person, and my lord Sir Gawain, there is no knight under heaven who dares to prove on my body that I was ever a traitor to your person. And where it pleases you to say that I have kept my lady your queen for years and winters, to that I will always give a full answer, and prove it on any knight alive, except your person and Sir Gawain, that my lady Queen Guinevere is as true a lady to your person as any lady living is to her lord; and that I will make good with my hands. And yet it has pleased her good grace to hold me in affection, and to cherish me more than any other knight. And to the best of my power I have deserved her love in return. For many times, my lord, you have agreed in your anger that she should be burned and destroyed, and then it was my fortune to fight for her; and before I left her adversary, they confessed their falsehood, and she was cleared with all honour. And at such times, my lord Arthur," said Sir Lancelot, "you loved me, and thanked me when I saved your queen from the fire; and then you promised to be my good lord for ever; and now I think you reward me very badly for my good service. And, my good lord, it seems to me I would have lost a great part of my honour as a knight if I had let my lady your queen be burned, and all the more since she was to have been burned for my sake. For since I have fought battles for your queen in other quarrels than my own, it seems to me I had all the more right to fight for her now in a rightful quarrel. And therefore, my good and gracious lord," said Sir Lancelot, "take your queen back into your good grace, for she is fair, and true, and good."

"Shame on you, false recreant knight!" said Sir Gawain. "I tell you, my lord my uncle King Arthur shall have his queen, and you too, whether you like it or not, and kill you both if it pleases him."

"That may well be," said Sir Lancelot. "But believe me, my lord Sir Gawain, if I cared to come out of this castle, you would find me and the queen harder to win than any hard battle you ever won."

"Shame on your proud words!" said Sir Gawain. "As for my lady the queen, I will never speak shame of her. But you, false recreant knight," said Sir Gawain, "what cause did you have to kill my good brother Sir Gareth, who loved you more than all my kin? Alas, you made him a knight with your own hands. Why did you kill him, when he loved you so well?"

"Making excuses does me no good," said Sir Lancelot, "but by Jesus, and by the faith that I owe to the high order of knighthood, I would as willingly have killed my nephew Sir Bors de Ganis at that moment. But alas that I was so unlucky," said Lancelot, "that I did not see Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris."

"You lie, recreant knight!" said Sir Gawain. "You killed him to spite me. And therefore, know this: I will make war on you, all the while that I live."

"I am sorry for that," said Sir Lancelot, "for I well understand it does no good to look for any agreement while you, Sir Gawain, are so bitterly set against me. And if you were not, I would have no doubt of winning back the good grace of my lord Arthur."

"I can well believe it, false recreant knight," said Sir Gawain, "for you have domineered over me and all of us for many long days, and destroyed many of our good knights."

"You say what pleases you," said Sir Lancelot. "And yet it can never be said of me, and openly proved, that I ever killed any good knight by treason planned beforehand, as you have done, my lord Sir Gawain. And I never did, except in my own defence, when I was driven to it to save my life."

"Ah, false knight," said Sir Gawain, "you mean Sir Lamorak. Know this, I killed him."

"You did not kill him yourself," said Sir Lancelot. "It would have been too much for you to have killed him, for he was one of the best knights of his time in all Christendom, and his death was a great pity."
