Chapter 12: How Sir Lancelot's cousins and kinsmen urged him to go out to battle, and how they made ready

"Well, well," said Sir Gawain to Lancelot, "since you reproach me with Sir Lamorak, know this: I will never leave you alone until I have you at such a disadvantage that you cannot escape my hands."

"I can well believe it," said Sir Lancelot. "If you can get hold of me, I will get little mercy."

But, as the French book says, the noble King Arthur would have taken his queen back, and been reconciled with Sir Lancelot, but Sir Gawain would not allow him to by any means. And then Sir Gawain had many men cry out against Sir Lancelot; and all together they called him a false recreant knight.

Then, when Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Ector de Maris and Sir Lionel heard this outcry, they called to them Sir Palomides, Sir Safere's brother, and Sir Lavaine, with many more of their kin, and they all went to Sir Lancelot and said this: "My lord Sir Lancelot, believe me, we are filled with scorn at the great insults we heard Gawain say to you. And so we beg you, and charge you, as you want our service, keep us no longer within these walls. For believe us plainly, we will ride out into the field and do battle with them. For you behave like a man who is afraid, and for all your fair speech it will do you no good. For believe us, Sir Gawain will not let you be reconciled with King Arthur; and therefore fight for your life and your right, if you dare."

"Alas," said Sir Lancelot, "I am very unwilling to ride out of this castle and do battle."

Then Sir Lancelot called down aloud to Arthur and Sir Gawain. "My lords, I ask you and beg you, since I am pressed and called upon like this to ride out into the field, that neither you, my lord King Arthur, nor you, Sir Gawain, come into the field."

"What shall we do then?" said Sir Gawain. "Is this not the king's quarrel with you, to fight it out? And it is my quarrel to fight with you, Sir Lancelot, because of the death of my brother Sir Gareth."

"Then I must go to battle," said Sir Lancelot. "Now believe me, my lord Arthur and Sir Gawain, you will regret it whenever I do battle with you."

And so then they parted from each other; and then each side made ready to do battle in the morning, and great preparations were made on both sides. And Sir Gawain had many knights set to lie in wait for Sir Lancelot, to overthrow him and kill him. And in the morning, at mid-morning, Arthur was ready in the field with three great armies. And then Sir Lancelot's fellowship came out at three gates, in very good order; and Sir Lionel came in the front division, and Sir Lancelot came in the middle, and Sir Bors came out at the third gate. So they came out in order and discipline, like the very noble knights they were. And all the while Sir Lancelot ordered all his knights, whatever happened, to spare King Arthur and Sir Gawain.
