Chapter 13: How Sir Gawain jousted and struck down Sir Lionel, and how Sir Lancelot put King Arthur back on his horse

Then Sir Gawain came out from the king's army, and he rode out in front and offered to joust. And Sir Lionel was a fierce knight, and he quickly rode against Sir Gawain; and there Sir Gawain struck Sir Lionel right through the body, so that he crashed to the ground as if he were dead. And then Sir Ector de Maris and others carried him into the castle. Then a great fight began, and many people were killed. And all the while Sir Lancelot did what he could to save the people on King Arthur's side; for Sir Palomides, and Sir Bors, and Sir Safere overthrew many knights, for they were deadly knights. And Sir Blamore de Ganis, and Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, with Sir Bellangere le Beuse, these six knights did much harm. And all the while King Arthur kept close to Sir Lancelot, to kill him, and Sir Lancelot let him be, and would not strike back.

So Sir Bors rode against King Arthur, and there Sir Bors struck him down with a spear. And so he dismounted and drew his sword, and said to Sir Lancelot, "Shall I make an end of this war?" And he meant that he would kill King Arthur.

"Don't you dare," said Sir Lancelot, "on pain of your head, touch him again. For I will never see that most noble king who made me a knight either killed or shamed."

And with that Sir Lancelot got down from his horse, and took up the king and put him back on his horse, and said this: "My lord Arthur, for the love of God, stop this strife, for you win no honour here. I could do my uttermost, but all the time I hold back from you, and neither you nor any of yours holds back from me. My lord, remember what I have done in many places, and now I am badly rewarded."

Then, when King Arthur was on horseback, he looked at Sir Lancelot, and then the tears burst from his eyes, as he thought of the great courtesy that was in Sir Lancelot, more than in any other man. And with that the king rode away, and could look at him no longer, and said, "Alas that this war ever began!"

And then both sides drew back from the battle to rest, and buried the dead, and laid soothing salves on the wounded men; and so they held out that night until the morning. And in the morning, by mid-morning, they made ready to do battle. And then Sir Bors led the vanguard.

So in the morning Sir Gawain came, as fierce as any boar, with a great spear in his hand. And when Sir Bors saw him, he meant to avenge his brother Sir Lionel for the injury that Sir Gawain had done him the day before. And so, as they knew each other, they set their spears in rest, and with all the might of their horses and of themselves they met together so fiercely that each ran the other through, and so they both fell to the ground. And then the armies joined, and there was great slaughter on both sides. Then Sir Lancelot rescued Sir Bors, and sent him into the castle; but neither Sir Gawain nor Sir Bors died of their wounds, for they were all healed.

Then Sir Lavaine and Sir Urre begged Sir Lancelot to exert himself, and fight as they had done. "For we see you hold back and spare them, and that does much harm. So we beg you, spare your enemies no more than they spare you."

"Alas," said Sir Lancelot, "I have no heart to fight against my lord Arthur, for it always seems to me that I am not doing as I ought."

"My lord," said Sir Palomides, "though you spare them all this day, they will never thank you for it; and if they can get you at a disadvantage, you are as good as dead."

So then Sir Lancelot understood that they told him the truth; and then he exerted himself more than he had done before, and all the more because his nephew Sir Bors was badly wounded. And then within a little while, by the time of evensong, Sir Lancelot and his side had the upper hand, for their horses waded in blood above the fetlocks, so many people were killed. And then, out of pity, Sir Lancelot held back his knights, and let King Arthur's side draw off to one side. And then Sir Lancelot's side withdrew into his castle, and both sides buried the dead and put salve on the wounded men.

So when Sir Gawain was hurt, those on King Arthur's side were not so proud to do battle as they had been before. This war was talked of through all Christendom, and at last it was reported before the Pope. And he, considering the great goodness of King Arthur and of Sir Lancelot, who were called the noblest knights in the world, called to him a noble churchman who was there at that time (the French book says it was the Bishop of Rochester). And the Pope gave him papal bulls sealed with lead to take to King Arthur of England, charging him, on pain of laying all England under interdict, with every church in it shut, to take his queen Dame Guinevere back to him again, and be reconciled with Sir Lancelot.
