Chapter 14: How the Pope sent his papal bulls to make peace, and how Sir Lancelot brought the queen to King Arthur

So when this Bishop had come to Carlisle, he showed the king these bulls. And when the king understood these bulls, he did not know what to do. He would very gladly have been reconciled with Sir Lancelot, but Sir Gawain would not allow him; but as for having the queen back, to that he agreed. But on no account would Sir Gawain allow the king to be reconciled with Sir Lancelot; but as for the queen, he consented. And then the Bishop had from the king his great seal, and his guarantee, as he was a true anointed king, that Sir Lancelot should come safely and go safely, and that the queen should not be reproached by the king, nor by anyone else, for anything done in times past. And of all these terms the Bishop brought with him sure guarantees and writings, to show Sir Lancelot.

So when the Bishop had come to Joyous Gard, he showed Sir Lancelot there how the Pope had written to Arthur and to him, and there he told him the dangers if he kept the queen from the king.

"It was never in my thoughts," said Lancelot, "to keep the queen from my lord Arthur. But since she was to have died for my sake, it seemed to me it was my part to save her life, and put her out of that danger until a better remedy might come. And now I thank God," said Sir Lancelot, "that the Pope has made her peace. For God knows," said Sir Lancelot, "I will be a thousand times gladder to bring her back than I ever was to take her away; provided that I can be sure to come safely and go safely, and that the queen shall have her freedom as she had before, and that never, for anything that has been alleged before this time, shall she stand in any danger from this day on. For otherwise," said Sir Lancelot, "I dare risk myself to keep her from a harder attack than any I ever kept her from."

"You will not need to fear so much," said the Bishop. "For believe me, the Pope must be obeyed, and it would not be to the Pope's honour, nor to my poor good name, to let you be wronged, nor the queen either, neither put in danger nor shamed."

And then he showed Sir Lancelot all his writings, both from the Pope and from King Arthur.

"This is sure enough," said Sir Lancelot, "for I dare trust my lord's own writing and his seal completely, for he was never shamed in his promise. Therefore," said Sir Lancelot to the Bishop, "you shall ride ahead to the king, and commend me to his good grace, and let him know that eight days from today, by the grace of God, I myself will bring my lady Queen Guinevere to him. And then say to my most dread king that I will speak out boldly for the queen, and that I will make no exception, for dread or fear, except the king himself and my lord Sir Gawain; and that is more for the king's love than for Gawain's own."

So the Bishop left, and came to the king at Carlisle, and told him everything, how Sir Lancelot had answered him; and then the tears burst from the king's eyes. Then Sir Lancelot provided himself with a hundred knights, and all were dressed in green velvet, and their horses were draped in trappings to their heels; and every knight held an olive branch in his hand, as a token of peace. And the queen had twenty-four gentlewomen following her in the same way; and Sir Lancelot had twelve warhorses following him, and on every warhorse sat a young man of good birth, and they were all dressed in green velvet, with girdles of gold about their waists, and the horses draped in the same way down to the heels, with many jewelled clasps, set with stones and pearls in gold, a thousand of them. And the queen and Sir Lancelot were dressed in white cloth of gold tissue. And just as you have heard, as the French book tells, he rode with the queen from Joyous Gard to Carlisle. And so Sir Lancelot rode through Carlisle, and so into the castle, so that everyone could see; and believe me, there was many a weeping eye. And then Sir Lancelot himself dismounted and got clear of his horse, and took the queen, and so led her to where King Arthur sat on his throne; and Sir Gawain sat in front of him, and many other great lords. So when Sir Lancelot saw the king and Sir Gawain, he led the queen by the arm, and then he knelt down, and the queen too. Believe me, there were many bold knights there with King Arthur who wept as tenderly as if they had seen all their kin before them. So the king sat still and said no word. And when Sir Lancelot saw his face, he rose and raised the queen with him, and then he spoke, like a true knight.
