Chapter 15: Of the handing over of the queen to the king by Sir Lancelot, and what words Sir Gawain had for Sir Lancelot

"My most revered king," said Sir Lancelot, "you are to understand that, by the Pope's command and yours, I have brought my lady the queen to you, as right requires. And if there is any knight, of whatever rank he may be, except your own person, who will say or dares say that she is anything but true and pure to you, I, Sir Lancelot du Lake, here and now will make it good upon his body that she is a true lady to you. But you have listened to liars, and that has caused the strife between you and me. For there was a time, my lord Arthur, when you were greatly pleased with me when I did battle for my lady, your queen. And you know full well, my most noble king, that she has been put to great wrong before this time. And since it pleased you many times that I should fight for her, it seems to me, my good lord, that I had all the more cause to rescue her from the fire, seeing that she was to have been burned for my sake. For those who told you those tales were liars, and so it fell out against them. For in all likelihood, if the might of God had not been with me, I could never have held out against fourteen knights, and they armed and ready by plan, and I unarmed and with no plan at all. For I was sent for to come to my lady your queen, I do not know for what reason; but I was no sooner inside the chamber door than at once Sir Agravain and Sir Mordred called me traitor and recreant knight."

"They called you right," said Sir Gawain.

"My lord Sir Gawain," said Sir Lancelot, "in their quarrel they did not prove themselves in the right."

"Well, well, Sir Lancelot," said the king, "I have given you no cause to do to me as you have done, for I have honoured you and yours more than any of all my knights."

"My good lord," said Sir Lancelot, "if you will not be displeased, you are to understand that I and mine have often done you better service than any other knights have done, in many different places. And where you have been in a very hard spot at various times, I have myself rescued you from many dangers. And always, to the best of my power, I was glad to please you, and my lord Sir Gawain. Both in jousts and tournaments, and in pitched battles, both on horseback and on foot, I have often rescued you, and my lord Sir Gawain, and many more of your knights, in many different places. For now I will boast," said Sir Lancelot. "I want you all to know that I never yet found any kind of knight but that I was too hard for him, if I did my uttermost, thanks be to God. Though I have been matched with good knights, such as Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak, I always had a goodwill toward them and a judgement of what they were. And I take God to witness," said Sir Lancelot, "I was never angry, nor greatly downcast, with any good knight if I saw him busy about winning honour. And I was always glad when I found any knight who could stand against me on horseback and on foot. Yet Sir Carados of the Dolorous Tower was a very noble knight and an exceedingly strong man, and you know that, my lord Sir Gawain. For he might well be called a noble knight when by sheer force he pulled you out of your saddle and bound you across his saddlebow in front of him; and there, my lord Sir Gawain, I rescued you, and killed him before your eyes. Also I found his brother, Sir Turquine, in the same way leading Sir Gaheris, your brother, bound in front of him; and there I rescued your brother and killed that Turquine, and freed sixty-four of my lord Arthur's knights from his prison. And now I dare say," said Sir Lancelot, "I never met with knights so strong, nor so good at fighting, as Sir Carados and Sir Turquine were, for I fought with them to the uttermost. And therefore," said Sir Lancelot to Sir Gawain, "it seems to me that you ought by rights to remember this. For if I could have your goodwill, I would trust to God to have my lord Arthur's good grace."
