Chapter 16: Of the talk between Sir Gawain and Sir Lancelot, with much other speech

"The king may do as he likes," said Sir Gawain, "but you may be sure, Sir Lancelot, you and I will never be reconciled while we live, for you have killed three of my brothers. And two of them you killed treacherously and pitilessly, for they wore no armour against you, nor would they wear any."

"I wish to God they had been armed," said Sir Lancelot, "for then they would be alive. And believe me, Sir Gawain, as for Sir Gareth, I love none of my own kinsmen as much as I loved him. And as long as I live," said Sir Lancelot, "I will mourn Sir Gareth's death, and not only for the great fear I have of you, but many causes make me sorrowful. One is that I made him a knight. Another is that I know well he loved me above all other knights. And the third is that he was exceedingly noble, true, courteous and well-bred, and of good character. The fourth is that I knew well, as soon as I heard that Sir Gareth was dead, I would never again have your love, but everlasting war between us; and I knew well too that you would make my noble lord Arthur my mortal enemy for ever. And as Jesus is my help," said Sir Lancelot, "I never killed Sir Gareth or Sir Gaheris by my will; but alas that they were ever unarmed on that ill-fated day. But this much I will offer," said Sir Lancelot, "if it may please the king's good grace, and you, my lord Sir Gawain. I will begin first at Sandwich, and there I will go in my shirt, barefoot; and at the end of every ten miles I will found and have built a house of religion, of whatever order you will assign me, with a whole community of monks, to sing and read day and night, especially for the sake of Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris. And this I will carry out from Sandwich to Carlisle, and every house shall have enough income to live on. And this I will carry out while I have any income in Christendom; and there shall not be one of all these religious houses but it shall be completed, furnished and fitted out in everything as a holy place ought to be, I promise you faithfully. And this, Sir Gawain, seems to me fairer and holier, and far better for their souls, than that you, my most noble king, and you, Sir Gawain, should make war on me, for you will gain nothing by it."

Then all the knights and ladies who were there wept as if they were mad, and the tears fell on King Arthur's cheeks.

"Sir Lancelot," said Sir Gawain, "I have heard your speech very well, and your great offers. But you may be sure, let the king do as he pleases, I will never forgive my brothers' deaths, and above all the death of my brother Sir Gareth. And if my uncle, King Arthur, makes peace with you, he will lose my service. For you may be sure you are false both to the king and to me."

"Sir," said Lancelot, "there is no man alive who can prove that. And if you, Sir Gawain, will charge me with so grave a thing, you must pardon me, for then I have no choice but to answer you."

"No," said Sir Gawain, "we are past that for now, and the Pope is the cause of it. For he has charged my uncle the king that he must take his queen back and make peace with you, Sir Lancelot, for this time; and therefore you shall go safe as you came. But you shall not stay in this land more than fifteen days; that is the summons I give you. So the king and we had agreed and settled it before you came. Otherwise," said Sir Gawain, "you may be sure you would not have come here, except against your will. And if it were not for the Pope's command," said Sir Gawain, "I would do battle with my own body against your body, and prove it upon you, that you have been false both to my uncle King Arthur and to me; and that I will prove upon your body once you have gone from here, wherever I find you."
