Chapter 17: How Sir Lancelot left the king and Joyous Gard for the sea, and what knights went with him

Then Sir Lancelot sighed, and with that the tears fell on his cheeks, and then he said this: "Alas, most noble Christian realm, which I have loved above all other realms, and in you I have won a great part of my honour, and now I must leave in this way. Truly I regret that I ever came into this realm, to be so shamefully banished, undeserved and without cause. But fortune is so changeable, and her wheel so moveable, that there is no constant staying, and that may be proved by many old chronicles, of noble Hector, and Troilus, and Alexander the mighty conqueror, and many more besides: when they were highest in their royalty, they came down lowest. And so it goes with me," said Sir Lancelot, "for in this realm I had honour, and through me and mine the whole Round Table has been increased in honour, through me and my blood, more than through any other. And therefore you may be sure, Sir Gawain, I can live on my own lands as well as any knight who is here. And if you, my most revered king, come upon my lands with Sir Gawain to make war on me, I must bear with you as well as I can. But as for you, Sir Gawain, if you come there, I beg you not to charge me with treason or felony, for if you do, I must answer you."

"Do your best," said Sir Gawain, "and so hurry up and be gone. And you may be sure we will soon come after you, and break the strongest castle you have upon your head."

"There will be no need for that," said Sir Lancelot, "for if I were as proud as you are, believe me, I would meet you in the middle of the field."

"Make no more talk," said Sir Gawain, "but hand over the queen, and take yourself quickly out of this court."

"Well," said Sir Lancelot, "if I had known of this short welcome, I would have thought twice before I came here. For if the queen were as dear to me as you make out, I would have dared to keep her from the fellowship of the best knights under heaven."

And then Sir Lancelot said to Guinevere, in the hearing of the king and all of them, "Madam, now I must leave you and this noble fellowship for ever. And since it is so, I beg you to pray for me, and speak well of me. And if you are in a hard spot because of any false tongues, my lady, send me word quickly; and if any knight's hands can free you by battle, I will free you."

And with that Sir Lancelot kissed the queen; and then he said openly before them all, "Now let us see who in this place dares say the queen is not true to my lord Arthur. Let us see who will speak, if he dares to speak."

And with that he brought the queen to the king, and then Sir Lancelot took his leave and left. And there was neither king, duke nor earl, baron nor knight, lady nor gentlewoman, but they all wept like people out of their minds, except Sir Gawain. And when the noble Sir Lancelot mounted his horse to ride out of Carlisle, there was sobbing and weeping out of pure grief at his leaving. And so he took his way to Joyous Gard, and from then on he called it the Dolorous Gard. And so Sir Lancelot left the court for ever.

And so when he came to Joyous Gard he called his company to him, and asked them what they would do. Then they all answered together with one voice that they would do as he would do.

"My fair companions," said Sir Lancelot, "I must leave this most noble realm, and now that I must leave it, it grieves me badly, for I shall leave with no honour. For a man driven out never left a realm with any honour; and that is my sorrow, for I fear always that after my days men will write in their chronicles of me that I was driven out of this land. And otherwise, my fair lords, be sure of this: if I had not feared shame, my lady Queen Guinevere and I would never have parted."

Then many noble knights spoke, such as Sir Palomides, Sir Safere his brother, and Sir Bellangere le Beuse, and Sir Urre, with Sir Lavaine, and many others: "Sir, if you are minded to stay in this land, we will never fail you. And if you do not care to stay in this land, there is not one of the good knights here who will fail you, for many reasons. One is that all of us who are not of your blood will never be welcome at the court. And since it pleased us to take your part in your distress and sorrow in this realm, believe me, it will please us just as well to go into other countries with you, and to take whatever part you take there."

"My fair lords," said Sir Lancelot, "I understand you well, and I thank you as best I can. And you are to understand that I will share out with you, in this manner, such inheritance as I was born to: that is to say, I will divide all my income and all my lands freely among you, and I myself will have as little as any of you. For if I have enough for my own person, I will ask for no other rich array. And I trust to God to maintain you on my lands as well as any knights were ever maintained."

Then all the knights spoke at once: "Shame on any man who leaves you! For we all understand that in this realm there will be no peace now, but always strife and quarrelling, now that the fellowship of the Round Table is broken. For by the noble fellowship of the Round Table King Arthur was held up, and by their nobility the king and all his realm were at peace and rest; and a great part of that," they said, "was all because of your nobility."
