Chapter 18: How Sir Lancelot crossed the sea, and how he made great lords of the knights who went with him

"Truly," said Sir Lancelot, "I thank you all for your kind words. And yet I know well that the whole stability of this realm did not lie in me; but as far as I could, I did my duty. And I am quite sure I knew of many rebellions in my day that were put down by me, and I believe we shall all hear of them in a short while, and that I deeply regret. For I always fear," said Sir Lancelot, "that Sir Mordred will make trouble, for he is exceedingly envious and sets himself to make trouble."

So they agreed to go with Sir Lancelot to his lands. And to cut a long story short, they packed up, and paid everyone who asked for payment; and a full hundred knights left with Sir Lancelot at once, and made their vows that they would never leave him, for better or for worse.

And so they took ship at Cardiff, and sailed to Benwick. Some men call it Bayonne, and some men call it Beaune, where the wine of Beaune comes from. But to tell the truth, Sir Lancelot and his nephews were lords of all France, and of all the lands that belonged to France; he and his kindred enjoyed it all through Sir Lancelot's noble prowess. And then Sir Lancelot stocked and furnished and armed all his noble towns and castles. Then all the people of those lands came to Sir Lancelot on foot and did him homage. And so when he had settled all these countries, he called a parliament without delay; and there he crowned Sir Lionel King of France; and Sir Bors he crowned king of all King Claudas's lands; and Sir Ector de Maris, who was Sir Lancelot's youngest brother, he crowned King of Benwick, and king of all Guienne, which was Sir Lancelot's own land. And he made Sir Ector prince over them all, and so he shared it out.

Then Sir Lancelot raised up all his noble knights, and first he raised up those of his own blood. That was Sir Blamore: he made him Duke of the Limousin in Guienne. And Sir Bleoberis he made Duke of Poitiers, and Sir Gahalantine he made Duke of Querne, and Sir Galihodin he made Duke of Saintonge, and Sir Galihud he made Earl of Perigord, and Sir Menadeuke he made Earl of Rouergue, and Sir Villiers the Valiant he made Earl of Bearn, and Sir Hebes le Renoumes he made Earl of Comminges, and Sir Lavaine he made Earl of Armagnac, and Sir Urre he made Earl of Astarac, and Sir Neroneus he made Earl of Pardiac, and Sir Plenorius he made Earl of Foix, and Sir Selises of the Dolorous Tower he made Earl of Masauke, and Sir Melias de Lile he made Earl of Tursauk, and Sir Bellangere le Beuse he made Earl of the Landes, and Sir Palomides he made Duke of Provence, and Sir Safere he made Duke of Languedoc, and to Sir Clegis he gave the Earldom of Agen, and to Sir Sadok he gave the Earldom of Sarlat, and Sir Dinas the Seneschal he made Duke of Anjou, and Sir Clarrus he made Duke of Normandy. So Sir Lancelot rewarded his noble knights, and many more, whom it would take too long, it seems to me, to list.
