Chapter 19: How King Arthur and Sir Gawain made a great army ready to cross the sea and make war on Sir Lancelot

So we leave Sir Lancelot in his lands, and his noble knights with him, and return again to King Arthur and to Sir Gawain, who made a great army ready, to the number of sixty thousand. And everything was made ready for their shipping to cross the sea, and so they took ship at Cardiff. And there King Arthur made Sir Mordred chief ruler of all England, and he also put Queen Guinevere in his keeping. Because Sir Mordred was King Arthur's son, he gave him the rule of his land and of his wife. And so the king crossed the sea and landed on Sir Lancelot's lands, and there, through the vengeance of Sir Gawain, he burned and laid waste all that they could overrun.

When word of this came to Sir Lancelot, that King Arthur and Sir Gawain had landed on his lands and were making a very great destruction and waste, then Sir Bors spoke, and said, "My lord Sir Lancelot, it is a shame that we allow them to ride over our lands like this. For believe me, put up with them as long as you like, they will show you no favour if they can get their hands on you."

Then Sir Lionel, who was wary and wise, said, "My lord Sir Lancelot, I will give this advice. Let us hold our strong walled towns until they suffer hunger and cold and blow on their nails; and then let us set on them fresh, and cut them down like sheep in a field, so that foreigners may take warning for ever how they land on our lands."

Then King Bagdemagus spoke to Sir Lancelot: "Sir, your courtesy will be the ruin of us all, and your courtesy has woken all this sorrow. For if they ride over our lands like this, they will in time bring us all to nothing while we hide in holes like this."

Then Sir Galihud said to Sir Lancelot, "Sir, here are knights come of kings' blood, who will not hang their heads for long, and they are within these walls. So give us leave, as we are knights, to meet them in the field, and we will kill them, so that they will curse the time they ever came into this country."

Then seven brothers of North Wales spoke, and they were seven noble knights; a man might search seven kings' lands before he could find seven such knights. Then they all said at once, "Sir Lancelot, for Christ's sake let us ride out with Sir Galihud, for we were never used to cowering in castles or in noble towns."

Then Sir Lancelot, who was master and governor of them all, spoke: "My fair lords, believe me, I am very unwilling to ride out with my knights and shed Christian blood. And besides, I understand that my lands are very bare for supporting any army for long, because of the mighty wars that King Claudas once made upon this country, upon my father King Ban, and on my uncle King Bors. However, for this time we will keep to our strong walls, and I will send a messenger to my lord Arthur to make a treaty; for peace is better than war for ever."

So Sir Lancelot sent out a damsel, and a dwarf with her, asking King Arthur to leave off his warring on his lands. And so she leapt onto a palfrey, and the dwarf ran by her side. And when she came to King Arthur's tent, she dismounted there; and there a well-bred knight met her, Sir Lucan the butler, and said, "Fair damsel, do you come from Sir Lancelot du Lake?"

"Yes, sir," she said, "and that is why I have come here, to speak with my lord the king."

"Alas," said Sir Lucan, "my lord Arthur would love Lancelot, but Sir Gawain will not let him." And then he said, "I pray to God, damsel, that you may succeed, for all of us who are about the king wish that Sir Lancelot fared the best of any knight living."

And so with this Lucan led the damsel to the king where he sat with Sir Gawain, to hear what she would say. So when she had told her tale, the tears ran out of the king's eyes, and all the lords were very glad to advise the king to make peace with Sir Lancelot, all except Sir Gawain. And he said, "My lord my uncle, what will you do? Will you turn back now, now that you have come this far on this campaign? All the world will speak of your disgrace."

"No," said Arthur, "believe me, Sir Gawain, I will do as you advise me. And yet it seems to me," said Arthur, "his fair offers were not to be refused. But since I have come so far on this campaign, I want you to give the damsel her answer, for I cannot speak to her for pity, her offers are so generous."
