Chapter 20: What message Sir Gawain sent to Sir Lancelot, and how King Arthur laid siege to Benwick, and other matters

Then Sir Gawain said this to the damsel: "Damsel, tell Sir Lancelot that it is wasted effort now to plead with my uncle. For tell him that if he had wanted to make any effort for peace, he should have made it before this; for tell him now it is too late. And say that I, Sir Gawain, send him this word: that I promise him, by the faith I owe to God and to knighthood, I will never leave him until he has killed me or I him."

So the damsel wept and left, and there were many weeping eyes. And so Sir Lucan brought the damsel to her palfrey, and so she came to Sir Lancelot where he was among all his knights. And when Sir Lancelot had heard this answer, the tears ran down his cheeks. And then his noble knights strode up around him, and said, "Sir Lancelot, why do you look like this? Think what you are, and what men we are, and let us noble knights match them in the middle of the field."

"That could easily be done," said Sir Lancelot, "but I was never so unwilling to do battle. And therefore I beg you, fair sirs, as you love me, be ruled as I would have you. For I will always flee from that noble king who made me a knight. And when I can go no further, I must defend myself, and that will be more honour for me and for us all than to set ourselves against that noble king whom we have all served."

Then they held their tongues, and that night they took their rest.

And in the morning early, at the dawning of the day, as knights looked out, they saw the city of Benwick besieged all round. And quickly the besiegers began to set up ladders, and then those in the town fought them off and beat them from the walls stoutly. Then Sir Gawain came out, well armed, on a strong steed, and he came before the main gate with his spear in his hand, crying, "Sir Lancelot, where are you? Is there not one of you proud knights who dares break a spear with me?"

Then Sir Bors made himself ready, and came out of the town, and there Sir Gawain met Sir Bors. And at that time he struck Sir Bors down from his horse, and almost killed him; and so Sir Bors was rescued and carried into the town. Then Sir Lionel came out, Sir Bors's brother, and meant to avenge him; and each set his spear in rest, and they charged together. And there they met fiercely, but Sir Gawain had such grace that he struck Sir Lionel down, and wounded him there exceedingly badly; and then Sir Lionel was rescued and carried into the town. And this Sir Gawain came every day, and he never failed to strike down one knight or another.

So they went on like this for half a year, and there was much slaughter of people on both sides. Then it happened one day that Sir Gawain came before the gates, armed at all points, on a noble horse, with a great spear in his hand; and then he cried in a loud voice, "Where are you now, you false traitor, Sir Lancelot? Why do you hide inside holes and walls like a coward? Look out now, you false traitor knight, and here I will take revenge on your body for the death of my three brothers!"

Sir Lancelot heard every bit of all this talk; and his kin and his knights drew around him, and they all said at once to Sir Lancelot, "Sir Lancelot, now you must defend yourself like a knight, or else you will be shamed for ever. For now that you are accused of treason, it is time for you to stir, for you have slept too long and put up with too much."

"So God help me," said Sir Lancelot, "I am very downcast at Sir Gawain's words, for now he has charged me with a grave charge. And therefore I know as well as you do that I must defend myself, or else be shamed as a recreant."

Then Sir Lancelot ordered his strongest horse to be saddled, and had his arms fetched, and all brought to the gate of the tower. And then Sir Lancelot spoke out from on high to King Arthur, and said, "My lord Arthur, noble king who made me a knight, believe me, I am very sorrowful for your sake that you pursue me like this. And I always held back from you; for if I had wanted to be vengeful, I might have met you in the middle of the field, and there made your boldest knights very tame. And now I have held back for half a year, and allowed you and Sir Gawain to do whatever you would do; and now I can bear it no longer, for now I must defend myself, since Sir Gawain has accused me of treason. And that is greatly against my will, that I should ever fight against any of your blood; but now I cannot refuse it, for I am driven to it like a beast brought to bay."

Then Sir Gawain said, "Sir Lancelot, if you dare do battle, stop your babbling and come out, and let us ease our hearts."

Then Sir Lancelot armed himself swiftly, and mounted his horse, and each of the knights took great spears in their hands. And the army outside stood still, all apart, and the noble knights came out of the city in great numbers, so many that when Arthur saw the number of men and knights, he marvelled, and said to himself, "Alas that Sir Lancelot was ever against me, for now I see he has held back from me."

And so the agreement was made that no man should come near them, or have anything to do with them, until the one was dead or had yielded.
