Chapter 21: How Sir Lancelot and Sir Gawain fought together, and how Sir Gawain was overthrown and wounded

Then Sir Gawain and Sir Lancelot drew a great way apart, and then they came together with all their horses' might, as fast as they could run, and each struck the other in the middle of his shield. But the knights were so strong, and their spears so big, that their horses could not withstand their blows, and so their horses fell to the earth. And then they got clear of their horses, and set their shields in front of them. Then they stood together and gave many heavy blows on various places of their bodies, so that the blood burst out on many sides and places.

Then Sir Gawain had a grace and gift that a holy man had given him: every day of the year, from mid-morning until high noon, his might increased threefold in those three hours, and that made Sir Gawain win great honour. And for his sake King Arthur made an ordinance that all battles, for whatever quarrel, that were to be fought before King Arthur should begin at mid-morning. And all this was done out of love for Sir Gawain, so that in all likelihood, if Sir Gawain were on the one side, he would have the better of the battle while his strength lasted those three hours. But there were very few knights living at that time who knew of this advantage that Sir Gawain had, except King Arthur alone.

So Sir Lancelot fought with Sir Gawain, and when Sir Lancelot felt his might increase more and more, Sir Lancelot wondered, and greatly feared to be shamed. For, as the French book says, when Sir Lancelot felt Sir Gawain double his strength, he thought he was a fiend and no earthly man. And so Sir Lancelot circled and sidestepped, and covered himself with his shield, and saved his strength and his quickness for three hours. And all that while Sir Gawain gave him many heavy charges and many heavy blows, so that all the knights who watched Sir Lancelot marvelled how he could hold out against him; but they little understood the labour Sir Lancelot had to hold out against him. And then, when it was past noon, Sir Gawain had nothing more than his own might. When Sir Lancelot felt him come down like this, then he drew himself up and stood close to Sir Gawain, and said this: "My lord Sir Gawain, now I feel that you are done. Now, my lord Sir Gawain, I must do my part, for I have borne many great and grievous blows from you this day with great pain."

Then Sir Lancelot doubled his blows, and gave Sir Gawain such a blow on the helmet that he fell down on his side, and Sir Lancelot drew back from him.

"Why are you drawing back?" said Sir Gawain. "Now turn back, false traitor knight, and kill me! For if you leave me like this, when I am healed I will do battle with you again."

"I will stand up to you, sir, by God's grace," said Sir Lancelot, "but you may be sure, Sir Gawain, I will never strike a fallen knight."

And so Sir Lancelot went into the city; and Sir Gawain was carried into King Arthur's tent, and doctors were brought to him, and they probed his wounds and dressed them with soft ointments.

And then Sir Lancelot said, "Now good day to you, my lord the king, for believe me, you will win no honour at these walls. And if I were to bring my knights out, many a man would die. Therefore, my lord Arthur, remember old kindness; and however it goes with me, may Jesus be your guide in all places."
