Chapter 22: Of the sorrow King Arthur felt for the war, and of another battle where Sir Gawain again got the worst of it

"Alas," said the king, "that this ill-fated war was ever begun! For Sir Lancelot always holds back from me everywhere, and from my kin in the same way, and that was plain to see this day with my nephew Sir Gawain."

Then King Arthur fell sick with sorrow for Sir Gawain, because he was so badly hurt, and because of the war between him and Sir Lancelot. So then those on King Arthur's side kept up the siege, with little fighting on the outside; and those inside kept to their walls, and defended them when there was need. So Sir Gawain lay sick three weeks in his tents, with every kind of doctoring that could be had. And as soon as Sir Gawain could walk and ride, he armed himself at all points, and leapt onto a warhorse, and took a spear in his hand, and so he came riding before the main gate of Benwick. And there he cried aloud, "Where are you, Sir Lancelot? Come out, you false traitor knight and recreant, for I am here, Sir Gawain, who will prove what I say on you!"

Sir Lancelot heard all this talk, and then he said this: "Sir Gawain, I am sorry for your foul words, that you will not stop your talk. For you know well, Sir Gawain, I know your might and all that you can do; and you know well, Sir Gawain, you cannot do me much harm."

"Come down, traitor knight," said he, "and prove the contrary with your hands! For it was my bad luck in the last battle to be hurt by your hands; so you may be sure I have come this day to make up for it, for I mean this day to lay you as low as you laid me."

"Jesus forbid," said Sir Lancelot, "that I should ever be so far in your power as you have been in mine, for then my days would be done. But Sir Gawain," said Sir Lancelot, "you shall not think that I will hang back long; but since you call me a traitor so unknightly, you shall have both your hands full of me."

And then Sir Lancelot armed himself at all points, and mounted his horse, and took a great spear in his hand, and rode out at the gate. And both the armies were assembled, those outside and those inside, and stood in array very manfully. And both sides were ordered to hold themselves still, to see and watch the battle of these two noble knights. And then they laid their spears in their rests, and they came together like thunder, and Sir Gawain broke his spear upon Sir Lancelot into a hundred pieces right up to his hand. And Sir Lancelot struck him with a greater might, so that the feet of Sir Gawain's horse rose up, and so the horse and he fell to the earth. Then Sir Gawain nimbly got clear of his horse, and put his shield in front of him, and eagerly drew his sword, and said to Sir Lancelot, "Get down, traitor knight! For if this mare's son has failed me, you may be sure a king's son and a queen's son will not fail you."

Then Sir Lancelot got clear of his horse, and set his shield in front of him, and drew his sword; and so they stood together and gave many heavy blows, so that all men on both sides were exceedingly amazed at it. But when Sir Lancelot felt Sir Gawain's might increase so marvellously, he held back his courage and his breath, and kept his might wonderfully hidden; and under his shield he circled and sidestepped here and there, to break Sir Gawain's blows and his spirit. And Sir Gawain strained himself with all his might and power to destroy Sir Lancelot; for, as the French book says, always as Sir Gawain's might increased, just so increased his breath and his ill will. So Sir Gawain gave Sir Lancelot great trouble for three hours, so that he had very great pains to defend himself.

And when the three hours were past, and Sir Lancelot felt that Sir Gawain had come back to his own proper strength, then Sir Lancelot said to Sir Gawain, "Now I have tested you twice, and found that you are a very dangerous knight and a wonderful man for your might. And you have done many wonderful deeds in your day, for by your increasing might you have deceived many a very noble and valiant knight. And now that I feel you have done your mighty deeds, now believe me, I must do my deeds."

And then Sir Lancelot stood close to Sir Gawain, and then Sir Lancelot doubled his blows. And Sir Gawain defended himself mightily, but nevertheless Sir Lancelot struck such a blow on Sir Gawain's helmet, and on the old wound, that Sir Gawain sank down on one side in a faint. And as soon as he came to, he waved and thrust at Sir Lancelot as he lay, and said, "Traitor knight, you may be sure I am not dead yet. Come near me and finish this battle to the uttermost!"

"I will do no more than I have done," said Sir Lancelot. "For when I see you on your feet, I will do battle with you all the while I see you stand on your feet; but as for striking a wounded man who cannot stand, God keep me from such a shame!"

And then he turned and went his way toward the city. And Sir Gawain kept calling him traitor knight all the while, and said, "You may be sure, Sir Lancelot, when I am healed I will do battle with you again, for I will never leave you until one of us is killed."

So the siege went on, and Sir Gawain lay sick for nearly a month; and when he was well recovered, and would have been ready within three days to do battle again with Sir Lancelot, just then news came to Arthur from England that made King Arthur and all his army move.

Here follows the twenty-first book.
