Chapter 1: How Sir Mordred presumed to make himself King of England, and tried to marry the queen, his father's wife

While Sir Mordred was ruler of all England, he had letters made as though they came from over the sea, and the letters said that King Arthur had been killed in battle with Sir Lancelot. So Sir Mordred called a parliament, and summoned the lords together, and there he made them choose him king; and so he was crowned at Canterbury, and held a feast there for fifteen days. And afterwards he went to Winchester, and there he took Queen Guinevere, and said plainly that he would marry her, who was his uncle's wife and his father's wife. And so he made ready for the feast, and a day was set for them to be married; at which Queen Guinevere was exceedingly downcast. But she did not dare show what was in her heart, but spoke him fair, and agreed to Sir Mordred's will. Then she asked Sir Mordred's leave to go to London, to buy all the things that belonged to the wedding. And because of her fair words Sir Mordred trusted her well enough, and gave her leave to go. And so when she came to London she took the Tower of London, and suddenly, in all the haste she could, she stocked it with all kinds of provisions, and manned it well, and so held it.

Then when Sir Mordred knew and understood how he had been tricked, he was angry beyond measure. And to cut a long story short, he went and laid a mighty siege around the Tower of London, and made many great assaults on it, and hurled many great stones at them from his siege engines, and fired great guns. But none of it could do Sir Mordred any good, for Queen Guinevere would never, for fair words or foul, trust herself to come into his hands again.

Then came the Bishop of Canterbury, who was a noble scholar and a holy man, and this is what he said to Sir Mordred: "Sir, what are you going to do? Will you first offend God and then shame yourself, and all knighthood? Is King Arthur not your uncle, no further off than your mother's brother? And on her, his own sister, King Arthur himself fathered you. So how can you marry your father's wife? Sir," said the noble scholar, "give up this idea, or I will curse you with book and bell and candle."

"Do your worst," said Sir Mordred. "And you can be sure I'll defy you."

"Sir," said the Bishop, "and you may be sure I will not be afraid to do what I ought to do. And you spread it about that my lord Arthur is killed, and that is not so, and so you will make foul work in this land."

"Quiet, you lying priest," said Sir Mordred, "for if you provoke me any more I'll have your head struck off."

So the Bishop left and pronounced the curse in the haughtiest way that it could be done. And then Sir Mordred went looking for the Bishop of Canterbury, to have him killed. Then the Bishop fled, and took part of his goods with him, and went to a place near Glastonbury; and there he lived as a priest and hermit in a chapel, in poverty and in holy prayer, for he understood well that a disastrous war was at hand.

Then Sir Mordred pressed Queen Guinevere with letters and messengers, and by fair means and foul, to make her come out of the Tower of London; but none of it did any good, for she answered him curtly, openly and in private, that she would rather kill herself than be married to him. Then word came to Sir Mordred that King Arthur had raised the siege against Sir Lancelot and was coming home with a great army, to take vengeance on Sir Mordred. So Sir Mordred had writs written and sent to all the barons of this land, and many people flocked to him. For the common talk among them then was that with Arthur there was no other life but war and strife, and with Sir Mordred there was great joy and happiness. So Sir Arthur was slandered and spoken ill of. And there were many whom King Arthur had raised up from nothing, and given lands, who could not then say a good word for him. Look, all you Englishmen, do you not see what a wretched thing this was? For he who was the greatest king and knight in the world, and loved the fellowship of noble knights the most, and by whom they were all upheld, even with him these Englishmen could not be content. Look, this was the old custom and habit of this land; and men say too that we of this land have not yet lost or forgotten that custom and habit. Alas, this is a great failing of ours, we Englishmen, for nothing pleases us for long. And that was how the people behaved at that time: they were better pleased with Sir Mordred than they were with King Arthur. And many people flocked to Sir Mordred, and said they would stand by him for better and for worse. And so Sir Mordred went with a great army to Dover, for he had heard that Sir Arthur would land there, and so he meant to drive his own father from his lands; and most of England held with Sir Mordred, the people were so fickle and so fond of anything new.
