Chapter 2: How King Arthur, when he had the news, came back to Dover, where Sir Mordred met him to stop his landing, and of the death of Sir Gawain

And so, while Sir Mordred was at Dover with his army, King Arthur came with a great navy of ships, and galleys, and carracks. And there was Sir Mordred, ready and waiting for his landing, to stop his own father from landing on the land that he was king over. Then there was launching of boats great and small, full of noble men-at-arms; and there was great slaughter of well-born knights, and many a bold baron was laid low, on both sides. But King Arthur was so courageous that no knights of any kind could stop him landing, and his knights followed him fiercely; and so they landed in spite of Sir Mordred and all his army, and drove Sir Mordred back, so that he fled, and all his people.

So when this battle was over, King Arthur had his people who were dead buried. And then the noble Sir Gawain was found in a great boat, lying more than half dead. When Sir Arthur knew that Sir Gawain was laid so low, he went to him; and there the king grieved beyond measure, and took Sir Gawain in his arms, and three times he fainted there. And then when he came to himself, he said, "Alas, Sir Gawain, my sister's son, here you lie now, the man in the world that I loved most; and now my joy is gone. For now, my nephew Sir Gawain, I will open my heart to you: in Sir Lancelot and you I had my greatest joy, and my trust, and now I have lost my joy in you both; and so all my earthly joy is gone from me."

"My uncle King Arthur," said Sir Gawain, "believe me, my death-day has come, and all through my own rashness and wilfulness; for I have been struck on the old wound that Sir Lancelot gave me, and I feel well that I must die of it. And if Sir Lancelot had been with you as he used to be, this ill-fated war would never have begun; and I am the cause of all of it, for Sir Lancelot and his kin, through their prowess, held all your inveterate enemies in subjection and in their power. And now," said Sir Gawain, "you will miss Sir Lancelot. But alas, I would not make peace with him. And so," said Sir Gawain, "I beg you, fair uncle, let me have paper, pen and ink, so that I may write a letter to Sir Lancelot with my own hands."

And then when paper and ink were brought, Gawain was propped up, weakly, by King Arthur, for he had made his confession a little before; and then he wrote this, as the French book tells: "To Sir Lancelot, flower of all the noble knights that ever I heard of or saw in my days, I, Sir Gawain, King Lot's son of Orkney, sister's son to the noble King Arthur, send you greeting, and let you know that on the tenth day of May I was struck on the old wound that you gave me before the city of Benwick, and through that same wound that you gave me I have come to my death-day. And I want all the world to know that I, Sir Gawain, knight of the Round Table, sought my own death, and not through any fault of yours, but it was my own seeking; and so I beg you, Sir Lancelot, to come back to this realm, and see my tomb, and say some prayer, more or less, for my soul. And this same day that I wrote this letter, I was hurt to the death in the same wound that I had from your hand, Sir Lancelot; for by no nobler man could I have been killed. Also, Sir Lancelot, for all the love that ever was between us, make no delay, but come over the sea in all haste, so that you and your noble knights may rescue that noble king who made you knight, that is my lord Arthur; for he is hard beset by a false traitor, who is my half-brother, Sir Mordred. And he has had himself crowned king, and would have married my lady Queen Guinevere, and so he would have done if she had not shut herself in the Tower of London. And so on the tenth day of May just past, my lord Arthur and all of us landed against them at Dover; and there we put that false traitor, Sir Mordred, to flight, and there it was my misfortune to be struck on the wound of your stroke. And at the date of this letter, it was written only two and a half hours before my death, written with my own hand, and so signed with part of my heart's blood. And I beg you, most famous knight in the world, to come and see my tomb."

And then Sir Gawain wept, and King Arthur wept; and then they both fainted. And when they both came to themselves, the king had Sir Gawain receive his Saviour in communion. And then Sir Gawain begged the king to send for Sir Lancelot, and to cherish him above all other knights.

And so at the hour of noon Sir Gawain gave up the ghost; and then the king had him buried in a chapel inside Dover Castle; and there all men may still see his skull, and the same wound can be seen that Sir Lancelot gave him in battle. Then the king was told that Sir Mordred had pitched a new camp on Barham Down. And in the morning the king rode there to meet him, and there was a great battle between them, and many people were killed on both sides; but in the end Sir Arthur's side came off best, and Sir Mordred and his side fled to Canterbury.
