Chapter 3: How afterwards Sir Gawain's ghost appeared to King Arthur, and warned him not to fight that day

And then the king had all the towns searched for his knights who had been killed, and buried them; and those who were badly wounded he had treated with soothing salves. Then many people flocked to King Arthur. And then they said that Sir Mordred was making war on King Arthur wrongfully. And then King Arthur moved with his army down by the seaside, westward towards Salisbury; and a day was appointed between King Arthur and Sir Mordred, that they should meet on a down beside Salisbury, not far from the seaside. And this day was appointed for the Monday after Trinity Sunday, at which King Arthur was exceedingly glad, that he might be avenged on Sir Mordred. Then Sir Mordred raised many people around London, for the men of Kent, Sussex and Surrey, Essex, and Suffolk and Norfolk held for the most part with Sir Mordred; and many a noble knight went over to Sir Mordred and to the king: but those who loved Sir Lancelot went over to Sir Mordred.

So on the night of Trinity Sunday, King Arthur dreamed a marvellous dream, and it was this: it seemed to him that he sat on a platform in a chair, and the chair was fastened to a wheel, and King Arthur sat on it in the richest cloth of gold that could be made. And the king thought there was beneath him, far below him, a hideous deep black water, and in it were all kinds of serpents, and dragons, and wild beasts, foul and horrible. And suddenly the king thought the wheel turned upside down, and he fell among the serpents, and every beast took him by a limb. And then the king cried out as he lay asleep in his bed, "Help!"

And then knights, squires and yeomen woke the king; and then he was so bewildered that he did not know where he was. And then he fell into a doze again, neither sleeping nor fully awake. And it truly seemed to the king that Sir Gawain came to him, with a number of fair ladies with him. And when King Arthur saw him, he said, "Welcome, my sister's son. I thought you were dead, and now I see you alive, and I owe great thanks to Almighty Jesus. O fair nephew and my sister's son, who are these ladies who have come here with you?"

"Sir," said Sir Gawain, "these are all ladies for whom I fought when I was a living man, and these are all the ones I did battle for in a righteous quarrel; and at their great prayer God has given them the grace, because I did battle for them, to bring me here to you. God has given me leave to do this much, to warn you of your death. For if you fight tomorrow with Sir Mordred, as you have both agreed, have no doubt that you will be killed, and most of your people on both sides. And for the great grace and goodness that Almighty Jesus has for you, and out of pity for you and for many other good men who would be killed there, God has sent me to you by His special grace, to warn you that on no account are you to do battle tomorrow, but to make a truce for a month; and offer generous terms, so that tomorrow is put off. For within a month Sir Lancelot will come with all his noble knights, and rescue you with honour, and kill Sir Mordred, and every one who will hold with him."

Then Sir Gawain and all the ladies vanished.

And at once the king called for his knights, squires and yeomen, and ordered them to fetch his noble lords and wise bishops to him quickly. And when they had come, the king told them his vision, what Sir Gawain had told him, and how he had warned him that if he fought in the morning he would be killed. Then the king commanded Sir Lucan the butler, and his brother Sir Bedivere, with two bishops with them, and charged them by any means they could to "make a truce for a month with Sir Mordred, and do not hold back: offer him lands and goods, as much as you think best."

So then they left, and came to Sir Mordred, where he had a grim army of a hundred thousand men. And there they pleaded with Sir Mordred for a long time; and at last Sir Mordred agreed to have Cornwall and Kent in Arthur's lifetime, and after that all England, after the days of King Arthur.
