Chapter 4: How by the mischance of an adder the battle began, in which Mordred was slain and Arthur mortally wounded

Then they agreed that King Arthur and Sir Mordred should meet between their two armies, and each of them should bring fourteen men; and they came back to Arthur with this word. Then he said, "I am glad that this is done." And so he went into the field. And when Arthur was about to set out, he warned all his army that if they saw any sword drawn, "see that you come on fiercely, and kill that traitor, Sir Mordred, for I do not trust him in any way."

In the same way Sir Mordred warned his army: "If you see any sword drawn, see that you come on fiercely, and so kill everyone who stands before you; for I will not trust this treaty in any way, for I know well my father will be avenged on me."

And so they met as they had arranged, and so they were agreed and fully reconciled; and wine was fetched, and they drank. Very soon an adder came out of a little heath bush, and it stung a knight on the foot. And when the knight felt himself stung, he looked down and saw the adder, and then he drew his sword to kill the adder, and thought of no other harm. And when the armies on both sides saw that sword drawn, they blew bugles, trumpets and horns, and shouted grimly. And so both armies made for each other. And King Arthur mounted his horse, and said, "Alas, this unlucky day!" and so rode to his side. And Sir Mordred did the same. And never was there seen a more sorrowful battle in any Christian land; for there was nothing but rushing and riding, thrusting and striking, and many a grim word was spoken by each to the other, and many a deadly stroke struck. But all the while King Arthur rode through Sir Mordred's ranks many times, and did very nobly, as a noble king should, and never at any time did he flag; and Sir Mordred that day did his duty, and put himself in great peril. And so they fought all the long day, and never stopped until the noble knights were laid on the cold earth; and still they fought on till it was near night, and by that time a hundred thousand lay dead on the down. Then Arthur was mad with rage beyond measure, when he saw his people killed around him like that.

Then the king looked about him, and then he saw that of all his army and all his good knights, no more were left alive but two knights: one was Sir Lucan the butler, and the other his brother Sir Bedivere, and they were very badly wounded.

"Jesus have mercy," said the king, "what has become of all my noble knights? Alas, that ever I should see this sorrowful day, for now," said Arthur, "I have come to my end. But I wish to God I knew where that traitor Sir Mordred is, who has caused all this misery."

Then King Arthur saw where Sir Mordred was leaning on his sword among a great heap of dead men.

"Now give me my spear," said Arthur to Sir Lucan, "for over there I have spotted the traitor who has brought about all this woe."

"Sir, let him be," said Sir Lucan, "for he is ill-fated; and if you live through this ill-fated day you will be very well revenged on him. Good lord, remember your dream last night, and what the spirit of Sir Gawain told you this night; and still God in His great goodness has kept you safe till now. So, for God's sake, my lord, leave it at this. For, blessed be God, you have won the field: here there are three of us alive, and with Sir Mordred there is no one alive. And if you leave off now, this wicked day of destiny is past."

"Come death to me, come life," said the king, "now that I see him over there alone he shall never escape my hands, for I shall never have him at a better advantage."

"God speed you well," said Sir Bedivere.

Then the king took his spear in both his hands, and ran towards Sir Mordred, crying, "Traitor, now your death-day has come!"

And when Sir Mordred heard Sir Arthur, he ran at him with his sword drawn in his hand. And there King Arthur struck Sir Mordred under the shield, with a thrust of his spear, right through the body, more than a fathom. And when Sir Mordred felt that he had his death wound, he thrust himself with all the strength he had up to the hand-guard of King Arthur's spear. And even so he struck his father Arthur, with his sword held in both his hands, on the side of the head, so that the sword pierced the helmet and the skull; and with that Sir Mordred fell stark dead to the earth. And the noble Arthur fell to the earth in a faint, and there he fainted again and again. And Sir Lucan the butler and Sir Bedivere lifted him up again and again. And so, weakly, the two of them led him between them to a little chapel not far from the seaside. And when the king was there he felt himself somewhat eased.

Then they heard people crying out in the field.

"Now go, Sir Lucan," said the king, "and let me know what that noise in the field means."

So Sir Lucan left, though he was grievously wounded in many places. And as he went, he saw and heard by the moonlight how plunderers and robbers had come into the field, to plunder and to rob many a noble knight of brooches and rosaries, of many a good ring, and of many a rich jewel; and any who were not quite dead, they killed there for their armour and their riches. When Sir Lucan understood what was going on, he came back to the king as soon as he could, and told him all that he had heard and seen.

"So, by my advice," said Sir Lucan, "it is best that we bring you to some town."

"I wish it could be so," said the king.
