Chapter 5: How King Arthur ordered his sword Excalibur thrown into the water, and how he was given over to ladies in a barge

"But I cannot stand, my head is reeling so," the king went on.

"Ah, Sir Lancelot," said King Arthur, "this day I have sorely missed you. Alas, that ever I was against you, for now I have my death, as Sir Gawain warned me in my dream."

Then Sir Lucan lifted the king on one side, and Sir Bedivere on the other, and in the lifting the king fainted; and with the lift Sir Lucan fell in a faint, so that part of his guts fell out of his body, and with that the noble knight's heart burst. And when the king came to, he saw Sir Lucan, how he lay foaming at the mouth, and part of his guts lay at his feet.

"Alas," said the king, "this is a very heavy sight to me, to see this noble duke die like this for my sake, for he wanted to help me, when he had more need of help than I did. Alas, he would not complain, his heart was so set on helping me. Now Jesus have mercy on his soul!"

Then Sir Bedivere wept for the death of his brother.

"Stop this mourning and weeping," said the king, "for none of it will do me any good. For believe me, if I could live myself, the death of Sir Lucan would grieve me for ever; but my time is running out fast," said the king. "So," said Arthur to Sir Bedivere, "take Excalibur, my good sword, and go with it to the water's edge over there, and when you get there I charge you to throw my sword into that water, and come back and tell me what you see there."

"My lord," said Bedivere, "your command will be done, and I will quickly bring you word again."

So Sir Bedivere left, and on the way he looked at that noble sword, and saw that the pommel and the hilt were all of precious stones; and then he said to himself, "If I throw this rich sword into the water, no good will ever come of it, only harm and loss."

And then Sir Bedivere hid Excalibur under a tree. And so, as soon as he could, he came back to the king, and said he had been to the water and had thrown the sword into the water.

"What did you see there?" said the king.

"Sir," he said, "I saw nothing but waves and winds."

"That is not the truth," said the king. "So go back quickly, and do my command; as you are dear and beloved to me, do not spare it, but throw it in."

Then Sir Bedivere went back again, and took the sword in his hand; and then it seemed to him a sin and a shame to throw away that noble sword, and so he hid the sword a second time, and went back again, and told the king that he had been to the water and done his command.

"What did you see there?" said the king.

"Sir," he said, "I saw nothing but the water rippling and the waves running dark."

"Ah, traitor, faithless," said King Arthur, "now you have betrayed me twice. Who would have thought it, of you, who have been so dear and beloved to me? And you are called a noble knight, and you would betray me for the richness of the sword. But now go again quickly, for your long delay is putting my life in great danger, for I have taken cold. And unless you do as I tell you now, if ever I set eyes on you again I will kill you with my own hands; for you would see me dead for the sake of my rich sword."

Then Sir Bedivere left, and went to the sword, and quickly took it up, and went to the water's edge; and there he wound the belt around the hilt, and then he threw the sword as far into the water as he could; and there came an arm and a hand above the water, and met it, and caught it, and so shook it three times and brandished it, and then the hand vanished with the sword into the water. So Sir Bedivere came back to the king, and told him what he had seen.

"Alas," said the king, "help me away from here, for I am afraid I have waited too long."

Then Sir Bedivere took the king on his back, and so went with him to that water's edge. And when they were at the water's edge, close by the bank a little barge was floating with many fair ladies in it, and among them all was a queen, and they all had black hoods, and they all wept and shrieked when they saw King Arthur.

"Now put me into the barge," said the king.

And so he did, gently; and there three queens received him with great mourning; and so they sat down, and King Arthur laid his head in the lap of one of them. And then that queen said, "Ah, dear brother, why have you stayed away from me so long? Alas, this wound on your head has caught too much cold."

And so then they rowed away from the land, and Sir Bedivere watched all those ladies go from him. Then Sir Bedivere cried out, "Ah, my lord Arthur, what will become of me, now that you go from me and leave me here alone among my enemies?"

"Comfort yourself," said the king, "and do as well as you can, for there is no trust left in me to trust in. For I will go into the vale of Avalon to be healed of my grievous wound. And if you never hear of me again, pray for my soul."

But all the while the queens and ladies wept and shrieked, so that it was pitiful to hear. And as soon as Sir Bedivere had lost sight of the barge, he wept and wailed, and so he took to the forest; and so he walked all that night, and in the morning he saw, between two grey old woods, a chapel and a hermitage.
