Chapter 6: How Sir Bedivere found King Arthur dead the next morning in a hermitage, and how he stayed there with the hermit

Then Sir Bedivere was glad, and went there; and when he came into the chapel, he saw a hermit lying face down, stretched out on the ground, close beside a tomb that was newly dug. When the hermit saw Sir Bedivere he knew him well, for only a little before he had been the Bishop of Canterbury whom Sir Mordred had driven out.

"Sir," said Bedivere, "what man is buried there, that you pray so hard for?"

"Fair son," said the hermit, "I do not know for certain, only by guessing. But this night, at midnight, a number of ladies came here, and brought a dead body here, and begged me to bury him; and here they offered a hundred tapers, and they gave me a hundred gold coins."

"Alas," said Sir Bedivere, "that was my lord King Arthur, who lies buried here in this chapel."

Then Sir Bedivere fainted; and when he came to, he begged the hermit to let him stay there with him from then on, to live with fasting and prayer. "For I will never go from here of my own will," said Sir Bedivere, "but stay here all the days of my life to pray for my lord Arthur."

"You are welcome to me," said the hermit, "for I know you better than you think I do. You are the bold Bedivere, and the very noble duke, Sir Lucan the butler, was your brother."

Then Sir Bedivere told the hermit everything, as you have heard it before. So Sir Bedivere stayed there with the hermit who had once been Bishop of Canterbury, and there Sir Bedivere put on poor clothes, and served the hermit very humbly in fasting and in prayer.

So of Arthur I never find anything more written in books that are authoritative, nor did I ever hear or read anything more of the real certainty of his death, except that he was led away in a ship in which there were three queens: one was King Arthur's sister, Queen Morgan le Fay; the second was the Queen of North Wales; the third was the Queen of the Waste Lands. Also there was Nimue, the chief Lady of the Lake, who had married Pelleas the good knight; and this lady had done much for King Arthur, for she would never let Sir Pelleas be in any place where he would be in danger of his life; and so he lived out his days to the very end with her, in great peace. More of the death of King Arthur I could never find, except that ladies brought him to his burial; and such a one was buried there, as the hermit bore witness, who had once been Bishop of Canterbury. But even so the hermit did not know for certain that it was truly the body of King Arthur: for Sir Bedivere, knight of the Round Table, had this tale written down.
