Chapter 8: How Sir Lancelot, when he heard of the death of King Arthur and of Sir Gawain, and other matters, came to England

And when he heard in his own country that Sir Mordred was crowned king in England, and had made war against King Arthur, his own father, and would hinder him from landing in his own land; and when it was also told Sir Lancelot how Sir Mordred had laid siege to the Tower of London, because the queen would not marry him; then Sir Lancelot was angry beyond measure, and said to his kinsmen, "Alas, that double traitor Sir Mordred! Now I regret that he ever escaped my hands, for he has done great shame to my lord Arthur. For I can tell from the sorrowful letter that my lord Sir Gawain sent me, on whose soul Jesus have mercy, that my lord Arthur is in a very hard spot. Alas," said Sir Lancelot, "that I should ever live to hear that the most noble king, who made me a knight, is overthrown like this by his own subject in his own kingdom! And this sorrowful letter that my lord Sir Gawain sent me before his death, begging me to come and see his tomb: believe me, his sorrowful words shall never leave my heart, for he was as noble a knight as ever was born. And in an ill-fated hour was I born, that I should ever have the ill luck to kill, first Sir Gawain, Sir Gaheris the good knight, and my own friend Sir Gareth, that most noble knight. Alas, I may well say I am ill-fated," said Sir Lancelot, "that I should ever do things so ill-fatedly. And alas, and yet I never had the luck to kill that traitor, Sir Mordred!"

"Leave your laments," said Sir Bors, "and first avenge the death of Sir Gawain. And it will be well done for you to see Sir Gawain's tomb; and secondly, avenge my lord Arthur, and my lady Queen Guinevere."

"I thank you," said Sir Lancelot, "for you always look to my honour."

Then they made themselves ready with all the haste they could, with ships and galleys, for Sir Lancelot and his army to cross into England. And so he crossed the sea until he came to Dover, and there he landed with seven kings, and their numbers were fearsome to behold. Then Sir Lancelot asked the men of Dover what had become of King Arthur. Then the people told him how he was killed, and Sir Mordred, and a hundred thousand died in one day; and how Sir Mordred had given King Arthur the first battle there at his landing, and there the good Sir Gawain was killed; and how the next morning Sir Mordred fought with the king on Barham Down, and there the king got the better of Sir Mordred.

"Alas," said Sir Lancelot, "this is the heaviest news that ever came to me. Now, fair sirs," said Sir Lancelot, "show me the tomb of Sir Gawain."

And then certain people of the town brought him into the castle of Dover, and showed him the tomb. Then Sir Lancelot knelt down and wept, and prayed with all his heart for his soul. And that night he gave out alms, and all who would come had as much meat, fish, wine and ale as they wanted, and every man and woman had twelve pence, whoever came. He dealt out this money with his own hand, in a mourning gown; and all the while he wept, and begged them to pray for the soul of Sir Gawain. And the next morning all the priests and clerks who could be found in the country were there, and sang the Requiem mass. And there Sir Lancelot made the first offering, and he offered a hundred pounds; and then the seven kings offered forty pounds apiece; and there were also a thousand knights, and each of them offered a pound; and the offering lasted from morning till night. And Sir Lancelot lay two nights on his tomb, praying and weeping.

Then on the third day Sir Lancelot called the kings, dukes, earls, barons and knights together, and spoke like this: "My fair lords, I thank you all for coming into this country with me. But we came too late, and I shall regret it as long as I live; but against death no man may rebel. But since it is so," said Sir Lancelot, "I will ride myself and look for my lady Queen Guinevere, for I hear she has had great pain and much distress; and I have heard that she has fled into the west. Therefore you shall all wait for me here, and unless I come back within fifteen days, then take your ships and your company, and go home to your own country, for I will do as I tell you."
