Chapter 9: How Sir Lancelot set out to find Queen Guinevere, and how he found her at Almesbury

Then Sir Bors de Ganis came, and said, "My lord Sir Lancelot, what do you mean to do, riding now through this kingdom? Believe me, you will find few friends."

"Be that as it may," said Sir Lancelot, "you stay here, for I will go on my journey, and no man or boy shall go with me."

So it was no use arguing, and he left and rode westward, and there he searched for seven or eight days. And at last he came to a nunnery, and then Queen Guinevere caught sight of Sir Lancelot as he walked in the cloister. And when she saw him there she fainted three times, so that all the ladies and gentlewomen had their hands full holding the queen up. So when she could speak, she called ladies and gentlewomen to her, and said, "You wonder, fair ladies, why I carry on like this. Truly," she said, "it is at the sight of that knight who is standing over there. So I beg you all, call him to me."

When Sir Lancelot was brought to her, she said to all the ladies, "Through this man and me all this war has been brought about, and the death of the noblest knights in the world; for through the love that we have loved together my most noble lord is killed. Therefore, Sir Lancelot, know this: I have set myself on this course to win the salvation of my soul. And yet I trust, through God's grace, that after my death I shall have a sight of the blessed face of Christ, and at Doomsday sit on His right side; for there are saints in heaven as sinful as ever I was. Therefore, Sir Lancelot, I ask you and beg you with all my heart, for all the love that ever was between us, never to look me in the face again. And I command you, in God's name, to leave my company, and go back to your kingdom, and keep your realm well from war and ruin. For as much as I have loved you, my heart will not let me see you, for through you and me the flower of kings and knights is destroyed. Therefore, Sir Lancelot, go to your kingdom, and there take a wife, and live with her in joy and happiness. And I beg you with all my heart, pray for me to our Lord, that I may make amends for my sinful life."

"Now, sweet madam," said Sir Lancelot, "do you want me to go back now to my own country, and marry a lady there? No, madam, believe me, that I will never do, for I will never be so false to you in what I have promised. But the same life that you have taken up, I will take up too, to please Jesus, and above all I mean to pray for you."

"If you will do that," said the queen, "keep your promise. But I can never believe that you will not turn back to the world again."

"Well, madam," he said, "you may say what you please, but you never yet knew me to break my promise; and God forbid that I should not forsake the world as you have done. For in the quest of the Holy Grail I would have forsaken the vanities of the world, had it not been for your love. And if I had done so at that time, with my heart, will and thought, I would have surpassed all the knights who were on the quest of the Grail, except Sir Galahad, my son. And therefore, lady, since you have given yourself to the perfect life, I must by right give myself to it too. For I call God to witness, in you I have had all my earthly joy; and if I had found you of another mind now, I had meant to take you away to my own kingdom."
