Chapter 10: How Sir Lancelot came to the hermitage where the Archbishop of Canterbury was, and how he put on a monk's habit

"But since I find you of this mind," Sir Lancelot went on, "I assure you faithfully, I will give myself to penance for ever, and pray while my life lasts, if I can find any hermit, of the grey order or the white, who will take me in. And so, madam, I beg you, kiss me, and never again."

"No," said the queen, "that I will never do. Keep yourself from such things now."

And they parted. But there was never a man so hard-hearted that he would not have wept to see the grief they made; for they lamented as if they had been stung with spears, and many times they fainted, and the ladies carried the queen to her room.

And Sir Lancelot came to himself, and went and took his horse, and rode all that day and all night in a forest, weeping. And at last he saw a hermitage, and a chapel standing between two cliffs; and then he heard a little bell ringing for mass, and he rode there and dismounted, and tied his horse to the gate, and heard mass. And the one who sang the mass was the Bishop of Canterbury. Both the Bishop and Sir Bedivere knew Sir Lancelot, and they talked together after mass. But when Sir Bedivere had told his whole tale, Sir Lancelot's heart almost burst for sorrow, and Sir Lancelot threw his arms wide, and said, "Alas, who can trust this world?" And then he knelt down on his knee, and begged the Bishop to hear his confession and absolve him. And then he begged the Bishop to let him be his brother. Then the Bishop said, "Gladly." And there he put a habit on Sir Lancelot, and there he served God day and night with prayers and fasting.

So the great army waited at Dover. And then Sir Lionel took fifteen lords with him, and rode to London to look for Sir Lancelot; and there Sir Lionel was killed, and many of his lords. Then Sir Bors de Ganis had the great army go home again; and Sir Bors, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Blamore, Sir Bleoberis, with others of Sir Lancelot's kin, took it on themselves to ride all over England, across and lengthwise, to look for Sir Lancelot. So Sir Bors by chance rode on until he came to the same chapel where Sir Lancelot was; and so Sir Bors heard a little bell tolling, ringing for mass; and there he dismounted and heard mass. And when mass was done, the Bishop, Sir Lancelot and Sir Bedivere came to Sir Bors. And when Sir Bors saw Sir Lancelot dressed in that manner, he begged the Bishop that he might wear the same. And so a habit was put on him, and there he lived in prayer and fasting. And within half a year there had come Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin, Sir Blamore, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Villiars, Sir Clarrus and Sir Gahalantine. So all these seven noble knights stayed on there. And when they saw that Sir Lancelot had given himself to such a perfect life, they had no wish to leave, but took the same habit as he had.

So they lived in great penance for six years; and then Sir Lancelot was ordained a priest by the Bishop, and for a year he sang mass. And there was not one of these other knights who did not read in books, and help to sing mass, and ring bells, and do all kinds of service with their own hands. And so their horses went wherever they liked, for they paid no attention to any worldly riches. For when they saw Sir Lancelot endure such penance, in prayers and fasting, they cared nothing what hardship they endured, seeing the noblest knight in the world keep such abstinence that he grew very thin. And so one night a vision came to Sir Lancelot, and charged him, in remission of his sins, to hurry to Almesbury: "And by the time you get there, you will find Queen Guinevere dead. And therefore take your companions with you, and get them a horse bier, and fetch her body, and bury her by her husband, the noble King Arthur." So this vision came to Sir Lancelot three times in one night.
