Chapter 11: How Sir Lancelot went with his seven companions to Almesbury, and found Queen Guinevere dead there, and how they carried her to Glastonbury

Then Sir Lancelot got up before daybreak, and told the hermit.

"It would be well done," said the hermit, "for you to make yourself ready, and not disobey the vision."

Then Sir Lancelot took his eight companions with him, and they went on foot from Glastonbury to Almesbury, which is little more than thirty miles. And they got there within two days, for they were weak and feeble at walking. And when Sir Lancelot had come into the nunnery at Almesbury, Queen Guinevere had died only half an hour before. And the ladies told Sir Lancelot that Queen Guinevere had told them all, before she died, that Sir Lancelot had been a priest for nearly a year: "And he is coming here as fast as he can to fetch my body; and he shall bury me beside my lord, King Arthur." And so the queen said in the hearing of them all, "I beseech Almighty God that I may never have the power to see Sir Lancelot with my worldly eyes." "And this," said all the ladies, "was her prayer all the time for these two days, until she was dead."

Then Sir Lancelot looked on her face, but he did not weep much, but sighed. And so he performed all the rites of the service himself, both the dirge and, the next morning, the mass he sang. And a horse bier was made ready; and so, with a hundred torches always burning around the queen's body, and with Sir Lancelot and his eight companions always walking around the horse bier, singing and reading many a holy prayer, and burning frankincense over the body, Sir Lancelot and his eight companions went on foot from Almesbury to Glastonbury.

And when they had come to the chapel and the hermitage, she had a dirge there, with great devotion. And the next morning the hermit who had once been Bishop of Canterbury sang the Requiem mass with great devotion. And Sir Lancelot was the first to make an offering, and then his eight companions too. And then she was wrapped in waxed cloth of Rennes, from head to toe, thirty times over, and after that she was put in a sheet of lead, and then in a coffin of marble. And when she was put in the earth, Sir Lancelot fainted, and lay still a long time, until the hermit came and woke him, and said, "You are to blame, for you displease God with such a show of grief."

"Truly," said Sir Lancelot, "I trust I do not displease God, for He knows what is in my heart. For my sorrow was not, and is not, for any delight in sin; but my sorrow can never have an end. For when I remember her beauty, and her nobility, that was in her king as well as in her, then when I saw his body and her body lying together like this, truly my heart would not hold up my sorrowful body. And also when I remember how, through my failing, my arrogance and my pride, they were both laid so low, who were the peerless of all Christian people who ever lived, believe me," said Sir Lancelot, "this remembrance of their kindness and my unkindness sank so deep into my heart that I could not hold myself up."

So the French book tells it.
