Chapter 12: How Sir Lancelot fell sick and afterwards died, and how his body was carried to Joyous Gard to be buried

Then Sir Lancelot never afterwards ate more than a little food, nor drank, until he was dead. For then he sickened more and more, and dried up, and wasted away. For neither the Bishop nor any of his companions could make him eat, and he drank little, so that he had become a cubit shorter than he had been, and people could not recognise him. For always, day and night, he prayed, though sometimes he slept a broken sleep; and he was always lying face down on the tomb of King Arthur and Queen Guinevere. And there was no comfort that the Bishop, or Sir Bors, or any of his companions could give him that did any good. So within six weeks after, Sir Lancelot fell sick, and lay in his bed; and then he sent for the Bishop who was a hermit there, and all his true companions. Then Sir Lancelot said in a sorrowful voice, "Sir Bishop, I beg you, give me all the rites that belong to a Christian man."

"You won't need them," said the hermit and all his companions. "It is only melancholy in your blood. You will be well mended by the grace of God tomorrow."

"My fair lords," said Sir Lancelot, "believe me, my sorrowful body is bound for the earth. I have had warning of it, more than I will tell you now. Therefore give me my rites."

So when he had been given communion and anointed, and had all that a Christian man ought to have, he begged the Bishop that his companions might carry his body to Joyous Gard. (Some men say it was Alnwick, and some men say it was Bamburgh.)

"Even so," said Sir Lancelot, "I am deeply sorry for it, but I once made a vow that I would be buried in Joyous Gard. And so as not to break my vow, I beg you all, take me there."

Then there was weeping and wringing of hands among his companions.

So at a certain hour of the night they all went to their beds, for they all lay in one room. And so after midnight, towards day, the Bishop who was then a hermit, as he lay asleep in his bed, burst into great laughter. And with that the whole company woke up, and came to the Bishop, and asked him what was the matter.

"Ah, Jesus have mercy," said the Bishop, "why did you wake me? I was never in all my life so happy and so much at ease."

"Why is that?" said Sir Bors.

"Truly," said the Bishop, "Sir Lancelot was here with me, with more angels than I ever saw men in one day. And I saw the angels lift Sir Lancelot up to heaven, and the gates of heaven opened to receive him."

"That is only the troubling of dreams," said Sir Bors, "for I don't doubt that there is nothing wrong with Sir Lancelot but good."

"That may well be," said the Bishop. "Go to his bed, and then you will find out the truth."

So when Sir Bors and his companions came to his bed they found him stone dead, and he lay as if he had smiled, and the sweetest scent around him that they had ever smelled.

Then there was weeping and wringing of hands, and the greatest grief that ever men made. And in the morning the Bishop said his Requiem mass, and afterwards the Bishop and all the nine knights put Sir Lancelot in the same horse bier that Queen Guinevere had been laid in before she was buried. And so the Bishop and all of them together went with the body of Sir Lancelot day after day, until they came to Joyous Gard; and all the way they had a hundred torches burning around him. And so within fifteen days they came to Joyous Gard. And there they laid his body in the middle of the choir, and sang and read many psalms and prayers over him and around him.

And all the while his face was left uncovered and bare, so that all people might look on him. For such was the custom in those days, that all men of honour should lie like that with their faces uncovered until they were buried. And just as they were at their service, there came Sir Ector de Maris, who for seven years had searched all England, Scotland and Wales, looking for his brother, Sir Lancelot.
