Chapter 13: How Sir Ector found his brother Sir Lancelot dead, and how Constantine reigned after Arthur, and of the end of this book

And when Sir Ector heard such sound and saw such light in the choir of Joyous Gard, he dismounted and let his horse go, and came into the choir, and there he saw men singing and weeping. And they all knew Sir Ector, but he did not know them. Then Sir Bors went to Sir Ector, and told him how his brother, Sir Lancelot, lay there dead; and then Sir Ector threw his shield, sword and helmet from him. And when he looked on Sir Lancelot's face, he fell down in a faint. And when he came to, it would be hard for any tongue to tell the sorrowful laments he made for his brother.

"Ah, Lancelot," he said, "you were the head of all Christian knights! And now I dare say," said Sir Ector, "you, Sir Lancelot, lying there, that you were never matched by any earthly knight's hand. And you were the most courteous knight that ever bore shield. And you were the truest friend to your lover that ever bestrode horse. And you were the truest lover, of a sinful man, that ever loved woman. And you were the kindest man that ever struck with sword. And you were the goodliest person that ever came among the press of knights. And you were the meekest man and the gentlest that ever ate in hall among ladies. And you were the sternest knight to your mortal foe that ever put spear in the rest."

Then there was weeping and grief beyond measure.

So they kept Sir Lancelot's body above ground for fifteen days, and then they buried it with great devotion. And then, at their leisure, they all went with the Bishop of Canterbury to his hermitage, and there they were together for more than a month. Then Sir Constantine, who was the son of Sir Cador of Cornwall, was chosen king of England. And he was a most noble knight, and he ruled this realm with honour. And then this King Constantine sent for the Bishop of Canterbury, for he had heard where he was. And so he was restored to his bishopric, and left that hermitage. And Sir Bedivere stayed on there as a hermit to the end of his life. Then Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Gahalantine, Sir Galihud, Sir Galihodin, Sir Blamore, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Villiers the Valiant and Sir Clarrus of Clermont, all these knights went back to their own countries. King Constantine would have kept them with him, but they would not stay in this realm. And there they all lived in their countries as holy men. And some English books say that they never went out of England after the death of Sir Lancelot, but that was only the partiality of the authors. For the French book says, and it is a book of authority, that Sir Bors, Sir Ector, Sir Blamore and Sir Bleoberis went into the Holy Land, where Jesus Christ lived and died, as soon as they had settled their lands. For the book says that Sir Lancelot commanded them to do so before he passed out of this world. And these four knights fought many battles against the unbelievers, the Turks. And there they died upon a Good Friday, for God's sake.

Here is the end of the book of King Arthur and of his noble knights of the Round Table, who, when they were all together, were always a hundred and forty. And here is the end of the death of Arthur. I pray you all, gentlemen and gentlewomen who read this book of Arthur and his knights from the beginning to the end, pray for me while I am alive, that God send me good deliverance, and when I am dead, I pray you all, pray for my soul. For this book was finished in the ninth year of the reign of King Edward the Fourth, by Sir Thomas Malory, knight, as Jesus help him by his great might, as he is the servant of Jesus both day and night.

Thus ends this noble and joyous book entitled Le Morte d'Arthur, which, for all its title, tells of the birth, life and deeds of the said King Arthur, and of his noble knights of the Round Table, their marvellous quests and adventures, the achieving of the Holy Grail, and in the end the sorrowful death and departing out of this world of them all. This book was translated into English by Sir Thomas Malory, knight, as is said before, and by me divided into twenty-one books, set into chapters and printed, and finished in the abbey at Westminster, the last day of July, in the year of our Lord 1485.
