Letters 28–32

Letter 28: On the Nature of Colors in Particular

_15 July 1760_.

Ignorance of the true nature of colors has fed great disputes among philosophers in every age, and each one has tried to shine by holding some opinion of his own on the subject. The view that colors reside in bodies themselves struck them as too commonplace, and unworthy of a philosopher, who must always rise above the ordinary crowd. Since the peasant imagines that this body is red, that one blue and another green, the philosopher can distinguish himself in no better way than by maintaining the opposite. So he says that colors have nothing real about them, and that there is nothing in bodies that corresponds to them. The Newtonians place colors solely in the rays, which they divide by color into red, yellow, green, blue and violet, and they say that a body looks to us like this or that color when it reflects rays of that kind. Others, to whom this opinion seems too crude, claim that colors exist only in sensation. That is the best way of covering up one's ignorance, and without it the common people might come to believe that the learned man knows no more about the nature of colors than they do. As things stand, though, to hear the learned talk you would think they possess the deepest mysteries, when they know no more than the peasant, and perhaps even less. Your Highness will easily see that these apparent subtleties are only quibbles.

Each simple color (to tell it apart from compound colors) is tied to a certain number of vibrations completed in a certain time. So a certain number of vibrations made in a second determines the color red, another number the color yellow, another green, another blue, and another violet. These are the simple colors, as the rainbow shows them to us. Now suppose the particles on the surface of some body are so arranged that, when they are shaken, they make in a second as many vibrations as red requires, for example. Then I call that body red, just as the peasants do, and I see no reason to depart from the accepted way of speaking. Next, the rays that also contain that many vibrations in a second can be called red with just as much right. And finally, when the nerves at the back of the eye are affected by those same rays, and are struck by them that many times in a second, they arouse the sensation of the color red. Here everything is clear, and I see no need to bring in obscure and mysterious phrases that in the end lead nowhere.

The parallel between sound and light is so perfect that it holds even in the smallest details. When I brought up the phenomenon of a stretched string that can be set shaking by nothing more than the noise of certain sounds, Your Highness will remember that the very same sound the string would give when plucked is the most effective at shaking it, and that other sounds have an effect on it only to the extent that they make a fine consonance with the string. It is exactly the same with light and colors, since the different colors correspond to the different notes of music.

To show this beautiful and remarkable phenomenon, which confirms my system most strongly, we prepare a dark room. We make a small hole in a shutter, and in front of the hole, at some distance, we place a body of a certain color, such as a piece of red cloth, so that when it is well lit, its rays enter the dark room through the hole. These will be red rays that enter the room, since every other light is shut out. Now if we hold a piece of cloth of the same color inside the room, facing the hole, we will see it perfectly well lit, and its red color will look very bright. But if we hold a piece of green cloth in the same place, it will stay dark, and we will hardly see anything of its color. Then, if we put a piece of green cloth, also well lit, outside the room in front of the hole, the green piece inside the room will be perfectly well lit, and its green color will look very vivid. The same holds for all the other colors, and I believe no more striking proof of my system could be asked for.

From this we learn that to light up a body of a certain color, the rays falling on it must be of the same color, since the rays of a different body are not able to shake the particles of this one. This is also proved by a very well-known experiment. When spirits of wine (alcohol) are set alight in a room, Your Highness knows that the flame of the spirits of wine is blue, and so it produces only blue rays. In that room, then, everyone present looks very pale, and their faces look like those of dying people, however much they may be painted or tinted with red. The reason is plain: blue rays are not able to excite or shake the red color in a face, so we see only a faint, bluish color there. But if someone is wearing a blue coat, that coat will in its turn look quite brilliant.

Now, the rays of the sun, or of a candle or an ordinary tallow candle, light up all bodies more or less equally. From this we conclude that the rays of the sun contain all the colors at once, although the sun's own tint looks yellowish. And in fact, when rays of all the simple colors, red, yellow, green, blue and violet, are let into a dark room in roughly equal amounts and gathered together, they show a whitish color. The same experiment is done with several powders of the colors I've mentioned: mix them well together, and the result is a whitish color. From this we draw the conclusion that white is anything but a simple color, and is rather a mixture of all the simple colors. Indeed, we see that white is equally suited to receiving every color.

As for black, it is not properly a color at all. When the particles of a body are so heavy that they can't take on any vibrating motion, the body is black. Or, put another way, a body that gives off no rays is black. So it is the absence of rays that produces this color, and the more particles on the surface of a body are incapable of any vibrating motion, the darker and blacker it looks.

Letter 29: On the Transparency of Bodies and the Passage of Rays

_28 July 1760_.

I have already remarked that there are certain bodies that transmit rays of light, which are called transparent, pellucid and diaphanous, such as glass, water, and above all air. Yet it is the ether that is the most natural medium in which rays of light are formed. The other transparent materials have this quality only because of the ether they contain, which is so thoroughly mixed in with them that the shakings light stirs up in it can be passed further on without being stopped. But this transmission never happens as freely as in pure ether. Something is always lost, and the loss is greater the thicker the transparent body is. The thickness can even become so great that all the light is lost in it, and then the body is no longer transparent. So although glass is a transparent body, a large lump of glass several feet thick is no longer transparent, and you can see nothing through it. In the same way, however pure the water of a river may be, where it is very deep you can't see the bottom, though you see it very well where the water is shallow.

So transparency is only a property of bodies that depends on their thickness. When we attribute this property to glass, water and so on, we must always understand it with this limit: when the thickness of these bodies is not too great. For each kind of body there is a certain thickness beyond which it is no longer transparent. On the other hand, there is no opaque body, the kind we set against the transparent, that doesn't become transparent in the end when it is reduced to an extremely thin sheet. So although gold is not transparent, gold leaf is transparent, and when we look at the smallest particles of any body through a microscope, we find them transparent. We could therefore say that all bodies are transparent when they are made thin, and also that no body is transparent when it is too thick. But as people commonly speak, we call bodies transparent when they keep this quality up to a certain thickness, even though they lose it when they are thicker.

As for the ether, by its very nature it is absolutely and perfectly transparent, and its extent takes nothing at all away from its transparency. The prodigious distance of the fixed stars (if Your Highness will kindly recall it) doesn't prevent their rays from being sent all the way to us. But if our air, though it seems perfectly transparent, stretched as far as the moon, it would lose all its transparency, and no ray from the sun or the other heavenly bodies could get through to us. We would find ourselves in the darkness of Egypt.

The reason is clear enough, and we notice the same thing with sound, whose likeness to light is confirmed in every respect. Air is the natural medium through which sound is carried. But the shakings stirred up in the air can also shake the particles of every body, and these, by setting the inner ones in motion, finally pass the shakings on through all bodies, unless they are too thick. So there are bodies that stand to sound in the same relation as transparent bodies stand to light, and in the end all bodies have this property with respect to sound, provided they are not too thick. Indeed, when Your Highness is in your room, you hear almost everything going on in the anteroom, even though the doors are firmly shut. That is because the shaking of the air in the anteroom is communicated to the walls, and through them the shaking gets into the room itself, though with some loss. If the walls were taken away, Your Highness would surely hear more distinctly.

Now, the thicker the walls are, the more force the sound loses in passing through them. The walls could be so thick that you would hear nothing at all of what was going on outside, unless it were a terrible noise, like the blast of a cannon. This leads me to a new remark: very loud sounds can pass through walls that are impenetrable to weaker sounds. So to judge whether a wall is able to transmit sound, it isn't enough to consider the wall's thickness. We must also take into account the strength of the sound. If the sound is very weak, a fairly thin wall could stop it, although it might let a stronger sound through.

The same goes for transparent bodies, which can let a very strong light pass while we can't see dim objects through them. When you blacken a piece of glass with smoke, you can no longer see dim objects through it, but if you look at the sun through such a glass, you see it quite distinctly. That is how astronomers observe the sun, which would otherwise dazzle their eyes. And when you are in a dark room with a hole in the shutter facing the sun, you can cover the hole with your hand as much as you like, but the sunlight will still pass through the hand. We do see, though, that the sunlight loses a great deal of its brightness passing through such a body, which, as far as other objects go, is not even transparent. But a very strong light can lose a great deal of its brightness before it is completely put out, while a weaker light is soon lost. So a very thick piece of glass will soon be non-transparent for dim objects, and yet we will still see the sun through it.

These remarks about transparent bodies lead me to the theory of refraction, which Your Highness has no doubt heard spoken of many times, and which I will try to set in its full light in what follows.

Letter 30: On Light Passing Through Transparent Media, and Its Refraction

_22 July 1760_.

As long as light moves through the same medium, whether that is the ether, or air, or some other transparent body, it travels in straight lines. These are called rays, because they go out from the shining point in every direction, just as the radii of a circle or a globe go out from the center. In the system of emanation, the particles thrown off by the shining body move in straight lines. The same is true in the true system that I have had the honor to propose to Your Highness, where the shakings are passed along in straight lines, in the same way that the sound of a bell is carried to us along a straight line, by which we also judge what direction the sound comes from. So in both systems the rays are represented to us by straight lines, as long as they pass through the same transparent medium. But they can suffer some bending when they pass from one transparent medium into another, and this bending is what we call the refraction of rays of light, the knowledge of which is of the utmost importance for an endless number of phenomena. So I will explain to Your Highness the laws by which refraction takes place.

First, it is a constant law that when a ray such as EC (Figure 8) falls perpendicularly on the surface AB of another medium, it continues on its way along the same straight line, extended as CF. In that case it suffers no bending or refraction at all. So if EC is a ray of the sun falling perpendicularly on the surface AB of water or glass, it will enter in the same direction and continue on its way along the line CF, also perpendicular to the surface AB, so that EF is one and the same straight line. This is the only case in which there is no refraction. Whenever the ray does not fall perpendicularly on the surface of another transparent body, it doesn't continue on the same straight line. It will turn aside from it, more or less, and suffer refraction.

Let PC (Figure 9) be a ray falling obliquely on the surface AB of another transparent medium. On entering this medium, it will not continue along the straight line CQ, which is the continuation of the straight line PC. It will turn aside from it, either along the straight line CR or along CS. So it suffers at C a bending that we call refraction. This refraction depends partly on how different the two media are, and partly on the obliquity at which the ray PC enters.

To explain the laws of this bending, we need to know some terms that authors use. First, the surface AB, which separates the two media, the one the ray comes from and the one it enters, is called the refracting surface. Second, the ray PC that falls on it is called the incident ray. Third, the ray CR or CS, which takes a different path in the other medium from CQ, is called the refracted ray. Furthermore, once we have drawn the perpendicular line ECF on the surface AB, we call the angle PCE that the incident ray PC makes with the perpendicular EC, fourth, the angle of incidence. And fifth, the angle of refraction is the angle RCF or SCF that the refracted ray CR or CS makes with the perpendicular CF.

Now, because of the refraction, the angle of refraction is not equal to the angle of incidence PCE. For if we extend the line PC to Q, the angles PCE and FCQ are opposite angles, and therefore equal to each other, as Your Highness will remember perfectly well. So it is the angle QCF that is equal to the angle of incidence PCE, and therefore the angle of refraction RCF or SCF is either smaller or larger. There are thus two cases that can occur. In one, where the refracted ray is CR, the angle of refraction RCF is smaller than the angle of incidence PCE. In the other, where the refracted ray is CS, the angle of refraction SCF is larger than the angle of incidence PCE. In the first case we say that the ray CR approaches the perpendicular CF, and in the other that the refracted ray CS moves away from the perpendicular.

So we have to see when one case or the other occurs. It depends on how the two media differ, according to whether one is denser or rarer than the other, or, to put it another way, according to whether rays pass more or less easily through each of them. For this purpose we must note that the ether is the rarest medium, the one that rays pass through without any difficulty. After it, the most common transparent media come in this order: air, water and glass. So glass is a denser medium than water, water is denser than air, and air is denser than ether.

With that established, we only have to observe two general rules. First, when rays pass from a less dense medium into a denser one, the refracted ray approaches the perpendicular. That is the case where, the incident ray being PC, the refracted ray is CR. Second, when rays pass from a denser medium into a less dense one, the refracted ray moves away from the perpendicular. That is the case where, the incident ray being PC, the refracted ray is CS.

Now, this bending is greater the more the two media differ in density. So rays passing from air into glass suffer a greater refraction than when they pass from air into water. Even so, in both cases the refracted rays approach the perpendicular. Likewise, rays passing from glass into air suffer a greater refraction than when they pass from water into air, but in these cases the refracted ray moves away from the perpendicular.

Finally, we must also note that the difference between the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction is greater the larger the angle of incidence is. Put another way, the more the incident ray departs from the perpendicular, the greater the bending of the ray, or the refraction, will be. There is a certain relationship at work here, which geometry determines, but there is no need to go into such detail. What I have just said is enough to follow what I will have the honor to put before Your Highness.

Letter 31: On the Refraction of Rays of Different Colors

_27 July 1760_.

Your Highness has just seen that when a ray of light passes obliquely from one transparent medium into another, it suffers a bending that we call refraction, and that refraction depends both on the obliquity of incidence and on the difference between the media, as I have had the honor to explain fairly fully. But now I must point out to Your Highness that the difference of colors also causes a small variation in refraction. This no doubt comes from the fact that rays of different colors contain different numbers of vibrations made in the same time, and differ from one another in the same way as sounds that are lower or higher.

So we observe that red rays suffer the least bending, or refraction. After them follow, in order, the orange rays, the yellow, the green, the blue and the violet, so that violet rays suffer the greatest refraction, provided, of course, that the obliquity of incidence is the same and the media are the same. For this reason we say that rays of different colors are subject to different refrangibility, that is, they are not all equally easy to bend. Red rays are the least refrangible, and violet rays the most.

So if PC (Figure 10) is a ray passing, for example, from air into glass, with PCE as the angle of incidence, the refracted ray will approach the perpendicular CF. If the ray were red, the refracted ray would be C-red. If it were orange, the refracted ray would be C-orange, and so on for the others, as you can see in the figure. All these rays turn aside from the line CQ, which is the continuation of PC toward the perpendicular CF. But the red ray turns aside the least from CQ, or suffers the least bending, and the violet turns aside the most from CQ, and suffers the greatest bending.

Now, if PC is a ray of the sun, it produces all the colored rays shown in the figure at once, and if we hold a white paper there, we do in fact see all these colors on it. That is why we say that every ray of the sun contains all the simple colors at once. The same thing happens if PC is a white ray, or one that comes from a white body. Refraction makes all the colors appear out of it, from which we conclude that white is a mixture of all the simple colors, as I have already had the honor of telling Your Highness. Indeed, we only have to gather all these colored rays together at a single point, and we will see white born again.

From this we learn which colors are truly simple. Refraction reveals them to us beyond dispute. In the order of refraction they are: first, red; second, orange; third, yellow; fourth, green; fifth, blue; sixth, violet. But we must not think that there are only six. Since the nature of each consists in a certain number, which expresses the number of vibrations made in a certain time, it is clear that the numbers in between give simple colors as well. What we lack is proper names to mark these colors. So between yellow and green we do see intermediate colors, but we have no way to name them separately.

The colors we see in the rainbow are founded on this same principle. The reason is that the rays of the sun, in passing through drops of water falling in the air, are reflected and refracted there, and the refraction breaks them up into the simple colors. Your Highness will no doubt have already noticed that these colors follow one another in the same order in the rainbow: red, orange, yellow, green, blue and violet. But we also discover all the intermediate colors there, as shades running from one color to the next. If we had more names to tell these degrees apart, we could name more different colors from one end to the other. Perhaps another nation, richer in words, actually counts more different colors there than we do. Perhaps, too, another nation counts fewer, if, for example, it had no term for orange. Some people even add purple, which can actually be found at the edge of the red, and which others include under the same name of red.

We can compare these colors with the sounds of an octave, as I have just set them out here, since colors, like sounds, can be expressed in numbers. It even seems that if we raise the violet further, we return to a new purple, just as in climbing through the sounds we arrive, beyond H, at the note c, which is an octave above C. In music this note is given the same name because of their likeness, and it is the same with colors. After climbing through the interval of an octave, they take up the same names again. Or, put another way, two colors, like two notes, where the number of vibrations of one is precisely double that of the other, count as the same color and have the same name.

On this principle Father Castel, in France, wanted to devise a kind of music of colors. He made a harpsichord in which each key, when struck, shows a piece of material dyed a certain color, and he claims that this harpsichord, well played, could put on a show that would be very pleasing to the eyes. He calls it the ocular harpsichord, and Your Highness has probably heard it mentioned once or twice. For my part, I think it is rather painting that stands to the eyes as music stands to the ears. And I very much doubt that a display of several pieces of cloth dyed in different colors could be very pleasant.

Letter 32: On the Blue of the Sky

_27 July 1760_.

Your Highness has just seen that the cause of the visibility of all objects is an extremely rapid vibrating motion, by which their very smallest particles are shaken on their surfaces, and that how frequent these vibrations are determines the color. It is the same whether these smallest particles are shaken by a force of their own, as happens in shining bodies, or receive their shaking from an illumination, or from other rays that light them, as happens in opaque bodies. Now, how frequent or rapid the vibrations are depends on the size of these particles and on their elasticity, just as the rapidity of the vibrations of a string depends on its thickness and its tension. So as long as the particles of a body keep the same elasticity, they will show the same color, like the leaves of a plant, which keep one color as long as they are fresh. But as soon as they begin to dry out, the change in elasticity, which is the cause of it, also produces a different color. I have already had the honor of speaking to Your Highness on this subject. Now I will explain to you that universal phenomenon: why the sky looks blue to us by day.

If we consider this phenomenon roughly, it seems to us that up there is a prodigious vault tinted blue, as painters show the sky on a ceiling. I won't need to talk Your Highness out of this prejudice. A little reflection is enough to make us understand that the sky is not a blue vault to which the stars are fastened like shining nails. Your Highness is rather convinced that the stars are immense bodies located at very great distances from us, moving freely in an almost empty space, or one filled only with that subtle matter called ether.

Now, I will show Your Highness that the cause of this blue of the sky must be sought in our atmosphere, insofar as it is not perfectly transparent. Suppose it were possible to rise higher and higher above the surface of the earth. First the air would grow rarer and rarer, then it would no longer be fit to sustain our breathing, and finally it would be lost altogether, and we would then be in pure ether. Likewise, when people climb high mountains, the mercury in the barometer falls lower and lower, as the atmosphere grows lighter. And then they also notice that the brilliant blue color of the sky grows fainter and fainter. If we could climb all the way up into pure ether, the blue color would vanish completely. Looking up, we would see nothing at all there, and the sky would look black, as it does at night. For everything looks black to us where no ray of light reaches us.

So it is quite right to ask why the sky looks blue to us. First we have to agree that if the air were a perfectly transparent medium like the ether, this phenomenon could not occur. We would then receive no rays from above except those of the stars. But the brightness of day is so great that the small light of the stars becomes imperceptible to us. In the same way, Your Highness wouldn't see the flame of a candle by day if it were far enough away, though the same flame looks very brilliant to us at night, and at much greater distances too.

From this it is clear that the cause of the blue of the sky has to be sought in the air's lack of transparency. The air is loaded with a quantity of small particles that are not completely transparent. Lit by the rays of the sun, they receive from them a vibrating motion that produces new rays belonging to the particles themselves. Or else these particles are opaque and, when they are lit, become visible themselves. Now, the color of these particles is blue. That, then, is the explanation of this phenomenon: the air contains a quantity of small blue particles. Or we can say that the smallest particles are bluish, but with an extremely faint blue, which becomes noticeable only in an enormous mass of air. So in a room we don't notice any of this blue. But when all the bluish rays from the whole atmosphere enter our eyes at once, however faint the color of each may be, all together they can produce a very deep color.

This is confirmed by another phenomenon that won't be unknown to Your Highness. When you look at a forest close up, it looks quite green, but as you move away from it, it looks more and more bluish. The forests of the Harz mountains, which can be seen from Magdeburg, look fairly blue, although when you look at them from Halberstadt they are green. The great stretch of air between Magdeburg and these mountains is the reason. However faint or thin the bluish particles of the air may be, there is a very great quantity of them in that gap, and their rays enter the eyes together, and so they show there a fairly deep blue color.

We notice a similar phenomenon in a fog, where the air is loaded with a quantity of opaque particles that are whitish. When we look only a short distance, we hardly notice the fog at all. But when the distance is great, the whitish color becomes very noticeable, even to the point that we can see nothing through it.

The water of the sea, when it is deep enough, looks green, but when you fill a glass with it, it is quite clear. The reason is plainly the same. This water is loaded with a quantity of greenish particles, of which a small amount produces no noticeable effect. But over a great extent, as when we look down into the depths, so many greenish rays joined together produce a deep color.
