Letters 38–43

Letter 38: On Convex and Concave Mirrors, and Burning Mirrors

_9 August 1760_.

As Your Highness has just seen, everything about the reflection of rays comes down to two things. One is the place of the image that the reflected rays present, and the other is the relationship of the image to the object. In ordinary, flat mirrors, the image is behind the mirror, at a distance equal to that of the object standing in front of it, and the image is like the object. These are the two things we have to pay attention to when the mirror isn't flat but has a convex or concave surface, because then the image is usually badly distorted. Your Highness will already have noticed that when you look into a well-polished spoon, whether at its inner, concave surface or its outer, convex one, you see your image badly deformed. A well-polished silver ball, on the other hand, shows objects quite well, only smaller. Now, if the inner surface of such a ball is well polished, objects look bigger, provided they aren't too far away. The same objects can also look smaller and upside down if you move them farther from the mirror. There's no need to take a whole ball. Any piece of its surface has the same effect. Such mirrors are called spherical, and there are two kinds, convex and concave, depending on whether they're taken from the outside or the inside of the sphere. These mirrors are made from a certain mixture of metals that can take a good polish, whereas flat mirrors are made from a sheet of glass coated on one side with a prepared mercury, to make the rays reflect. I'll begin with convex mirrors.

Let ACB (Figure 19) be a mirror belonging to a sphere whose center is at G. Place an object far away in front of this mirror, at E. Its image will appear behind the mirror at D, which is the midpoint of the sphere's radius CG, and this image will be smaller than the object by as many times as the line CD is shorter than the object's distance CE. If we bring the object E closer to the mirror, its image comes closer too. All of this is proved by geometry, on the assumption that any incident ray EM is reflected along MN in such a way that the angle BMN equals the angle CME. So when the eye is at N and receives the reflected ray MN, it will see the object E in the direction NM in the mirror, at D. Or rather, D will be the image of the object at E, but a smaller one. It's also easy to see that the smaller the sphere the mirror belongs to, the more the image is reduced.

I move on to concave mirrors, which are very commonly used on many occasions. Let ACB (Figure 20) be a mirror that is part of a sphere whose center is at G, and let GC be a radius. Now imagine an object at E, far from the mirror. Its image will appear in front of the mirror at D, the midpoint of the radius CG. For any ray of light EM that falls from the object E onto the mirror at the point M will be reflected so that it passes through the point D, and when the eye is placed at N, it will see the image of the object at D. But this image will be smaller than the object by as many times as the distance CD is smaller than the distance CE. Now when we bring the object closer to the mirror, the image moves away from it. With the object placed at the very center of the sphere, G, the image is also at G. If we bring the object up to D, the image moves off beyond E to infinity. But if the object is even closer, between C and D, the image falls behind the mirror and appears larger than the object. When you look at yourself in such a mirror, standing between D and C, you see your face at a frightful size. All this is proved from the nature of reflection, by which the angle of incidence EMA is always equal to the angle of reflection CMN. It's to this kind of mirror that burning mirrors belong, and any concave mirror can be used to burn. This surprising property deserves a more careful explanation.

Let ACB (Figure 21) be a concave mirror with center G, and in place of the object, let the sun be at E. Its reflected rays will present the image of the sun at D, the midpoint of CG. The size of this image is determined by the extreme rays ec, ec. So this image of the sun will be very small. And since all the sun's rays that fall on the mirror ACB are reflected into this image, they are gathered together there, and they have that much more force the smaller the image D is compared with the surface of the mirror. Now, besides the power to give light, the sun's rays have a power to give heat. It follows that there must be a great degree of heat at D. When the mirror is large enough, this heat can become stronger than the most violent fire. Indeed, with such a mirror you can burn any wood in an instant, and even melt all the metals. It is only the image of the sun that produces these astonishing effects. This image is commonly called the focus of the mirror, and it always falls in the middle, between the mirror and its center G.

Burning mirrors must be carefully distinguished from burning glasses, which Your Highness will know, and which I'll have occasion to talk about next post.

Letter 39: On Dioptrics

_11 August 1760_.

Having had the honor of laying before Your Highness the main phenomena of catoptrics, which result from the reflection of rays of light, I still have to speak of dioptrics, which deals with the refraction of rays, which happens when rays pass through different transparent media. A ray of light keeps to a straight line only as long as it stays in the same medium. As soon as it enters another transparent medium, it changes direction, more or less, depending on how obliquely it meets it. There is only one case where it keeps its straight path, and that is when it enters the other medium perpendicularly. The instruments considered chiefly in dioptrics are glasses of the sort used in telescopes and microscopes. These glasses are round like circles, but they have two faces. Everything depends on the shape of these two faces, which is either flat, or convex, or concave. Now, both the convex and the concave shape are part of a sphere whose radius we need to know, since it is nearly the measure of the convexity or concavity. With that noted, there are several kinds of these dioptric glasses.

The first kind, No. I (Figure 22), is the one where both faces are flat. Cut a circle out of a mirror and you'll have such a glass, which changes nothing in the objects. The second kind, No. II, has one flat surface and one convex; these glasses are called plano-convex. The third kind, No. III, has one flat face and one concave; these glasses are called plano-concave. The fourth kind, No. IV, is the one where both faces are convex; they are called convexo-convex.

The fifth kind, No. V, has both faces concave; these glasses are called concavo-concave. Kinds No. VI and No. VII have one face convex and the other concave; these glasses are called menisci. Now, all these glasses fall into two classes. One contains those where convexity wins out, like No. II, IV and VI, and the other those where concavity has the upper hand, like No. III, V and VII. The first are simply called convex, and the second simply concave. These two classes are distinguished by the following property.

Let AB (Figure 23) be a convex glass, held up to a very distant object EF, whose rays GA, GC, GB fall on the glass and, passing through it, undergo the refraction that makes the rays coming from the point G join together behind the glass at g. The same will happen to the rays coming from every point of the object. Through this change, all the refracted rays Al, Bm, Cn go on along the same path as if the object were at egf, in an upside-down position, and smaller by as many times as the distance Cg is less than the distance CG. So we say that such a glass presents the object EF behind it at egf, and we call this presentation the image, which is therefore upside down, and smaller than the object itself by as many times as it is closer to the glass than the object is. From this it's clear that if the sun takes the place of the object, the image presented at egf will be that of the sun. Though very small, it will be so brilliant that we can't look at it without being dazzled. For all the rays that pass through the glass are gathered in this image, and exert their double power of giving light and heat there. The heat there is greater by about as many times as the surface of the glass exceeds the size of the sun's image, which is called the focus. So if the glass is very large, it can work wonders through the power of heat. Combustible materials placed at the focus of such a glass are burned in an instant. Metals are melted there and even turned to glass, and these burning glasses produce effects far greater than anything we're able to do with the most violent fire. The reason is the same as for burning mirrors. In both, the sun's rays spread over the whole surface of the mirror or the glass are gathered into the small space of the sun's image. The only difference is that in mirrors this gathering is done by reflection, and in glasses by refraction. That is the effect of convex glasses, which are thicker in the middle than at the edges, such as those I've shown as No. II, IV and VI (Figure 22). Now, the glasses No. III, V and VII, which are thicker at the edges than in the middle, and which are simply called concave, produce the opposite effect.

Take such a glass ACB (Figure 24). If we place the object EGF at a great distance, the rays GA, GC, GB coming from the point G are refracted by the glass at l, m and n as if they came from the point g. An eye placed behind the glass, as at m, will see the object just as if it stood upright at egf, but smaller by as many times as the distance CG exceeds the distance Cg. So convex glasses present the image of very distant objects behind them, while concave glasses present it in front of them, the first upside down and the second upright. In both kinds, the image is reduced by as many times as it is closer to the glass than the object itself. On this property of glasses the construction of all microscopes and telescopes is founded.

Letter 40: More on the Same Subject, Especially Burning Glasses and Their Foci

_13 August 1760_.

Convex glasses give me a few more remarks that I'll have the honor of putting before Your Highness. Here I'm speaking in general of convex glasses that are thicker in the middle than at the edges. It doesn't matter whether both faces are convex, or one is flat and the other convex, or even one concave and the other convex, as long as the convexity wins out, that is, the thickness at the middle is greater than at the edges. We also suppose that the faces of these glasses are worked to a circular, or rather spherical, shape. First, these glasses have the property that when they're held up to the sun, they present behind them a focus, which is the image of the sun, gifted with a double power of giving light and burning. The reason is that all the rays that leave a point of the sun are gathered by the glass's refraction into a single point. The same happens whatever other object we hold up to such a glass. It always presents an image of it, which we see in place of the object itself. All this will become clearer from Figure 25.

Let ABCD be a convex glass, with an object EGF in front of it, of which it's enough to consider the three points E, G, F. The rays that fall from the point E onto the glass are contained in the space AEB. In the refraction they are all brought into the space AeB, so that they are gathered at the point e. In the same way the rays from the point G that fall on the glass fill the space AGB, and these are brought by refraction into the space AgB, meeting at the point g. Finally, the rays from the point F that fall on the glass within the angle AFB are refracted so that they meet at the point f. In this way we get the image egf in an upside-down position behind the glass. An eye placed behind this image, as at O, will be affected just as if the object stood at egf upside down, and smaller by as many times as the distance Dg is smaller than the distance CG. To judge the place of the image egf, we have to take into account both the nature of the glass and the distance of the object. For the first, the more convex the glass is, that is, the more the thickness CD in the middle exceeds that at the edges, the closer the image is to the glass. For the other, we should note that if we bring the object EF closer to the glass, the image ef moves away, and the other way around. The image can't be any closer to the glass than when the object is very far away. It is then at the same distance as the image of the sun, which is called the focus of the glass. So if the object is very far away, the image falls right at the focus, and the closer we bring the object to the glass, the farther the image moves away. This follows a rule proved in dioptrics, by means of which we can always work out the place of the image for every distance of the object, provided we know the focus of the glass, or the distance at which the sun's image falls, where the power of burning is exerted. This distance is easily found by experiment. It's from this that glasses get their names, when we say: such a glass has its focus at a distance of one inch, another at a distance of one foot, another at a distance of ten feet, and so on. Long telescopes need glasses with their focus at a great distance, and it is very hard to make good ones. I once paid 150 crowns for a glass whose focus was at a distance of 600 feet, which I sent to the Academy at Petersburg. I'm quite sure it wasn't worth much, but they wanted it because of its rarity. To show Your Highness that the presentation of the image egf (in the previous figure) is very real, we only have to hold a white paper at that place, whose particles are capable of all the kinds of vibrations on which colors depend. Then all the rays from the point E of the object, gathering at the point e, will put the particle of paper there into a vibrating motion like that of the point E, and so the same color will form there. Likewise the points g and f will have the same colors as the points G and F of the object, and so all the points of the object will be seen on the paper with their natural colors. This makes the most exact and the most beautiful painting of the object. It works all the better in a dark room, putting the glass in a hole in the shutter, where all the outside objects can be seen on a white paper so exactly painted that you could trace them with a pencil. Painters use such a machine to sketch landscapes and views.

Letter 41: On Vision and the Structure of the Eye

_15 August 1760_.

Now I find myself able to explain to Your Highness how vision takes place in the eyes of human beings and of all animals. This is without doubt the most marvelous thing the human mind has managed to look into. We are far from knowing it perfectly, yet the little we do know of it is more than enough to convince us of the almighty power and infinite wisdom of the Creator, and these marvels ought to lift our minds to the purest adoration of the Supreme Being. In the structure of the eyes we will recognize perfections that the most enlightened mind could never get to the bottom of. And the most skillful craftsman could never build a machine of this kind that wasn't infinitely below everything we discover in the eyes, even if we granted him the power to shape matter as he pleased, and the highest degree of penetration a man can have.

I won't stop here for an anatomical description of the eye. For my purpose it will be enough to note that the front membrane akb (Figure 26) is transparent and is called the cornea. Behind it, on the inside, there is another membrane, circular, tinted with colors, called the iris, with a hole mm in the middle. This hole is called the pupil, and it looks black to us in the middle of the iris. Behind this hole lies a body abCa like a small burning glass, perfectly transparent, of a membranous substance, called the crystalline lens. Behind the crystalline lens, the cavity of the eye is filled with a perfectly transparent jelly called the vitreous humor. The cavity in front, between the cornea akb and the lens ab, contains a liquid as fluid as water, called the aqueous humor. So there are four transparent materials that the rays of light entering the eye must pass through: first, the cornea; second, the aqueous humor, between A and B; third, the crystalline lens aBCa; and fourth, the vitreous humor. These four materials differ in density, and the rays passing from one to the next undergo a particular refraction in each, and they are so arranged that the rays coming from one point of some object are gathered again inside the eye in a single point, and present an image there. Now, the back of the eye, EGF, is lined with a whitish tissue, suited to receive images, just as I pointed out that with a convex glass we can show the images of objects on a white background. So it's by the same principle that all the objects whose rays enter the eye are painted true to life on the whitish back of the eye, which is called the retina. When you take an ox's eye and remove the outer parts covering the retina, you see all the objects painted there so exactly that no painter could imitate them. And to see an object, whatever it is, its image must always be painted at the back of the eye on the retina. When some misfortune happens, so that parts of the eye spoil or lose their transparency, a person goes blind. But it isn't enough, for seeing objects, that their images be painted on the retina. There are people who are blind in spite of that. From this we see that the images painted on the retina are not yet the immediate object of vision, and that our soul's perception takes place somewhere else. The retina lining the back of the eye is a web of the finest threads of nerves, which connect with a great nerve that comes from the brain and enters the eye at O, called the optic nerve. The rays of light that form the image at the back of the eye shake these little nerves of the retina, and this shaking is carried by the optic nerve farther than the brain. It is without doubt there that the soul draws its perception. But the most skillful anatomist is not able to follow the nerves to their origin, and this will always remain for us a mystery, the mystery of the link between our soul and body. However we look at this link, we are obliged to recognize it as the most dazzling miracle of the almighty power of God, which we could never get to the bottom of. How thoroughly this reflection should confound those freethinkers, who reject everything they can't understand with their limited minds!

Letter 42: More on the Wonders Found in the Structure of the Eye

_17 August 1760_.

I hope Your Highness will be glad to contemplate with me, more carefully, the wonders we can discover in the structure of the eye. And first of all, the pupil gives us a most worthy object of admiration. The pupil is that black hole in the middle of the iris, or the star, through which the rays pass into the inside of the eye. The wider this hole is open, the more rays can enter the eye and form the image painted on the retina, and so the image will be that much brighter the wider the pupil is open. Now, we only have to look closely into people's eyes to see that the opening of their pupil is sometimes larger and sometimes smaller. We generally notice that the pupil is much narrowed when we're in a great blaze of light, and that on the contrary it's wide open when we're in a place that isn't well lit. This variation is very necessary for the perfection of vision. When we're in a bright light, the rays are stronger, and a smaller quantity of them is enough to shake the nerves of our retina, and that is when the pupil narrows. If it were more open, and admitted rays in greater quantity, their force would shake the nerves too much and cause pain. That is the case when we can't look at the sun without being dazzled and without very sharp pain at the back of the eye. If it were possible for us to contract the pupil even more, so as to receive only a very small quantity of rays, we wouldn't feel any discomfort. But the contraction of the pupil isn't in our power. Eagles have the advantage that they can look straight at the sun, but it has also been observed that their pupil contracts so much then that it seems to be reduced to a point. Just as a great brightness calls for a very small opening of the pupil, so the more the brightness decreases, the more the pupil widens, and in darkness it opens until it takes up almost the whole iris. If the opening stayed as small as it is in the light, the weak rays entering would not be able to stir the nerves as much as sensation requires. The rays then have to enter the eye in greater abundance, to produce a noticeable effect. If it were possible for us to open the pupil even wider, we could still see quite well in a fairly deep darkness. People cite, on this point, the case of a man who, after receiving a blow in the eye, had his pupil so enlarged that he could read and make out the smallest things in the deepest darkness. Cats, and many other animals that make their expeditions in the dark, have the ability to widen their pupils much more than people do, and owls always have their pupils too wide open to bear even a moderate degree of brightness. Now, when a person's pupil widens or narrows, it isn't an act of his will, and a man is not master of opening and contracting his pupil whenever he likes. As soon as he is in a brightly lit place, his pupil contracts, and when he goes back to a place that is less bright or dark, it widens. But this change doesn't happen in an instant. We have to wait a few minutes until it adjusts to the circumstances. So Your Highness will already have noticed, when you passed suddenly from a great blaze of light into a dark place, as in Schuch's playhouse, that you couldn't at first make out the people who were there. The pupil was still too narrow for the few weak rays it let in to be able to make a noticeable impression. But little by little the pupil widened to take in enough rays. The opposite happens when we pass suddenly from a dark place into a great brightness. Then, the pupil being too wide open, the retina is struck too sharply, and we are quite dazzled, so that we're forced to shut our eyes. It is therefore a most remarkable circumstance that the pupil narrows and widens according to the needs of vision, and that this change happens almost by itself, without the will having any part in it. The philosophers who examine the structure and functions of the human body are greatly divided on this point, and it seems unlikely that the true reason for it will ever be discovered. Yet this variability of the pupil is something essential to vision, without which vision would be very imperfect. But we will discover many other wonders still.

Letter 43: The Living Eye Versus the Dark Room

_19 August 1760_.

The principle on which the structure of the eye is founded is, in general, the same one by which I had the honor of explaining to Your Highness how objects are shown on white paper by means of a convex glass. In both, it comes down to this: all the rays coming from a point of the object are gathered again into a single point by refraction. And it seems to matter little whether this refraction is done by a single glass or by the several transparent materials the eye is made of. From this one might even suspect that a simpler structure than the eye, using only a single transparent material, would have given the same advantages. That would be a very strong objection against the wisdom of the Creator, who surely followed the simplest path in his works and used the most suitable means. There have been freethinkers, and there are still quite a few, who boast that if God had asked their advice at the creation, they could have given him good counsel, and that many things would be more perfect. They imagine they could have supplied a simpler and better plan for the structure of the eye. I'll examine this eye of the freethinkers, and from that examination Your Highness will see very clearly that this work would be very defective, and quite unworthy of being compared with the works of the Creator.

So the eye of these freethinkers would be reduced to a single convex glass ACBD (Figure 27). I've pointed out that such a glass gathers into one point all the rays that come from a point of the object, but that is true only roughly. The circular shape given to the faces of the glass always has this defect, that the rays falling on the edges of the glass don't meet at the same point as those passing through the middle of the glass. There is always a small difference, almost imperceptible in experiments where we receive the image on white paper, but if it happened in the eye itself, it would make vision very confused. These people say that instead of the circular shape, we could find another shape for the faces of the glass that had this property, that it would gather all the rays leaving the point O again into a point R, whether they pass through the middle of the glass or its edges. I agree that this would be possible. But if the glass had this property for the point O, which is at a certain distance CO from the glass, it would no longer have it for points nearer to or farther from the glass. And even if that were possible, which it isn't, it is quite certain that it would lose this quality for objects off to the side, as at T. And so we see that when we show objects on a white paper, although those directly in front of the glass, as at O, are shown fairly well, the objects obliquely in front of the glass, as at T, are always badly distorted and confusedly shown. That is a defect such that the most skillful craftsman couldn't remedy it. But there is another one that is no less considerable. When I spoke to Your Highness about rays of different colors, I noted that in passing from one transparent medium into another they undergo different refraction, and that red rays undergo the smallest refraction and violet rays the greatest. So if the point O were red, and its rays, in passing through the glass AB, were gathered at the point R, that would be the place of the red image. But if the point O were violet, the meeting of the rays would happen closer to the glass, at V. Then, since white is a mixture of all the simple colors, a white object placed at O would form several images at once, at various distances from the point O. On the retina this would produce a colored blotch that would greatly disturb the picture. And in fact we observe that in a dark room, when we show the outside objects on a white paper, they appear bordered with the colors of the rainbow, and it is even impossible to remedy this defect using only a single transparent body. Now, it has been noticed that this is possible by means of different transparent materials, but neither theory nor practice has yet been carried to the degree of perfection needed to carry out such a construction, which would remedy all these defects. Yet the eye that the Creator made has none of the imperfections I've just described, nor several others to which the eye of the freethinkers would be subject. From this we understand the true reason why divine Wisdom used several transparent materials in forming the eyes: it was to free them from all the imperfections that mark the works of men. What a fine subject for our admiration! And the Psalmist is quite right to lead us to this weighty question: He that planted the eye, shall he not see? and he that made the ear, shall he not hear? A single eye is a masterpiece that surpasses all human understanding. What a sublime idea we ought to form of him who has provided not only all men but all animals, even the lowest insects, with this marvelous gift, and at the highest degree of perfection!
