Letters 54–59

Letter 54: Philosophers' Views on Universal Gravitation

_7 September 1760_.

So it's an established fact, resting on the most solid reasons, that a general gravitation reigns among all the heavenly bodies, by which they are pushed or pulled toward one another, and that this force is greater the closer the bodies are. No one can deny this. But people argue over whether to call it an impulsion or an attraction, although the name alone changes nothing in the thing itself. Your Highness knows that the effect is the same whether you push a cart from behind or pull it from in front. So the astronomer, who watches only the effect of this force, doesn't care whether the heavenly bodies are pushed toward one another or whether they attract one another. In the same way, someone who examines only the phenomena doesn't trouble himself over whether the earth attracts bodies or whether some invisible cause pushes them toward it.

But if we want to penetrate the mysteries of nature, it is very important to know whether the heavenly bodies act on one another by impulsion or by attraction. Is it some subtle, invisible matter that acts on the bodies and pushes them toward one another? Or are the bodies endowed with a hidden, occult quality by which they attract one another? The philosophers are sharply divided on this. Those who favor impulsion are called impulsionists, and the supporters of attraction are called attractionists. The late Monsieur Newton leaned strongly toward attraction, and today all the English are very zealous attractionists.

They agree that the earth has no ropes, and none of the machines we ordinarily use for pulling, with which it could draw bodies to itself and cause weight in them. Still less do they find anything between the sun and the earth that the sun might be thought to use to pull the earth. Suppose we saw a cart following horses without being harnessed to them, and saw no rope or anything else that could keep up some connection between the cart and the horses. We wouldn't say the cart was being pulled by the horses. We'd be more inclined to believe that the cart was being pushed by some force, even though we saw nothing of it, unless it were the doing of some witch.

Yet these English gentlemen don't give up their view. They even maintain that it is a quality belonging to all bodies to attract one another, that this quality is as natural to them as extension, and that it is enough that the Creator willed all bodies to attract one another. And with that, they say, the whole question is settled.

If there had been only two bodies in the world, however far apart they were, there would at once have been a tendency of each toward the other, by which they would soon have drawn together and even joined. From this it follows that the larger a body is, the greater is the attraction with which it draws other bodies. Since this quality is essential to matter, the more matter a body contains, the more force it exerts to pull other bodies toward itself. So, since the sun greatly surpasses all the planets in size, the attractive force it is endowed with is also much greater than that of the planets. They also point out that Jupiter's body is much larger than the earth, so the attractive force it exerts on its satellites is much greater than the force with which the earth acts on the moon.

According to this view, the weight of bodies on the earth is the result of all the attractions by which bodies are drawn toward all the parts of the earth. If the earth contained more matter than it actually does, its attraction would become greater too, and the weight of bodies would be increased. If, on the other hand, the earth somehow lost part of its matter, its attraction would become smaller, and all bodies would be lighter.

People object to these philosophers that, on their view, any two bodies set on a table, for example, ought to attract each other and so move toward each other. They grant the consequence, but they say that in this case the attraction would be too small to produce any noticeable effect. If the whole mass of the earth, by its attractive force, produces in each body only its weight, then a body that is several million times smaller than the whole earth will produce an effect several million times smaller. And we will readily agree that if a body's weight became several million times smaller, the effect would have to shrink to nothing. It follows that unless the bodies, or at least one of them, are extremely large, the attraction can't be noticed.

So on this side there is nothing to be gained against the attractionists. They even cite in their favor an experiment made in America by the academicians of Paris, who observed, very near a very high and massive mountain, the effect of a small attraction, by which the body of the mountain drew nearby bodies toward it. So if we embrace the attractionists' system, we don't have to fear that it will lead us to false conclusions. We can rather be assured in advance of their truth.

Letter 55: On the Force by Which All Heavenly Bodies Attract Each Other

_9 September 1760_.

Your Highness knows the property a magnet has of drawing iron to itself. We see that small pieces of iron or steel, such as needles, placed near a magnet are pulled toward it with a force that is greater the closer they are. Since we see nothing pushing them toward the magnet, we say the magnet attracts them, and the action itself is called attraction. Still, there can be no doubt that some very subtle matter, though invisible, produces this effect by actually pushing the iron toward the magnet. But language follows appearances, so the custom has prevailed of saying that the magnet attracts iron and that an attraction takes place. This phenomenon is peculiar to the magnet and iron, but it is very well suited to clarify the term "attraction," which modern philosophers use so often.

They say, then, that a property like the magnet's belongs to all bodies in general, and that all the bodies in the world attract one another. But this effect becomes noticeable only when the bodies are extremely large, and it is absolutely imperceptible in small ones. However big a stone may be, for example, it exerts no attraction on other bodies held near it, because its force is too small to make the attraction noticeable. But if we made the stone several thousand times larger, its attraction would finally become noticeable too. I've already pointed out to Your Highness that people claim to have actually observed a great mountain in America produce a small attraction. A still bigger mountain would therefore produce an even more noticeable attraction, and a body larger still, such as the whole earth, would attract with a correspondingly greater force.

Now this force, with which the whole earth would draw all bodies to itself, is precisely the gravity by which we see all bodies carried toward the earth. So according to this system, gravity, or weight, which makes all bodies fall downward, is nothing other than the effect of the whole earth, by which it attracts all bodies to itself. If the earth's body were larger or smaller, the gravity or weight of bodies would be greater or smaller too.

From this we understand that all the other great bodies in the universe, such as the sun, the planets and the moon, are endowed with a similar attractive force, greater or smaller according as they are themselves greater or smaller. Since the sun is several thousand times larger than the earth, its attractive force exceeds the earth's by that many times. The body of the moon is estimated to be about 40 times smaller than the earth, and so its attractive force is that many times smaller. The same holds for all the heavenly bodies.

Letter 56: On the Same Subject

_11 September 1760_.

By virtue of the system of attraction, or universal gravitation, every heavenly body attracts all the others and is in turn attracted by them. To judge the force with which these bodies attract others, we only have to consider two bodies that attract each other. We then have to take three things into account: first, the attracting body; second, the attracted body; and third, their distance. The force of attraction depends on all three of these.

Let A (Figure 33) be the attracting body and B the attracted body, both being spherical, since the heavenly bodies have roughly that shape. Their distance is then measured from center to center, from A to B, that is, by the straight line AB.

Now for the first point, which concerns the quantity of the attracting body A. We must notice that the larger this body is, the greater its force will be to attract the body B. So if the attracting body were twice as large, the body B would be attracted to it with twice the force. If it were three times as large, B would be attracted with three times the force, and so on, supposing that the distance between their centers stayed the same. Therefore, if the earth contained more or less matter than it actually does, all bodies would be attracted to it with correspondingly more or less force, or in other words their weight would be correspondingly greater or less. And since the whole earth is attracted by the sun, if the sun were larger or smaller, the earth would be attracted to it with correspondingly more or less force.

As for the attracted body B, with the attracting body A and the distance AB staying the same, we should notice that the larger or smaller the body B is, the greater or smaller also is the force by which it is attracted toward the body A. So if the body B is twice as large, it will be attracted to the body A with twice the force. If it is three times as large, it will be attracted with three times the force, and so on. To make this clearer, we only have to put the earth in the place of the attracting body A. The force by which the body B is attracted is then nothing other than the weight of B. And we know that the larger or smaller this body B is, the greater or smaller its weight is. So we see that as long as the attracting body A and the distance AB stay the same, the force by which B is attracted follows exactly the size of that body.

To express this situation, mathematics uses the term "proportional." We say the force by which the body B is attracted toward the body A is proportional to the mass of the body. That means that if the mass of B were two, or three, or four times as large, the force would be exactly that many times as large. On the first point, where we look at the attracting body A, we say in the same way that the force by which B is attracted toward A is also proportional to the mass of A, while B and the distance AB stay the same.

I must also observe that when we speak here of the quantity of the attracting body A or the attracted body B, we mean the quantity of matter that each contains, and not merely its extension. Your Highness will remember well that bodies differ very considerably in this respect. Some, in a small extension, contain a great deal of matter, such as gold, for example, while others, like air, contain very little matter in a large extension. So when we speak of bodies here, we must always judge them by the quantity of their matter, which is also called their mass.

It only remains for me to examine the third point, the distance AB between the two bodies, supposing that the bodies themselves stay the same. Here we must observe that as the distance AB increases, the attraction decreases, and as the distance decreases, the attraction increases, but by a rule that isn't easy to express. When the distance becomes twice as great, the force by which B is attracted toward A becomes 2 times 2, or 4 times, smaller. For a triple distance, the force of attraction becomes 3 times 3, that is, 9 times smaller. If the distance becomes 4 times greater, the force of attraction becomes 4 times 4, that is, 16 times smaller, and so on. So for a distance 100 times greater, the force of attraction will be 100 times 100, or 10,000 times smaller.

From this we see that for very great distances the force of attraction must finally become quite imperceptible. And conversely, when the distance AB is very small, the force of attraction can be very considerable, even though the bodies are very small.

Letter 57: On the Same Subject

_13 September 1760_.

When a body B is attracted by another body A, I have just shown that the force of attraction is proportional, first, to the mass of the attracting body A, and also to that of the attracted body B. But the force of this attraction depends so much on the distance between the bodies that if the distance became two times, or three times, or four times, or five times greater, the force of attraction would become four times, or nine times, or sixteen times, or twenty-five times smaller.

To set up a rule for this, we must multiply by itself the number that says how many times the distance has increased, and the product will show how many times smaller the attraction becomes. To put this rule in its full light, we should note that when a number is multiplied by itself, the resulting product is called its square. So to find these squares, we multiply the numbers by themselves like this:

	1 multiplied by 1 gives 1, so the square of 1 is 1.
	11 multiplied by 11 gives 121, so the square of 11 is 121.
	12 multiplied by 12 gives 144, so the square of 12 is 144.

From this last example it's clear that the square of the number 12 is 144. And if we want to know the square of any other number, for example 258, we have to multiply that number by itself, and we do the following operation:

	258 multiplied by 258 gives 66,564.

So we see that the square of the number 258 is 66,564. We do the same for all other numbers.

Since we have to multiply the distance between the bodies by itself, it's clear that the force of attraction decreases as many times as the square of the distance increases. Or, put another way, the square of the distance becomes as many times greater as the force of attraction becomes smaller. When mathematicians treat subjects like these, they use certain terms in order to make themselves understood, and it's worth explaining them, because people sometimes use them in conversation too. If the force of attraction increased in step with the square of the distance, we would say it was proportional to the square of the distance. But since exactly the opposite happens, with the force of attraction decreasing while the square of the distance increases, we use the word "inversely" to mark this contrariness, saying that the force is inversely proportional to the square of the distance. This is a geometrical way of speaking, and Your Highness will understand its meaning perfectly, since it is the same as what I've just set out above.

So to judge the force with which one body is attracted toward another, we only have to notice that this force is proportional, first, to the mass of the attracting body, then to that of the attracted body, and finally inversely to the square of their distance.

From this it is at once clear that although the earth and the planets are also attracted toward the fixed stars, this force must be absolutely imperceptible because of their prodigious distance. Suppose the mass of a fixed star equals that of the sun. At equal distances, the earth would be attracted toward it with as much force as toward the sun. But the distance of the fixed star is 400,000 times greater than that of the sun, and the square of that number is 160,000,000,000, or one hundred sixty thousand million. So the force by which the earth is attracted to this fixed star will be one hundred sixty thousand million times smaller than the force by which the earth is attracted by the sun. That is an attraction far too small to produce the slightest noticeable effect.

For this reason, the attractive force of the fixed stars changes nothing in the motion of the earth, the planets and the moon. It is the sun's attractive force that mainly governs the motion of the earth and the planets, since the mass of the sun exceeds the mass of each planet by several thousand times.

However, when two planets come near each other, so that their distance becomes smaller than the distance of the sun, their attractive force increases, and it might become strong enough to disturb their motion. And in fact we do notice such a disturbance, which is a very strong proof in favor of the system of attraction, or universal gravitation. So too, when a comet comes very near a planet, it can well alter the planet's motion.

Letter 58: On the Motion of the Heavenly Bodies and How to Find It

_15 September 1760_.

From what I've just said about the force with which all the heavenly bodies are attracted toward one another in proportion to their size, or mass, and their distance, Your Highness will easily understand how their motion can be determined, so that the true place where each body will be found can be given at any time. In this consists the science of astronomy. It depends on an exact knowledge of the motion of all the heavenly bodies, so that we can determine for any moment, past or to come, the spot where each heavenly body must be, and in what place in the sky it must appear when seen from the earth or from any other place in the world.

The science that treats motion in general is called mechanics, or dynamics. Its object is to determine the motion of any bodies whatever when they are driven by whatever forces there may be. This science is one of the principal parts of mathematics, and those who work at it make every effort to bring mechanics to its highest degree of perfection. Their researches are so profound, however, that we can't yet boast of having succeeded, and we must be content to advance a little at a time. It is only in the last ten or twenty years that considerable progress has been made. And it is chiefly on subjects of this kind that the Academy of Sciences in Paris proposes questions every year, with prizes attached that are substantial enough for those who do best.

The greatest difficulty lies in the plurality of forces by which each heavenly body is pushed or pulled toward all the others. If each body were attracted toward only one other body, there would be no difficulty at all. The great English mathematician, the late Monsieur Newton, who died in 1728, was the first to determine successfully the motion of two bodies that attract each other, according to the law I had the honor of describing to Your Highness. By this law, if the earth were attracted only toward the sun, we would know the motion of the earth perfectly well, and there would be no further research to do. It would be the same for the other planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, if these bodies were attracted only by the sun.

But since the earth is attracted not only by the sun but also by all the other heavenly bodies, the question becomes infinitely more complicated and more tangled, because of the plurality of forces that agitate it. Fortunately, though, we can neglect the forces by which it is attracted toward the fixed stars. However great their masses may be, the fixed stars are so prodigiously far away that the forces they exert on the earth are extremely small, and we can neglect them. The motion of the earth and the other planets will therefore always be exactly the same as if the fixed stars did not exist.

Besides the force of the sun, then, we only have to consider the forces with which the planets attract one another. These forces are also extremely small when compared with those by which each planet is attracted toward the sun. The reason is that the mass of the sun exceeds the mass of each planet so many times over that the force resulting from a planet is very small next to the sun's. Still, these forces increase as the distances become smaller. At a distance 2 times smaller the force is 4 times greater, at a distance 3 times smaller it is 9 times greater, and so on according to the squares of the numbers, as I explained in my previous letter. So it could well happen that two planets came so near each other that their attractive force became equal to the sun's, and even greatly surpassed it.

Fortunately this case doesn't occur in this world. The planets always stay so far from one another that their attractive force is always incomparably smaller than the force by which they are attracted toward the sun. So without taking our views beyond this knowledge, we can regard each planet as attracted only by the sun's force alone, and from that it is easy to determine its motion.

This holds, however, only when we are content with a superficial knowledge of the motion of the planets. As soon as we want to be more exactly informed, we have to take into account the small forces by which the planets act on one another. These produce real small irregularities and deviations, which astronomers notice only too well in their observations. And it is to get to know all these irregularities in the motion of the planets that astronomers and mechanicians alike gather all their strength and skill.

Letter 59: On the System of the World

_17 September 1760_.

To make clearer what I've just set out about the motion of the heavenly bodies and the forces that cause it, it will be good to present to Your Highness (Figure 34) the system of the world, or a description of the heavenly bodies that make it up.

First we must observe that the fixed stars are bodies entirely like the sun, shining by themselves, separated from the sun and from one another by prodigious distances, and each of them may be as large as the sun. I've already had the honor of telling Your Highness that the fixed star nearest to us is 400,000 times farther from us than the sun. Each fixed star seems to be meant to warm and light a certain number of opaque bodies, like our earth and no doubt inhabited as well, which lie in its neighborhood but which we don't see, because of their prodigious distance. We can't be sure of this by observation, but we infer it from the stars' resemblance to the sun, which serves to warm and light our earth and also some other bodies like our earth, which are called planets.

We know six of these bodies in particular that are warmed and lit by the sun. They aren't at rest. Each of them moves around the sun along a path that differs little from a circle, and this path is called the orbit of each planet. The sun itself is roughly at rest, like all the fixed stars, the motion we see in them being only apparent and caused by the motion of the earth.

So in Figure 34 I've drawn what is called the solar system, which contains all the opaque bodies that move around the sun and enjoy the same advantages it provides for us. The large spot I've placed near the middle of the paper, with the sign ☉, represents the sun at rest. Around it are six circles marking the orbits, or paths, along which the planets move around the sun.

The planet nearest the sun is Mercury, marked with the sign ☿, and the small spot on its circle represents the body of Mercury, which completes its turn around the sun in about 88 days. Next comes Venus, marked ♀, which completes its revolutions around the sun in about 7 months. The third circle is our earth, which carries the sign ⊕ and completes its revolutions around the sun in a year, a year being nothing other than the time the earth takes to travel around its circle about the sun.

But while the earth moves around the sun, there is another body that itself moves around the earth, following it in its orbit. This is the moon ☽, whose circle, or orbit, is shown in the figure. The first two planets, Mercury and Venus, have no visible body accompanying them, and neither does Mars ♂, the fourth, which travels its orbit around the sun in about 2 years.

The fifth circle is Jupiter's ♃, which makes its revolution in about twelve years. Around it move four satellites, shown in the figure with their orbits by the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4. Finally, the sixth and last circle is the orbit of Saturn ♄, which takes almost thirty years to make its revolution around the sun. This planet is accompanied on its course by five satellites, marked with the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

So the system of the sun contains six principal planets, Mercury ☿, Venus ♀, the Earth ⊕, Mars ♂, Jupiter ♃ and Saturn ♄, and besides these 10 satellites, namely the moon, four satellites of Jupiter and five of Saturn.

This system also contains several comets, whose number is unknown. The figure shows one of them. Its orbit differs from those of the planets because it is extremely elongated. A comet sometimes comes very near the sun, even as near as to us, and sometimes moves so far away that it becomes entirely invisible to us. Among the comets, one has been noticed that completes its revolutions in about 75 years, and this is the one that was seen last year. As for the other comets, it is certain that they take several centuries to travel their orbits. Since they weren't exactly observed in past centuries, we know nothing of their return.

That, then, is what the system of the sun consists of, and it is very probable that each fixed star has a similar one.
