Letters 89–92

Letter 89: On the Best World, and the Origin of Evil and Sin

_30 December 1760_.

People argue so often about whether this world is the best one possible that Your Highness must be familiar with the question. There is no doubt that the world answers perfectly to the plan God had in mind when he created it, and we have the testimony of Holy Scripture itself on this.

As for bodies and material things, their arrangement and structure are such that certainly nothing better could have been made. Your Highness will remember the wonderful workmanship of the eye. We have to admit that its parts and their shapes could not serve their purpose any better, which is to show us outside objects distinctly.

How much skill it must have taken to keep the eye in this condition through a whole lifetime! The fluids it is made of had to be kept from spoiling, and they had to be renewed and maintained in the right state. All of this is beyond our understanding. An equally marvelous structure is found in every other part of our bodies, in those of all animals, and even in those of the lowliest insects. In the insects, because they are so small, the structure is all the more admirable, since it meets perfectly every need that is particular to each kind. Just consider the sight of insects, by which they make out the smallest and nearest objects that would escape our eyes, and that alone will fill us with admiration. We find a similar perfection in plants. Everything in them works together toward their formation, their growth, and the production of their flowers, their fruits, or their seeds. What a wonder it is to see a plant or a tree spring from a little seed put in the ground, and to see it do so from nothing but the nourishing sap the earth supplies! The things we find in the depths of the earth are no less admirable, and every part of nature can exhaust our researches without our ever getting to the bottom of the wonders of its construction. We are lost altogether when we consider how all the materials, earth, water, air and heat, work together to produce all organized bodies, and how, finally, the arrangement of all the heavenly bodies could not have been better made to serve all these particular purposes.

After these reflections, Your Highness will find it hard to believe that there have ever been people who maintained that the whole world was only the work of pure chance, without any design. There have nonetheless been such people in every age, and there are still some who hold this view. But they are always people with no solid knowledge of nature, or rather people whom the fear of being obliged to acknowledge a supreme Being has driven headlong into this extravagance. We, however, are convinced that there is a supreme Being who created the entire universe, and I have just pointed out, as far as bodies are concerned, that everything was created in the greatest perfection.

But as for minds, the wickedness of men seems to count against this, because it is only too able to bring the greatest evils into the world, and these evils have always seemed incompatible with the sovereign goodness of God. This is what usually arms unbelievers against religion and the existence of God. They say: if God were the author of the world, he would also be the author of the evils in it, and therefore of sins as well, which would overturn religion.

The question of the origin of evils, and how they can exist alongside the sovereign goodness of God, has always tormented philosophers and theologians alike. Some have tried to give an explanation, but most have satisfied only themselves. Others have gone astray so far as to maintain that God really was the author of all evils and sins, while insisting nonetheless that their view did not weaken the goodness and holiness of God. Others, finally, regard this question as a mystery beyond our comprehension, and these last have no doubt taken the best course.

God is supremely good and holy. God is the author of the world. The world swarms with evils and sins. These are three truths that seem hard to reconcile with one another. But it seems to me that a large part of the difficulty disappears once we form a right idea of minds, and of the freedom that is so essential to them that God himself cannot strip it from them.

God created the minds and souls of men. I note first that minds are beings infinitely more excellent than bodies, and that they make up the principal part of those bodies. Next, at the moment of creation all minds were good, since bad inclinations take some time to form. So there is no difficulty in saying that God created minds. But it is of the essence of minds to be free, and freedom cannot exist without the possibility, or the power, of sinning. So creating minds with the power to sin is not contrary to the perfection of God, because it is not possible to create a mind without that power.

God also did everything to prevent sin, by giving minds commandments whose observance would keep them always good and happy. There is no other way of dealing with minds, which no constraint can act upon. So if some minds have since broken these commandments, they are themselves responsible and guilty, and God has no part in it.

Only one objection remains: that it would have been better not to create the minds God foresaw would fall into sin. But this goes far beyond our understanding, and we don't know whether the falling away of these minds could have been made to fit the plan of the world. We even know from experience that the wickedness of some men often does a great deal to correct others and lead them to happiness. This consideration alone is enough to justify the existence of wicked minds. Besides, since God is the master of the consequences that wicked men bring in their train, everyone can be assured that if he behaves in accordance with God's commandments, every event that happens to him, however unfortunate it may seem at first, will always be directed by Providence so that it finally leads to his true happiness.

The providence of God, which extends to each individual in particular, also gives the most solid answer to the question of why evil is permitted and where it comes from. All of religion is founded on this, and its one aim is to lead men to their salvation.

Letter 90: Religion, and Objections Against Prayer Answered

_3 January 1761_.

Before I continue my reflections on philosophy and physics, it is of the utmost importance to point out to Your Highness how they connect with religion.

However odd and absurd a philosopher's opinions may be, he is so stubborn about them that he admits no opinion or doctrine in religion that doesn't fit his system of philosophy. This is the source of most of the sects and heresies in religion. Several philosophical systems really do contradict religion. But then divine truths ought to prevail over human daydreams, if the pride of philosophers didn't stand in the way. And if true philosophy sometimes seems contrary to religion, the contradiction is only apparent, and we must never let ourselves be dazzled by objections.

I'm going to speak to Your Highness about an objection to prayer that almost every philosophical system raises. Religion prescribes prayer as our duty, with the assurance that God will grant our wishes and our prayers, provided they conform to the rules he has given us. On the other hand, philosophy teaches us that all the events of this world happen in accordance with the course of nature set from the beginning, and that our prayers can't bring about any change in it, unless we want to claim that God works continual miracles in answer to our prayers. This objection is all the stronger because revelation itself assures us that God has established the entire course of all events in the world, and that nothing can happen that God hasn't foreseen from all eternity. Is it credible, they ask, that God would want to change this established course in answer to all the prayers the faithful address to him? This is how unbelievers try to attack our confidence.

But I observe first that when God established the course of the world and arranged all the events that were to happen, he took into account at the same time all the circumstances that would accompany each event, and in particular the dispositions, the wishes and the prayers of each intelligent being. And the arrangement of all events was brought perfectly into agreement with all these circumstances. So when one of the faithful now addresses to God a prayer worthy of being granted, we must not imagine that the prayer only now comes to God's knowledge. He has already heard this prayer from eternity. And since this merciful Father judged it worthy of being granted, he arranged the world for the very purpose of answering it, so that its fulfillment would follow from the natural course of events. This is how God grants the prayers of the faithful without working miracles, although there is no reason to deny that God has worked, and still sometimes works, real miracles.

So the fact that the course of the world is fixed, far from making our prayers useless, as the freethinkers claim, rather increases our confidence, by teaching us this comforting truth: all our prayers were already presented at the foot of the Almighty's throne from the beginning, and were set into the plan of the world as reasons on which events were to be arranged, in keeping with the infinite wisdom of the Creator.

Would anyone want to believe that our condition would be better if God knew nothing of our prayers before we made them, and then wanted to overturn the order of nature on our behalf? That would be very contrary to God's wisdom, and would weaken his adorable perfections. Wouldn't people be right to say, in that case, that this world was a very imperfect work? That God would gladly have granted the wishes of the faithful but, not having foreseen them, was reduced to interrupting the course of nature at every moment, unless he chose to neglect altogether the needs of the intelligent beings, who nevertheless make up the principal part of the world? For what would be the point of creating this material world, full of the greatest wonders, if there were no intelligent beings able to admire it and be carried by it to the worship of God and to the closest union with their Creator, in which their greatest happiness surely consists?

From this we must absolutely agree that intelligent beings and their salvation must have been the chief object by which God ordered the arrangement of this world. And we can be sure that all the events of this world are bound together in the most wonderful way with the needs of all intelligent beings, so as to lead them to their true happiness. Here, however, no constraint can take place, because of freedom, which is as essential to all minds as extension is to bodies. So we shouldn't be surprised that there are intelligent beings who will never reach their happiness.

Divine Providence consists in this connection of minds with the events of the world, and each person has the comfort of taking part in it. So every man can be assured that from all eternity he has had his place in the plan of the world, and that everything that happens to him is closely connected with his most pressing needs, the ones that tend toward his salvation. How much this thought must increase our confidence in, and our love for, divine Providence, on which all religion is founded! From this Your Highness sees that on this side philosophy does no harm to religion.

Letter 91: Free Will Is Not Contrary to Christian Doctrine

_5 January 1761_.

Freedom is a property so essential to every spiritual being that God himself cannot strip it away. In the same way, he cannot strip a body of its extension or inertia without destroying it and reducing it to nothing. So taking freedom away from a mind would be the same as annihilating it. This has to be understood of the mind or soul itself, and not of the actions of the body that the soul produces there in accordance with its will. Someone only has to tie my hands to stop me from writing, which is no doubt a free act. But in that case, although people say my freedom to write has been taken away, all that has been taken from my body is the ability to obey the orders of my soul. However tightly I'm bound, no one can extinguish in my mind the will to write. They can only prevent the carrying out.

We must always distinguish carefully between the will, the act of willing itself, and the carrying out, which happens through the service of the body. The act of willing itself can't be stopped by any outside force, not even by God's, since freedom is independent of every outside force. But there are other ways of acting on minds, namely through motives, whose aim is not to compel but to persuade. However determined a man is to undertake a certain action, if the carrying out of it is prevented, his will and his intention are not changed. But he could be shown motives that would lead him to give up his plan, and all of this without any constraint. Now, however strong these motives are, the man always remains master of his willing. It could never be said that he was forced or compelled, and if someone said so, it would be very improper. The right word would be persuade, which so suits the nature and the freedom of intelligent beings that it can't be used on any other occasion. It would be ridiculous, for example, when playing billiards, to say that I had persuaded the ball to go into a pocket.

This view of the freedom of minds nevertheless seems to some people contrary to religion, or rather to certain passages of Holy Scripture, from which they think they can maintain that God could change the greatest villain into a good man in a moment. To me this seems not only impossible but also contrary to the most solemn declarations of Scripture. For God does not desire the death of the sinner, but that he turn and live. So why, by a single act of his will, would he not convert all sinners? Would it be so as not to multiply miracles too much, as some say? But no miracle would ever have been better used, or more in keeping with God's aims, which are directed to the happiness of men. From this I conclude instead that since this miraculous conversion doesn't happen, the reason must lie in the very nature of minds. And it is precisely freedom that by its nature can't endure any constraint, even from God. But without using force on minds, God has an infinity of ways to set motives before them to persuade them. I believe that all the encounters we may find ourselves in are purposely fitted to our condition by Providence, so that the greatest villains could draw from them the strongest motives for their conversion, if they were willing to listen to them. And I am sure that a miracle would not have a better effect on spoiled minds. They would be greatly struck by it for a while, but deep down they would not become any better. This is how God helps bring about the conversion of sinners, by supplying them with the most effective motives for this purpose, through the circumstances or opportunities he lets them meet.

If, for example, a sinner is struck by hearing a fine sermon, comes to himself and is converted, then the act of his soul is truly his own work. But the occasion of the sermon he has just heard, at a time when he happened to be disposed to profit by it, is anything but his own work. It is divine Providence that arranged this saving circumstance for him. And it is in this sense that Holy Scripture so often attributes the conversion of sinners to divine grace. For in fact, without such an occasion, which man doesn't control, he would have stayed in his wanderings.

Your Highness will easily understand from this the meaning of these expressions: "Man can do nothing of himself; everything depends on the grace of God, and it is he who works both the willing and the doing." The favorable circumstances that Providence supplies to men are enough to explain these expressions, without any need to appeal to a hidden force that acts by constraint on the freedom of men.

Let us judge from this, too, the famous disputes between the Pelagians, the semi-Pelagians and the orthodox. The first maintained that sinners can be converted without the help of divine grace. The second are willing to grant that the grace of the Almighty helps, but insist that sinners must also use their own strength. But the orthodox claim that man contributes nothing at all, and that divine grace finishes the whole work. According to the explanations above, each of these three views could be maintained, provided we set aside every absurd sense, whether one that strips men of freedom or one that attributes to chance all the circumstances they meet. It is a fundamental article, and very essential to religion, that all these circumstances are arranged by God, in keeping with his highest wisdom, to lead every intelligent being to happiness and salvation, so long as that being doesn't entirely reject the means by which he could arrive at true happiness.

Letter 92: Further Explanations on the Nature of Minds

_10 January 1761_.

To clarify what I have just said about the difference between bodies and minds, I will add the following reflections. (One cannot pay too much attention to what makes this difference, which goes so far that minds have nothing in common with bodies, nor bodies with minds.)

Extension, inertia and impenetrability are properties of bodies. Minds have no extension, no inertia and no impenetrability. As for extension, all philosophers agree that it cannot belong to minds. The point is clear of itself, since whatever is extended is also divisible, or at least we can conceive parts in it. But a mind is not open to any division. We can't conceive half or a third of a mind. Every mind is rather a whole being that excludes all parts. So we can't say that a mind has length, breadth or depth. In a word, everything we conceive in extension must be shut out of the idea of a mind. From this it seems that, since minds have no size, they are like geometric points, which likewise have no length, breadth or depth. But would it be a right idea to picture a mind as a point? The scholastic philosophers held this view, and pictured minds as infinitely small beings, like the finest dust but endowed with an inconceivable activity and agility, by which they could leap in an instant across the greatest distances. Because of this extreme smallness, they maintained that millions of minds could be shut up in the smallest space. They even raised the question of how many minds could dance on the point of a needle. The followers of Wolff hold nearly the same view. According to them, all bodies are composed of extremely small particles stripped of all size, and they give these the name of monads. So a monad is a substance without any extension. Or, put another way, if we divide a body until we arrive at particles so small that they can't be divided any further, we arrive at the Wolffian monads. These differ from very fine dust only in that the grains of dust are perhaps not small enough, and would have to be divided still further to obtain true monads.

Now, according to Monsieur Wolff, not only are all bodies composed of monads, but every mind is nothing other than a monad, and even the supreme Being, I hardly dare say it, is also such a monad. This gives a rather unimpressive idea of God, of minds and of our souls. I can't conceive that my soul is only a being like the last particles of a body, or that it is hardly more than a point. Still less does it seem to me defensible that several souls taken together and joined could form a body, for example a piece of paper, with which one could light a pipe of tobacco. But the supporters of this view hold to this reason: since a mind has no extension, it must be like a geometric point. So everything comes down to examining whether this reason is sound or not.

I observe first that since a mind is a being of a nature entirely different from that of a body, we can't even apply to it questions that presuppose a size. It would be absurd to ask how many feet or inches long a mind is, or how many pounds or ounces it weighs. Such questions can only be asked of things that have a length or a weight. They are as absurd as it would be, when speaking of a time, to ask, for example, how many feet long an hour is, or how many pounds it weighs. I can always say that an hour is not equal to a line of 100 feet, or of 10 feet, or of one foot, or to any other measure. But it doesn't follow from this that an hour is a geometric point. An hour is of an entirely different nature, and we can't apply to it any question that presupposes a length expressible in feet or inches.

It is the same with a mind. I can always say boldly that a mind is not 10 feet, or 100 feet, or any other number of feet. But it doesn't follow that a mind is a point, any more than an hour is a point because it can't be measured in feet and inches. So a mind is not a monad, or like the last particles into which bodies can be divided. And Your Highness will now understand very well that a mind may have no extension without being a point or a monad on that account. We must therefore banish every idea of extension from the idea of a mind.

So it will also be an absurd question to ask in what place a mind exists. As soon as we attach a mind to a place, we suppose it has extension. I can't say, either, in what place an hour is to be found, although an hour is certainly something. So something can be without being attached to a certain place. In the same way I can say that my soul doesn't exist in my head, or outside my head, or in any place at all, without anyone being able to conclude that my soul doesn't exist at all. No more than the present hour, of which I can truly say that it exists neither in my head nor outside my head. A mind therefore exists without existing in a certain place. But if we think about the power a mind may have to act on a certain body, that action certainly takes place in a certain place.

So my soul doesn't exist in a certain place, but it acts in a certain place. And since God has the power to act on all bodies, it is in this respect that we say God is everywhere, although his existence is not attached to any place.
