Letters 97–101

Letter 97: Refuting the View of the Idealists

_27 January 1761_.

I wish I could give Your Highness the weapons needed to fight the idealists and the egoists, and to prove that there is a real connection between our sensations and the very objects they represent. But the more I think about it, the more I have to admit my own inadequacy.

With the egoists, it would even be ridiculous to try to engage. A man who imagines that he alone exists, and refuses to believe that I exist, would be acting against his own system if he listened to my arguments, since by his account they would be the arguments of a nothing. It is almost as hard to argue with the idealists, and it seems to me impossible to convince a man of the existence of bodies when he stubbornly denies it. I doubt that these philosophers act in good faith. Still, it would be very much to be wished that we had reasons strong enough to convince ourselves that whenever our soul has certain sensations, we can safely conclude that certain bodies exist as well, and that when my soul is affected by the sensation of the moon, I can boldly conclude that the moon exists. But the connection the Creator has established between our soul and our brain is such a great mystery that all we know of it is this: certain impressions made in the brain, where the soul has its seat, excite certain ideas or sensations in the soul. How this influence works is completely unknown to us. We must be content to know that the influence exists, which experience confirms well enough, and we cannot look any deeper into the way it happens. Now, the same experience that convinces us of this also teaches us that every sensation always leads the soul to believe that some object actually exists outside it and has caused the sensation. And the same sensation also reveals several properties of the object.

So it is a well-established fact that from any sensation whatever, the soul always concludes that a real object exists outside us. This is so natural to us from earliest childhood, and so universal among all people, and even among all animals, that one cannot call it a prejudice. A dog, seeing me and barking, is certainly convinced that I exist, because my presence excites in him the idea of my person. This dog, then, is no idealist. Even the lowest insects are sure that there are bodies existing outside themselves, and they could have this conviction only through the sensations that those bodies excite in their souls. From this I believe that sensations contain something more than these philosophers think. They are not simply perceptions of certain impressions made in the brain. They do not merely supply the soul with ideas, but they actually represent to it objects existing outside it, though we cannot understand how this is done. For what resemblance could there be between the bright idea of the moon and the slight agitation that the moon's rays can produce in the brain by means of the nerves?

The idea, even as the soul perceives it, has nothing material about it. It is an act of the soul, which is a spirit. So we should not look for a real relationship between the impressions of the brain and the ideas of the soul. It is enough for us to know that certain impressions made in the brain excite certain ideas in the soul, and that these ideas are representations of objects existing outside us, whose very existence they assure us of. For this reason, when my brain excites in my soul the sensation of a tree or a house, I state boldly that a tree or a house really exists outside me, and I even know its place, its size, and its other properties. Nor do we find any people or animals who doubt this truth. If a peasant wanted to doubt it, if he said, for example, that he didn't believe his bailiff existed, although the man was standing in front of him, he would be taken for a madman, and rightly so. But as soon as a philosopher puts forward such views, he expects us to admire his wit and his learning, which he thinks infinitely surpass those of the common people. It seems quite certain to me that such bizarre views have never been held except out of pride, and to stand out from the crowd. And Your Highness will readily agree that in this respect peasants have more good sense than this sort of scholar, who gain nothing from their studies except a mind gone astray.

So let us establish as a certain rule that each sensation excites in my soul not only an idea, but also shows it, so to speak, an object outside itself, whose existence it assures the soul of at the same time, without deceiving it. But here I fear a very strong objection, drawn from dreams and from the ravings of the sick, where the soul has any number of sensations of objects that exist nowhere. My reflection on this is as follows. It must be very natural for us to judge that the objects the soul has sensations of really exist, since we judge this way even in sleep, though we are mistaken then. But it doesn't follow that we are equally mistaken when awake. Now, to settle this objection, it would be better to know the difference between sleeping and waking, and perhaps nobody knows less about it than the learned, which will seem very surprising to Your Highness.

Letter 98: Sensing, Recollection, Memory, Attention, and Ideas

_31 January 1761_.

Your Highness has just seen that objects, by acting on our senses, excite sensations in our soul, and that from these sensations we judge that the objects really exist outside us. The impressions that cause the sensations are in the brain, yet they present to the soul a kind of image resembling the object the soul perceives, which is called a sensory idea, since it is excited by the senses. So, on seeing a dog, the soul acquires the idea of that dog. It is by means of the senses that the soul comes to know that dog, and external objects in general, and acquires sensory ideas of them. These sensory ideas hold the foundation of all our knowledge.

This faculty of the soul, by which it knows external things, is called the faculty of sensing, and it doubtless depends on the wonderful connection the Creator has established between the soul and the brain. But the soul has another faculty as well, which is to call back the ideas it has already had through the senses. This faculty is called recollection, or imagination. So when Your Highness has once seen an elephant, you can call the same idea back to mind even though the elephant is no longer present. There is, however, a great difference between the ideas we are sensing right now and the ideas we call back. The former make a much more vivid and more interesting impression than the latter. Even so, the faculty of calling ideas back holds the chief source of all our knowledge.

If we lost the ideas of objects as soon as they stopped acting on our senses, no reflection or comparison could take place. Our knowledge would be limited entirely to what we were sensing at that moment, since all earlier ideas would be extinguished, just as if we had never had them.

So the power to call back past ideas is an essential property of all reasoning beings, and even animals are endowed with it. Your Highness understands that this property includes memory. It doesn't follow, however, that we can always remember all our past ideas. How often we strain in vain to call back some ideas we once had! Sometimes ideas are forgotten completely, but usually we forget them only by half. Suppose, for example, that Your Highness forgot the proof of the theorem of Pythagoras. It could well happen that, in spite of all your efforts, you would no longer remember it. But the forgetting would be only half. As soon as I had the honor of drawing the figure for you again and putting you on the road to the proof, you would certainly remember it right away, and this second proof would make quite a different impression on your mind from the first. This shows that the recollection of ideas is not always in our power, even though they are not extinguished. Yet some slight circumstance is often enough to bring them back.

So we must carefully distinguish sensory ideas from recalled ideas. Sensory ideas are presented to us by the senses. The recalled ones we form ourselves, on the model of the sensory ideas, insofar as we remember them.

The doctrine of ideas is of the utmost importance for getting to the true source of all our knowledge. First, we divide ideas into simple and compound. A simple idea is one in which the soul finds nothing to distinguish and notices no parts different from one another. Such is the idea of a smell, or of a patch of one even color. Such too is the idea of a star, in which we notice only a point of light. A compound idea is a representation in which the soul can distinguish several things. When we look closely at the moon, for example, we discover several dark spots surrounded by brighter outlines. We also notice its round shape when the moon is full, and its horns when it is a crescent. We pay attention to this especially when we look through a telescope, which shows us that much more to distinguish. How many different things do we notice when we look at a beautiful palace or a beautiful garden! When Your Highness deigns to read this letter, you will discover in it different strokes of the characters, which you will tell apart perfectly from one another. This idea is therefore compound, since it actually contains several simple ideas. Not only does the whole letter offer a compound idea, through the many words in it, but each word is also a compound idea, since it contains several letters. And each letter is again a compound idea, because of the singularity of its outline, which sets it apart from the others. But the elements or points that make up each letter can be regarded as simple ideas, insofar as we can discover no more variety in them. Still, closer attention will find some variety even in these elements, especially when we look at them through a microscope.

So there is a great difference in the very way of looking at objects. Someone who looks at them only lightly, with a passing glance, discovers little variety in them, while another who examines them with attention distinguishes a quantity of different things. A savage, casting his eyes on this letter, will take it for a smeared piece of paper and will make out nothing but white and black, while an attentive reader observes the strokes of each letter. Here, then, is a new faculty of the soul, which we call attention, by which the soul acquires the simple ideas of all the various things found in an object.

Attention takes a skill acquired through long practice, in order to distinguish the different parts of an object. A peasant and an architect who both walk past a palace do receive the same impressions from the rays entering their eyes, but the architect will make out a thousand things the peasant never notices. It is only in attention that we must look for the cause of this difference.

Letter 99: Obscure and Clear, Confused and Distinct Ideas

_3 February 1761_.

If we look only lightly at a representation the senses offer, the idea we get of it is very imperfect, and we say that such an idea is obscure. But the more attention we bring to it, to distinguish all its parts and all the marks it wears, the more our idea becomes perfect, or distinct. So to acquire a perfect or distinct idea of an object, it isn't enough for it to be well represented in the brain by the impressions it makes on the senses. The soul must also bring its attention to it, which is an action proper to the soul and independent of the body. But it is also necessary that the representation in the brain be well expressed, and that it contain the various parts and the marks that characterize the object. This happens when the object is exposed to the senses in a suitable way. For example, when I see writing at a distance of ten feet, I can't read it, however much attention I give it. The reason is that, because of the distance, the letters aren't well drawn at the back of the eye, and so even less well in the brain. But as soon as the writing is brought to the right distance, I read it, because all the letters are then distinctly represented at the back of the eye.

Your Highness knows that certain instruments are used to give us a more perfect representation in the organs of the senses. Such are microscopes and telescopes, which serve to make up for the weakness of our sight. But even with all these aids, we still don't arrive at a distinct idea without attention. We say that we haven't paid attention, that we have gotten only an obscure idea, and it is very nearly as if we hadn't seen the object at all.

I have already remarked that sensations are not a matter of indifference to the soul, but are either agreeable or disagreeable to it, and that this agreeableness most often excites our attention, unless the soul is already busy with several other sensations on which its attention is fixed. Such a state of the soul is called distraction.

Practice also does a great deal to strengthen attention, and there could be no more suitable exercise for children than learning to read. There they are obliged to fix their attention on each letter in turn and to impress on themselves a very clear idea of the shape of each. It's easy to understand that this exercise must be very painful at the beginning, but soon they acquire such a habit that at last they are able to read with a speed quite inconceivable. Now, in reading writing one must have a very distinct idea of it, from which we see that attention is capable of a very high degree of perfection through practice.

How quickly a skilled musician can play a piece written in notes, even though he has never seen it before! It is quite certain that his attention has passed through all the notes one after another, and that he has noticed the value and the time of each. And his attention isn't confined to these notes alone. It presides over the movement of his fingers, of which not one moves without an express order from the soul. Besides this, he notices at the same time how his companions in the ensemble are playing the same piece. In short, it is amazing how far the skill of the human mind can be carried by application and practice. Show the same musical notes to someone who is only beginning to play an instrument. How long would it take to impress on him the meaning of each note and give him a complete idea of it, while the skilled musician, almost at a single glance, acquires the most complete idea of it?

A similar skill extends to all the other kinds of objects, in which one person can infinitely surpass others. There are people who, from a single glance at someone passing in front of them, acquire a distinct idea not only of every feature of the face but also of the whole outfit, down to the smallest trifles, while others are not able to notice even the crudest details.

In this respect we see an infinite difference among people. Some quickly seize all the different marks in an object and form a distinct idea of it, while others have only a very obscure idea. This difference doesn't depend only on the sharpness of the mind, but also on the nature of the objects. A musician immediately grasps all the notes of a piece of music and gets a distinct idea of it. But show him Chinese writing, and he will have only very obscure ideas of the characters it's written in. A Chinese person, in turn, will know right away the true strokes of each character, but will understand nothing of the notes of music. In the same way, a botanist will observe in a plant he has never seen before a thousand things that escape another person's attention. And an architect notices at a single glance, in a building, several things that another person doesn't see, although the other brings much more attention to it.

It is always a great advantage to form distinct ideas of all the objects that present themselves to our senses, that is, to notice all the parts they're made of and all the marks that distinguish and characterize them. From this Your Highness will easily understand the division of ideas into obscure and clear, confused and distinct. The more distinct our ideas are, the more they help to push forward the limits of our knowledge.

Letter 100: Abstraction, General Notions, Genera and Species

_7 February 1761_.

The senses represent to us only objects that actually exist outside us, and sensory ideas all relate to these objects. But from these sensory ideas the soul forms any number of others, which do take their origin from the first kind, but no longer represent things that really exist. For example, when I see the full moon and fix my attention only on its outline, I form the idea of roundness, but I can't say that roundness exists by itself. The moon is indeed round, but the round figure doesn't exist separately outside the moon. It's the same for all other figures. When I see a triangular or square table, I can have the idea of a triangle or a square, although such a figure never exists by itself, or separately from a real object that has that figure. The ideas of numbers have a similar origin. Having seen two or three people or other objects, the soul forms the idea of two or of three, which is no longer attached to the people. Once it has arrived at the idea of three, the soul can go further and form ideas of larger numbers, of four, five, ten, a hundred, a thousand, and so on, without ever having seen exactly that many things together. And to return to figures, Your Highness can quite well form the idea of a polygon, say, of 1761 sides, although you have never seen a real object with such a figure, and perhaps such an object has never existed. So a single occasion on which we have seen two or three objects can have led the soul to form ideas of other numbers, however large they may be.

Here the soul displays a new faculty, which is called abstraction. It happens when the soul fixes its attention on only one quantity or quality of the object, separates it from the object, and considers it as if it were no longer attached to the object. For example, when I touch a hot stone and fix my attention only on the heat, I form from it the idea of heat, which is no longer attached to the stone. This idea of heat is formed by abstraction, since it is separated from the stone, and the soul could have drawn the same idea from touching hot wood, or from plunging a hand into hot water. In this way, by means of abstraction, the soul forms a thousand other ideas of the quantities and properties of objects, by then separating them from the objects themselves. So when I see a red coat and fix my attention only on the color, I form the idea of red, separated from the coat, and we see that a red flower, or any other red body, could have led me to the same idea.

These ideas acquired by abstraction are called notions, to distinguish them from sensory ideas, which represent to us things that really exist.

It is claimed that abstraction is a prerogative of human beings and of reasoning spirits, and that animals are entirely without it. An animal, for example, has the same sensation of hot water that we do, but it can't separate the idea of heat from the idea of the water itself. It knows heat only as found in water, and it has no abstract idea of heat as we do. These notions are said to be general ideas that extend to several things at once, just as heat can be found in a stone, in wood, in water, or in any other body. But our idea of heat is attached to no body. For if my idea of heat were attached to a certain stone that first gave me the idea, I couldn't say that wood or other bodies were hot. From this it is clear that these notions or general ideas are not attached to particular objects, as sensory ideas are. And since these notions distinguish human beings from animals, they properly belong to the level of reasoning that animals can never reach.

There is still another kind of notion, also formed by abstraction, which gives the soul the most important subjects on which to exercise its powers. These are the ideas of genera and species. When I see a pear tree, a cherry tree, an apple tree, an oak, a fir, and so on, all these ideas are different. Yet I notice several things they have in common, such as the trunk, the branches and the roots. I stop only at these things that the different ideas have in common, and I call a tree the object to which these qualities belong. So the idea of the tree that I've formed in this way is a general notion, and it includes the sensory ideas of the pear tree, the apple tree, and in general of every tree that actually exists. Now, the tree that answers to my general idea of the tree exists nowhere. It isn't a pear tree, for then apple trees wouldn't be included in it. For the same reason it isn't a cherry tree, or a plum tree, or an oak, and so on. In a word, it exists only in my soul. It is only an idea, but an idea that is realized in an infinity of objects. And when I say cherry tree, that is already a general notion, which includes all the cherry trees existing anywhere. This notion isn't tied to a cherry tree that stands in my garden, since then every other cherry tree would be excluded from it.

In relation to such general notions, each really existing object included in one is called an individual, and the general idea, for example that of the cherry tree, is called a species, or a genus. These two words mean almost the same thing, but the genus is more general and contains several species within it. So the notion of a tree can be regarded as a genus, since it includes the notions not only of pear trees, apple trees, oaks, firs, and so on, which are species, but also the idea or notion of sweet cherry trees, of sour ones, and of so many other kinds of cherry trees, which are species that each have within them a quantity of individuals actually existing.

This way of forming general ideas also happens by abstraction, and it is chiefly here that the soul displays its activity and its operations, from which we draw all our knowledge. Without these general notions, we would not differ from animals.

Letter 101: On Language and Its Uses

_10 February 1761_.

However skilled a man may be at making abstractions and at getting general notions, he can make no progress without the help of language, which is twofold, one kind in speaking and the other in writing. Both contain a number of words, which are nothing other than certain signs that answer to our ideas, and whose meaning is established by custom, or by the tacit agreement of several people who live together.

From this it seems that language serves people only to communicate their views to one another, and that a solitary man could do quite well without language. But Your Highness will soon agree that language is as necessary to people for pursuing and developing their own thoughts as for communicating with others.

To prove this, I note first that we have almost no words in our languages whose meaning is attached to some individual object. If every cherry tree in a whole region had its own name, and likewise every pear tree, and in general every individual tree, what a monster of a language would result! If I had to use a special word for each sheet of paper on my desk, or gave each one a separate word on a whim, it would be as useless to me as to anyone else. So it is a very imperfect description of languages to say that people first gave certain names to all individual objects, to serve as their signs. In fact the words of a language signify general notions, and one will rarely find a word that marks only a single individual being. The name Alexander the Great fits only one person, but it is a compound name. There are plenty of Alexanders, and the epithet "Great" extends to an infinity of things. In the same way all people carry names to distinguish them from all others, although these names are very often shared by several. But if I wanted to give a particular name to each individual thing in my room, and even every fly had its own name, it would come to nothing, and would still be infinitely far from language.

What is essential to a language is rather that it contain words to mark general notions, as the name "tree" answers to a prodigious multitude of individual beings. These words serve not only to excite, in others who understand the same language, the same idea that I attach to them, but they are also a great help to me in representing that idea to myself. Without the word "tree" to represent to me the general notion of a tree, I would have to imagine a cherry tree, a pear tree, an apple tree, a fir, and so on, all at once, and draw out by abstraction what they have in common. That would tire the mind a great deal and would easily lead to the greatest confusion. But once I have decided to express by the name "tree" the general notion formed by abstraction, that name always excites the same notion in my soul, without my needing to remember its origin. So for the most part the word "tree" alone constitutes the object of the soul, without its picturing any real tree. In the same way the name "man" is a sign to mark the general notion of what all men have in common, and it would be very hard to say, or to list, everything this notion contains. Would we say that it is a living being with two feet? A rooster would be included in that. Would we say that it is a living being with two feet and no feathers, as the great Plato defined it? One would only have to strip a rooster of all its feathers to have a Platonic man. I don't know whether those are any more right who say that a man is a living being endowed with reason. How often do we take beings for men without being sure of their reason? At the sight of an army, I don't doubt that all the soldiers are men, although I don't have the slightest proof of their reason. If I wanted to list all the parts necessary to make up a man, we would always find some men who lacked one or perhaps several of those parts, or else we would find some animal that had the same parts. So, looking at the origin of the general notion of a man, it is almost impossible to say what that notion consists of, and yet everyone has no doubt about the meaning of the word. The reason is that each person, in trying to excite this notion in his soul, thinks only of the name "man," as if he saw it written on paper or heard it pronounced, according to his own language. From this we see that, for the most part, the objects of our thoughts are not so much the things themselves as the words that mark those things in the language. And this does a great deal to make us more skillful at thinking. Indeed, what idea do we connect with words like virtue, liberty, goodness, and so on? It is certainly not a sensory image. But the soul, having once formed the abstract notions that answer to these words, then puts those words into its thoughts in place of the things they mark. Your Highness will easily judge how many abstractions had to be made to arrive at the notion of virtue. It was necessary to consider people's actions and compare them with the duties laid upon them, and from that we call virtue a person's disposition to direct his actions in keeping with his duties. But when we hear the word "virtue" in a speech delivered quickly, do we always attach this complicated notion to it? And when we hear the little words "and" and "also" pronounced, what idea is excited in the mind? We can see that these words signify a kind of connection. But however much trouble we took to describe this connection, we would use just as many other words whose meaning would be equally hard to explain, and while I was trying to explain the meaning of the little word "and," I would use that same word several times.

Let Your Highness now judge how useful language is for directing our own thoughts, and how, without a language, we would hardly be able to think for ourselves at all.
