Letters 111–115

Letter 111: On Moral and Physical Evils

_17 March 1761_.

When people complain about the evils that reign in this world, they sort them into two classes: moral evils and physical evils. The class of moral evils takes in evil or vicious inclinations, the leanings of minds toward wrong, or in a word sin, which is without doubt the greatest evil and the greatest imperfection that can exist.

For in the case of minds, there can be no greater disorder than for them to depart from the eternal laws of virtue and give themselves up to vice. Virtue is the only way to make a mind happy, and it would be impossible even for God to make a vicious mind happy. Every mind given over to vice is necessarily unhappy, and as long as it does not return to virtue (which may well often be impossible), its unhappiness can never end. That is the idea I form of devils, of wicked spirits and of hell, and it seems to me to agree very well with what Holy Scripture teaches us on the subject.

Freethinkers laugh when they hear devils mentioned. But men cannot claim to be the best of all rational beings, and so they cannot boast of being the wickedest either. There are doubtless beings far more wicked than the most malicious men, and these are the devils. Now, I have already shown Your Highness that the existence of so many wicked men and spirits need not be a stumbling block against the perfections of this world, or in particular against the Supreme Being. A mind, the devil not excepted, is always an excellent being, infinitely superior to anything we can conceive in the bodily world. And this world, since it contains an infinite number of minds of all the different orders, is still the most perfect work possible. Now, since all minds are essentially free, sin was possible from the very beginning of their existence, and could not be prevented, even by divine omnipotence. Furthermore, minds are the authors of the evils that necessarily follow from sin, since every free being is always the sole author of the actions it commits. So these evils cannot be laid to the Creator's account, any more than, among men, the craftsman who makes swords is responsible for the misfortunes they cause. And so, as for the moral evils with which this world is filled, God's supreme goodness is sufficiently justified.

The other class, that of physical evils, contains all the calamities and miseries to which men are exposed in this world. It is agreed that most of them are a necessary result of the malice and vicious tendencies with which men, like other minds, are infected. But since these results are carried out through bodies, people ask why God allowed wicked minds to act so effectively on bodies, and to use them as instruments to carry out their destructive plans. A father who saw his son about to murder a man would snatch the sword out of his hand and not allow him to become guilty of such a crime. On this point I have already remarked that the wicked son is equally guilty before God, whether he carries out his plan or makes every effort to succeed at it in vain. And the father who holds him back does not thereby make him any better.

Yet we can say quite boldly that God does not allow the malice of men a free course. If nothing stopped the carrying out of all the destructive plans of men, how unhappy we would be! We often see that wicked people run into great obstacles. And even when they succeed, they are not masters of the consequences of their actions, which always depend on so many other circumstances that in the end they turn out in a completely different way. Still, it cannot be denied that calamities and miseries result which torment the human race. And people imagine that the world would be infinitely better governed if God put an unbreakable check on the wickedness and audacity of men.

It would doubtless be very easy for God to put a tyrant to death before he oppressed so many honest people, and to strike an unjust judge dumb before he pronounced a ruinous sentence. Then we could live peacefully at rest and enjoy all the comforts of life, supposing that God granted us good health and all the goods we could wish for, and our happiness would be as secure as it could be. This is the basis on which people would like the world to be governed, in order to make us all happy: the wicked unable to exercise their malice, and the good in possession and quiet enjoyment of every good thing one could wish.

People rightly believe that God sincerely wants the happiness of men, and they are surprised that this world is so different from the plan they imagine to be best suited to that goal. Instead we see that the wicked not only very often enjoy all the advantages of this life, but are also able to carry out their destructive plans, to the confusion of honest people. We see the good often oppressed and crushed by the most painful evils: pains, sicknesses, sorrows, heavy losses of their property, and in general every kind of calamity. And finally we see that all the good, like the wicked, must inevitably die, which seems the greatest of all evils.

Looking at the world from this side, one is very tempted to doubt the wisdom and supreme goodness of the Creator. Even believers have in every age gone astray on this point. It is a reef against which we must be very much on our guard.

Letter 112: Answer to Complaints About Physical Evils

_21 March 1761_.

Even if our existence were limited to the present life, it would be far from true that owning the goods of this world and enjoying every pleasure would be the height of our happiness. Everyone agrees that true happiness consists in the rest and contentment of the soul, which is almost never found together with the brilliant condition that seems happy to those who judge only by appearances.

The insufficiency of these worldly goods to make us happy shows itself even more when we reflect on our true destiny. Death does not end our existence, but rather carries us over into another life, which is to last forever. The faculties of our soul and our understanding will doubtless then be raised to a higher degree of perfection, and our true happiness depends on the state we will find ourselves in then. Now, that state cannot be happy without virtue and the most sublime perfections. The infinite perfections of the Supreme Being, which we now perceive only through very thick clouds, will then shine with the greatest brilliance, and will be the chief object of our contemplation, our admiration and our worship. There not only will our understanding find the most perfect knowledge, but there we dare hope to enter into the favor of the Supreme Being and be admitted to the greatest gifts of his love. How happy we think those who enjoy the favors of a great prince, especially when that prince is truly great, even though those same favors come with plenty of bitterness! What, then, will it be in the future life, where almighty God himself will fill us with his love, a love whose effects will never be interrupted by any reversal? That will be a degree of happiness that infinitely surpasses everything we can conceive.

Now, to share in these infinite favors of the Supreme Being's love, it is quite natural that we, for our part, should likewise be filled with the liveliest love toward him. This blessed union absolutely requires a certain disposition on our side, without which we would be unable to have the smallest share in it. That disposition consists in virtue, whose foundation is the love of God and of our neighbor. So virtue is the one thing we must try to reach in this life, where we exist only to prepare ourselves to be worthy of sharing in the supreme and eternal happiness.

From this we must judge the events that befall us in this life in a completely different way. It is not the possession of the goods of this world that makes us happy. It is rather a situation that leads us effectively to virtue. If prosperity were a sure means of making us virtuous, then we could complain of adversity. But it is rather adversity that can strengthen us in virtue, and in this respect all the complaints of men about the physical evils of this life are also done away with.

Your Highness therefore sees clearly that God had the most solid reasons for introducing so many calamities and miseries into this world, and that everything plainly tends toward our salvation. It is quite true that these calamities are for the most part natural results of the wickedness and corruption of men. But it is here too that we must chiefly admire the infinite wisdom of the Supreme Being, who knows how to direct even the most vicious actions to our salvation. Many good people would never have reached virtue if they had not been oppressed and tormented by the injustice of others.

I have already remarked that bad actions are bad only with regard to those who commit them. Only the wicked resolve of their soul is criminal. The action itself is something purely bodily, and when it is considered apart from the person who committed it, it contains nothing either good or bad. A mason who falls from a roof onto a man kills him just as surely as the most determined murderer. The action is exactly the same, but the poor mason is not responsible for it, while the murderer deserves the severest punishments. So however criminal actions may be with regard to those who commit them, we must look at them quite differently in so far as they concern us, or have some influence on our situation. Then we must reflect that nothing can happen to us that is not in perfect agreement with the supreme wisdom of God. The wicked may well commit injustices, but we never suffer any. No one ever wrongs us, though he does wrong himself, and in everything that happens to us we must always regard God as if he were directly commanding it to happen to us. Besides this, we can be sure that it is not out of some whim, or to distress us, that God arranges these events for us, but that they lead to our true happiness. Those who look on everything that happens to them in this way will soon have the satisfaction of being convinced that God takes particular care of them.

Letter 113: On the True Destiny of Men and the Use of Adversity

_24 March 1761_.

I hope Your Highness will no longer have any doubt about this great question: how can the evils of this world be reconciled with the supreme wisdom and goodness of the Creator? The answer is beyond dispute founded on the true destiny of men and other intelligent beings, whose existence is not limited to this life. As soon as we lose sight of this important truth, we find ourselves tangled in the greatest difficulties. If men had been created only for this life, there would certainly be no way to defend God's perfections against all the troubles and misfortunes with which this world would then be overwhelmed. Those misfortunes would be only too real, and it would be absolutely impossible to explain how the prosperity of the wicked and the misery of so many good people could stand alongside the justice of God.

But as soon as we reflect that this life is only the beginning of our existence, and that it is meant to prepare us for another life that will last forever, the face of things changes entirely, and we must judge quite differently the evils that this life seems to swarm with. I have already remarked that the prosperity we enjoy in this world is anything but suited to prepare us for the future life, or to make us worthy of the happiness that awaits us there. However important the possession of this world's goods may seem for making us happy, they have that quality only in so far as they bear marks of God's goodness. Apart from God, all these goods could never make up our happiness. We can find our true happiness only in God himself. All other pleasures are only a very faint shadow of it, and can satisfy us for only a short time. So we see that those who enjoy them in abundance soon have their fill, and this apparent happiness serves only to inflame their desires and unsettle their passions, drawing them away from the supreme good instead of bringing them nearer to it. Now, true happiness consists in a perfect union with God. That cannot take place unless we love God above all things with the most perfect love and the most perfect trust, and it is clear that such love calls for a certain disposition of the soul, which we must prepare for in this life. This disposition is virtue, whose foundation is contained in these two great commandments:

Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul and with all thy mind;

and the other, which is like it:

Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.

Any other disposition of the soul that departs from these two commandments is vicious and utterly unworthy of sharing in true happiness. A deaf man can no more be delighted by beautiful music than a vicious man can enjoy the supreme happiness of eternal life. The vicious will be shut out of it forever, and not by some arbitrary decree of God, but by the very nature of the thing, since a vicious man, by his own nature, is not capable of supreme happiness.

If we look at the arrangement and government of this world in this light, nothing could be better fitted to this great purpose. All the events, and even the adversities we go through, are the most suitable means of leading us to our true happiness. In this respect it can be said that this world is indeed the best, since everything in it works together to bring about our salvation. When I reflect that nothing happens to me in this world by chance, and that all its events are directed by a providence with the aim of making me happy, how this thought must lift my thoughts toward God and fill my soul with the purest love!

But however effective these means are in themselves, they do not force our minds, to which freedom is so essential that no force can take place. And experience shows us only too often that through our attachment to sensual things we become too vicious to listen to these healthy motives. By abusing all these means, which ought to lead us to virtue, people become more and more vicious and turn away from the one road that leads to happiness. From this we understand the truth of the teachings of our holy religion, which tell us that sin separates men from God and makes them unable to reach true happiness.

We are only too convinced that all men are plunged in sin, and that the ordinary motives which events supply us with in this world would not be enough to free us from those bonds. So extraordinary means had to be used to break the chains that tie us to vice, and this is what God's infinite mercy carried out by sending us our divine Savior.

This is a mystery too high for our feeble understanding. But although unbelievers find fault with it, experience plainly shows us that it is a very suitable means of bringing men back to virtue. We need only look at the apostles and the first Christians to be convinced. Their lives, their deaths, and above all their sufferings reveal to us not only the most sublime virtue but also the purest love toward God. That alone would be enough to demonstrate to us the truth and divinity of the Christian religion. Surely it is no work of some trickery or illusion to make us truly happy.

Letter 114: On True Happiness and the Conversion of Sinners

_28 March 1761_.

My last reflection, on the truly virtuous life of the apostles and the first Christians, seems to me an unanswerable proof of the divinity of the Christian religion. For if true happiness consists in union with the Supreme Being, as no one can doubt, then enjoying that happiness necessarily requires on our side a certain disposition, founded on the most perfect love toward God and the most perfect charity toward our neighbor. So all who lack this disposition are absolutely incapable of heavenly happiness. Or rather, the vicious are necessarily shut out of it by their own nature, and it would not be possible, even for God, to make them happy. God's omnipotence extends only to things that are possible by their own nature, and freedom is so essential to all minds that no constraint can take place with regard to them.

So minds can be brought to the good only by motives. Now, what stronger motives to virtue can be imagined than those that were given to the apostles and disciples of Jesus Christ, both in conversation with their divine master and in his miracles, his sufferings, his death and his resurrection, which they witnessed? All these striking events, joined with the purest and most sublime teaching, had to stir up in their hearts the most ardent love and the highest reverence for God, whom they could regard and worship as their father and at the same time as the absolute sovereign of the whole universe. These vivid impressions necessarily had to smother in their minds every inclination to vice, and strengthen them more and more in the most sublime virtue.

This healthy effect on the minds of the apostles, looked at in itself, has nothing miraculous about it, and did no damage at all to their freedom, though the events themselves were doubtless the most miraculous. All that was needed was a docile heart, not corrupted by vices and passions. So it was without doubt the mission of Jesus Christ in this world that produced in the minds of the apostles that disposition so necessary for reaching the enjoyment of supreme happiness, and this mission still gives us the same motives for reaching that goal. We need only read its history attentively and without prejudice, and meditate on all the events.

I stop at the healthy effect of our Savior's mission, without wishing to probe into the mysteries of the work of our redemption, which infinitely surpass the feeble understanding of our minds. I only remark that this effect, of which experience convinces us, cannot be the work of some illusion or some trickery of men. It is too healthy not to be divine. It also agrees perfectly with our undeniable principles, that minds can be governed only by motives.

There have been theologians, and there still are, who maintain that our conversion is brought about directly by God, without our contributing the least thing to it. They imagine that a decree of God is enough to make the greatest villain virtuous in an instant. These learned men have the best of intentions, and think they are raising up God's omnipotence by it. But it seems to me that this view would be incompatible with the justice and goodness of God, even if it were not ruled out by the freedom of men. How, it will rightly be said, if a single decree of divine omnipotence were enough to convert all sinners in an instant, how could that decree possibly not be issued right now, instead of letting so many thousands of men perish, or employing the work of redemption, by which only the smallest part of them are saved after all? I admit this objection would strike me as much stronger than all those that freethinkers raise against our religion, which are all founded only on ignorance of the true destiny of men. But, thank God, this objection cannot arise in the system that I take the liberty of proposing to Your Highness.

Some theologians will perhaps accuse me of heresy, and say that I hold that man's own strength is enough for his conversion. But I do not fear that reproach. I intend rather to set the divine concurrence in its fullest light. In the work of conversion a man does use his freedom, which cannot be constrained, but a man always makes up his mind on the strength of motives. Now, motives are supplied to him by the circumstances and conditions he finds himself in, and all circumstances depend solely on Providence, which directs all the events of this world according to the laws of its supreme wisdom. So it is always God who supplies men, at every moment, with the most suitable circumstances, from which they can draw the strongest motives to bring them to conversion. Men are therefore always indebted to God for the circumstances that lead them to their salvation.

I have already pointed out to Your Highness that, however wicked the actions of men may be, they are not masters of their consequences, and that God, in creating the world, arranged the course of events so that each man is placed at every moment in the circumstances that are the most healthy for him. And happy is the one who tries to make use of them!

This conviction must produce in us the most healthy effects: an infinite love toward God, with an unshakable trust in his providence, and the purest charity toward our neighbor. This idea of the Supreme Being, as magnificent as it is consoling, must fill our hearts with the most sublime virtues, and prepare us effectively for the enjoyment of eternal life.

Letter 115: On the True Foundation of All Our Knowledge

_31 March 1761_.

Madam,

Having taken the liberty of setting before Your Highness my thoughts on the most important article of our knowledge, I hope they will be enough to dispel all the doubts that many people torment themselves with, being poorly instructed about the true notion of our freedom.

I will now have the honor of talking with Your Highness about the true foundation of all our knowledge, by which we are convinced of the certainty and truth of everything we know. We are far from being sure of the truth of all our opinions. It happens only too often that people let themselves be dazzled by some appearances, often very slight ones, and also accept many falsehoods. Both are equally dangerous faults, and a reasonable man must make every possible effort to guard against error, although we are not always fortunate enough to succeed.

Everything comes down here to the soundness of the proofs by which we convince ourselves of the truth of anything at all, and it is absolutely necessary to be able to judge the soundness of these proofs, whether they are enough to convince us or not. To that end, I first remark that all the truths within reach of our knowledge fall into three classes, essentially distinct.

The first class holds the truths of the senses, the second the truths of the understanding, and the third the truths of faith. Each of these classes calls for its own kind of proof to establish the truths that belong to it, and all our knowledge takes its origin from these three classes.

The proofs of the first class come down to our senses, when I can say:

This thing is true, because I have seen it, or because I am convinced of it by my senses.

This is how I know that a magnet attracts iron: I see it, and experience proves it to me beyond doubt. Such truths are called sensory, and are founded on our senses or on experience.

The proofs of the second class are contained in reasoning, when I can say:

This thing is true, because I can demonstrate it by sound reasoning, or by valid syllogisms;

and it is to this class above all that logic is attached, which gives us rules for reasoning soundly. This is how we know that the three angles of a straight-sided triangle together equal two right angles. In this case I do not say that I see it, or that my senses convince me of it. It is reasoning that assures me of its truth. Such truths are called intellectual, and here we must place all the truths of geometry and the other sciences, so far as we are able to prove them by demonstrations. Your Highness readily understands that these truths are quite different from those of the first class, where no proofs are offered except the senses, or experience, which assures us that the thing is so, though we do not know the cause. In the example of the magnet, we do not know how the attraction of iron is a necessary effect of the nature of both the magnet and the iron, but we are no less convinced of the truth of the fact. The truths of the first class are just as much truths as those of the second, though the proofs we have of them are entirely different.

I pass to the third class of truths, those of faith, which we believe because trustworthy persons report them to us, or, when we can say:

This thing is true, because one or more trustworthy persons have assured us of it.

This class therefore contains all historical truths. Your Highness no doubt believes that there was once a king of Macedon named Alexander the Great, who made himself master of the kingdom of Persia, although she has never seen him, and cannot prove geometrically that such a man ever existed on earth. We believe it on the report of the authors who wrote his history, and we do not doubt their faithfulness. But might it not be possible that all these authors had made a plot to deceive us? We are right to dismiss this objection, and we are as well convinced of the truth of these facts, at least a great part of them, as we are of the truths of the first and second classes.

The proofs of these three classes of truths are quite different, but if they are good, each of its own kind, they must convince us equally. Your Highness will not doubt that the Russians and the Austrians have been in Berlin, though she has not seen them. For Your Highness, then, it is a truth of the third class, since she believes it on the report of others. But for me it was a truth of the first class, since I saw them and spoke with them, and many others noticed it as well through other senses. In spite of that, Your Highness is just as fully persuaded of it as we are.
