Letters 116–120

Letter 116: On Errors in Knowing the Truth

_4 April 1761_.

The three classes of truths I've just laid out are the sources of all our knowledge, and they're the only ones. Everything we know, we know either from our own experience, or from reasoning, or from the report of others.

It's hard to say which of the three does the most to increase our knowledge. For Adam and Eve, it seems they drew only on the first two. Yet God revealed a great many things to them that must be credited to the third source, since neither their own experience nor their reasoning had led them there. Then the devil got involved too, and put new ideas into their heads, and Adam trusted the report Eve gave him.

But without lingering over such distant times, we're all convinced that if we refused to believe anything other people tell us, or that we read in their writings, we'd be in a sorry state. Still, we're a long way from having to believe everything we're told or everything we read. Everywhere we need to use discernment, and not just with the third source but with the other two as well.

We're so easily dazzled by our senses, and so easily fooled in our reasoning, that the very sources the Creator opened up to lead us to the truth often plunge us into error. So it isn't a reproach that anyone has more right to make against the third source than against the other two. We have to be on our guard equally everywhere, and there are as many examples of people going astray in drawing on the first and second sources as in the third. The same goes for the certainty of the knowledge these three sources give us. You can't say that the truths of one are better founded than those of another. Each source is subject to errors that could mislead us, but there are also precautions which, when they're properly observed, give us nearly the same degree of conviction. I don't know whether Your Highness is more convinced that two triangles with the same base and the same height are equal to each other, or that the Russians have been in Berlin. Yet the first rests on the soundest reasoning, and the other rests on nothing but the trustworthiness of the reports we've had.

So for the truths of each of these three classes, we have to be satisfied with the kind of proof that suits its nature. It would be ridiculous to demand a geometrical demonstration for truths of experience or of history. This is usually the fault of the freethinkers, and of people who misuse their sharpness on intellectual truths: they demand geometrical demonstrations to prove all the truths of religion, though a large part of those belong to the third class.

There are also people who will believe or admit nothing except what they see with their own eyes and touch with their own hands. Whatever you prove to them by the soundest reasoning stays suspect, unless you put it right in front of their eyes. You usually notice this fault in chemists, anatomists, and natural philosophers, who spend their time doing experiments. Whatever the first can't melt in their crucibles, or the second dissect with their scalpels, makes no impression on their minds. You can talk to them all day about the qualities and nature of the soul, and they agree to nothing unless it strikes their senses.

So the kind of study each person pursues has such a strong influence on his way of thinking that the experimenter wants only experiments, and the reasoner wants only arguments. These make up entirely different kinds of proof, the first belonging to the first class and the second to the second, and we must always take care to tell them apart, according to the nature of the things we want to know.

But could there really be people who, wholly taken up with the knowledge of the third source, ask only for proofs belonging to that class? Indeed there are. I've known some who were buried in the study of antiquity and history, and would admit nothing unless it was proved to them by history or by the authority of some ancient author. They do agree that the propositions of Euclid are true, but only on that author's authority, without paying the slightest attention to the demonstrations he gives for them. They even imagine that the opposite of those propositions could just as well be true, provided the ancient geometers had thought to maintain it.

So here is a threefold error that holds many people back in the knowledge of the truth, though you meet it more among scholars than among those just beginning to study the sciences. We have to be evenhanded toward the three kinds of proof that the three classes require. As long as they're sufficient, we're obliged to accept them.

"I saw it" or "I felt it" is the proof of the first class. "I can demonstrate it" is the proof of the second class, of which we also say that we know things. And finally, "I have it on the testimony of trustworthy people," or "I believe it for solid reasons," is the proof of the third class.

Letter 117: On the Testimony of the Senses

_7 April 1761_.

The first class of our knowledge includes what we acquire directly through our senses. Now, I've already remarked that our senses don't only give our soul certain representations of the changes made in one part of our brain. They also stir up in our soul a conviction that there really are things outside us that correspond to the ideas the senses present to us.

People commonly compare our soul to a man shut up in a dark room, where the images of outside objects are cast on the wall by means of a glass made for the purpose. The comparison is fair enough as far as the man looking at the images on the wall goes, and that act is quite like what our soul does when it looks at the impressions made in the brain. But the same comparison seems to me very faulty when it comes to the conviction that such objects really exist and cause these images.

The man in the room will certainly suspect that those objects exist. If he has no doubt of it, that's because he has been outside and seen them, and because, knowing how his glass works, he knows that nothing can appear on the wall except images of objects that are actually outside the room in front of the glass. But the soul isn't in that position. It has never left its seat to look at the objects themselves, and it knows even less about how the sense organs are built, or about the nerves that lead to the brain. Yet it is far more strongly convinced that the objects really exist than our man in the room could ever be. I'm not afraid of any objection on this point. The thing is too clear in itself, even though we don't know its true foundation. Nobody has ever doubted it, except a few visionaries who lost themselves in their daydreams. Even when they said they doubted things outside themselves, they didn't really doubt them. Why would they have said so, if they hadn't believed that other people exist, people to whom they wanted to communicate their strange opinion?

This conviction that the things whose images our senses show us really exist is found not only in all people of every age and condition, but in all animals too. The dog that barks at me doesn't doubt that I exist, though its soul perceives only a faint image of my body. From this I conclude that this conviction is essentially bound up with our sensations, and that the truths our senses reveal to us are as well founded as the most certain truths of geometry.

Without this conviction, no human society could last, and every one of us would fall into the greatest absurdities and the greatest contradictions.

If the peasants took it into their heads to doubt the existence of their bailiff, or the soldiers the existence of their officers, what confusion we'd be plunged into! Absurdities like these occur only among philosophers, and anyone else who indulged in them would have to have lost his good sense. So let's acknowledge that this conviction is one of the principal laws of nature, and that we're deeply convinced of it even though we're entirely ignorant of the true reasons for it, and very far from being able to explain them in an intelligible way.

Important as this reflection is, it isn't free of every difficulty. But however great these difficulties are, and even if we couldn't resolve them, they do not in the least weaken the truth I've just established, which we should regard as the most solid foundation of our knowledge.

We must admit that our senses are sometimes wrong. And from this, those subtle philosophers who boast of doubting everything draw the conclusion that we can't trust our senses. More than once, meeting an unknown man in the street, I've taken him for someone I knew. So, they say, since I was mistaken then, nothing prevents me from always being mistaken, and consequently I can never be sure that the person I'm speaking to is really the one I imagine.

If I came to Magdeburg and had the honor of being brought to Your Highness's feet, I would always have to fear that I was making a very gross mistake. Perhaps I wouldn't even be in Magdeburg, since there are examples of people who have sometimes taken one town for another. Perhaps I have never even had the happiness of seeing Your Highness, and was always mistaken whenever I thought I was that fortunate.

These are the natural consequences of these philosophers' opinion, and Your Highness easily understands that they lead not only to the greatest absurdities but would also overturn all the bonds of society. Yet it is from this source that the freethinkers draw their objections against religion, most of which come down to this fine piece of reasoning: there are examples of someone being mistaken and taking one man for another; therefore the apostles too were mistaken when they say they saw Jesus Christ after his resurrection. On any other occasion people would laugh at such false wit, but when it's a question of religion, these objections find only too many admirers.

Letter 118: Another Objection of the Pyrrhonists, and the Answer

_11 April 1761_.

The objection I just spoke of, against the certainty of truths perceived by the senses, seems strong enough. Yet people try to support it further with the common maxim that we shouldn't trust someone who has deceived us once. So, they say, a single example of the senses deceiving us is enough to refuse them all belief. But if this objection were sound, Your Highness would have to agree that the whole of human society would be overturned from top to bottom.

To answer it, I note that the other two sources of our knowledge are subject to difficulties that are either similar or even greater. How many times are we mistaken in our reasoning? I venture to say that we're deceived far more often in reasoning than by the senses. But does it follow that reasoning always deceives us, and that we can't be sure of any truth the understanding shows us? By that argument it would have to be doubtful whether twice two is four, or whether the three angles of a triangle equal two right angles. It would even be ridiculous to try to pass that off as a truth. So although people have often reasoned badly, that doesn't stop there being a great many intellectual truths of which we're perfectly convinced.

The same holds for the third source of our knowledge, which is without doubt the most prone to error. How many times have we been deceived by a false rumor, or by a false report of some event? And who would want to believe everything the gazette writers or the historians have written? Yet whoever maintained that everything others tell or relate to us is false would surely fall into greater absurdities than someone who believed everything. So in spite of all the false reports and false testimonies, we're still sure of the truth of a great many facts that we know only from the report of others.

There are certain marks by which we're able to recognize the truth, and each of our three sources has marks of its own. When my sight deceived me, and I took one man for another, I soon recognized my mistake. From this it's clear that there really are means of preventing error. For if there were none, it would be impossible ever to notice that we had been mistaken. So even those who maintain that we're mistaken so many times are obliged to grant that it's impossible to notice we've been mistaken, or else they have to admit that they're mistaken themselves in reproaching us for our errors.

It's remarkable that the truth is so firmly established that even the strongest itch to doubt everything has to come back to it in spite of itself. So, just as logic lays down the rules of sound reasoning that protect us from error in intellectual truths, there are also equally certain rules for the first source, that of our senses, and for the third, that of trust in others.

The rules of the first source are so natural to us that all people, even the most stupid, understand and practice them better than the most learned could ever describe them. It may be easy to dazzle a peasant now and then. But when hail destroys his fields, or lightning strikes his barns, the cleverest philosopher will never persuade him that it's only an illusion. Every sensible person has to admit that the peasant is right, and that he isn't always the dupe of a trick of his senses. The philosopher may perhaps confound him so thoroughly that the peasant can no longer answer him, but deep down he'll laugh at all his arguments. The argument that the senses sometimes deceive us will make only the faintest impression on his mind. And when he's told, with the greatest eloquence, that everything the senses show us is no more real than what we dream in our sleep, all of this will just make the peasant laugh.

But suppose the peasant in his turn wanted to be a philosopher, and maintained that the bailiff was only a phantom, and that those who took him for something real and obeyed him were fools. That sublime philosophy would soon be destroyed, and the head of the sect would feel only too well the force of the proofs the bailiff would give him of the reality of his existence.

From this Your Highness will be well convinced that, where the senses are concerned, there are certain marks that leave us not the slightest doubt about the reality and truth of what we know through them. These same marks are so well known to us and so deeply stamped on our souls that we're never mistaken when we take the necessary precautions. Now, it's very hard to make an exact count of all these marks, and to explain their nature. People usually say that the sense organs must be in a good natural state, that the air must not be clouded by fog, and finally that we must bring a sufficient degree of attention, and above all try to examine the same object with two or more of our senses at once. But I believe that everyone actually follows rules more solid than any that could be given to him.

Letter 119: On Certainty

_14 April 1761_.

So there are three sources from which we draw all the knowledge that we should regard as equally certain, provided we take the necessary precautions to guard against error. From these come three kinds of certainty.

The certainty of the first source is called physical certainty. When I'm convinced of the truth of something because I've seen it myself, I have physical certainty of it. When someone asks me the reason, I answer that my own senses assure me of it, and that I am, or was, a witness myself. This is how I know that the Austrians have been in Berlin, and that many of them committed a great many outrages there. I also know that fire destroys all combustible materials, because I've seen it myself, and I have physical certainty of it.

The certainty of the knowledge we acquire by reasoning is called logical or demonstrative certainty, because we're convinced of its truth by a demonstration. The truths of geometry can serve here as examples, and it's a logical certainty that assures us of them.

Finally, the certainty we have of the truth of things we know only from the report of others is called moral certainty, because it rests on the trust that those who tell us deserve. This is how Your Highness has only a moral certainty that the Russians have been in Berlin, and the same is true of all the facts that history teaches us. We know, with a moral certainty, that there once was a Julius Caesar in Rome, an Augustus, a Nero, and so on. The testimonies are so authentic that we're as well convinced of these things as of the truths that our own senses or our own reasoning make known to us.

Still, we mustn't confuse these three kinds of certainty, the physical, the logical, and the moral, each of which is of an entirely different nature. I plan to talk with Your Highness about each of these three kinds separately, and I'll begin by dwelling longer on moral certainty, which is the third.

We should notice that this third source divides into two branches. In one, others simply tell us what they have seen themselves, or experienced themselves through their senses. In the other, they share with us their reflections or their reasoning. We could even add a third branch, when others report to us what they in turn learned from still others.

As for this last branch, everyone recognizes that it's very prone to error, and that a witness should be believed only about what he has seen or experienced himself. So in the courts of justice, when witnesses are examined, the judges take great care to distinguish, in their statements, what they saw or experienced themselves from the reflections or reasonings they usually add to it. They hold only to what the witnesses saw or experienced themselves, and they completely set aside their own reflections, and the conclusions they draw from them, however well founded those might otherwise be. The same rule is applied to historians. We want them to tell us only what they witnessed themselves, and we don't much care about the reflections they add, though these are a great ornament to a history. In the same way, we rely more on the truth of what others have experienced through their own senses than on what they've discovered by their meditations. Everyone wants to be the master of his own judgment, and unless he sees the foundation and the demonstration for himself, he isn't persuaded.

Euclid could have announced the most beautiful truths of geometry to us, and we would never have believed them on his word. We want to examine the demonstrations to the bottom ourselves. If I told Your Highness that I had seen such and such a thing, supposing my report faithful, she wouldn't hesitate to believe it. I'd even be hurt if she suspected me of falsehood. But when I had the honor of telling Your Highness that in a right triangle the squares drawn on the two short sides are equal to the square on the long side, I didn't at all want her to believe me on my word, though I was as convinced of it as anyone can be, and could have cited the authority of the greatest minds, all of whom were equally convinced of it. I even intended her to distrust my assertion and refuse to believe it, until she herself had understood the soundness of the reasoning on which the demonstration rests.

However, it doesn't follow that physical certainty, the certainty our senses give us, is greater than the logical certainty founded on reasoning. But as soon as a truth of that kind comes up, it's good for the mind to work on it and go deeply into the demonstration. That is the best way to cultivate the sciences and bring them to the highest degree of perfection.

The truths of the senses and of history greatly multiply our knowledge, but the faculties of the mind are set to work only by reflection and reasoning.

We never stop at what the senses or the reports of others announce to us. We always mix in our own reflections. Without noticing, we fill in the gaps by adding causes and motives and drawing conclusions. That is why in the courts of justice it's extremely difficult to get pure, clean testimony that contains only what the witnesses actually saw or felt, since they always mix in their own reflections without being aware of it themselves.

Letter 120: On Induction

_18 April 1761_.

The knowledge our senses give us is without doubt the first we acquire, and on it our soul then builds the thoughts and reflections that reveal to it a great many other intellectual truths. To understand better how the senses help to increase our knowledge, I note first that the senses act only on individual things that exist at this moment under definite circumstances, limited on every side.

Imagine a man suddenly set down in this world with no experience at all. Put a stone in his hand, then let him open his hand and see the stone fall to the ground. That is an experience limited on every side, and it teaches him nothing except that this stone, being in his left hand, say, and let go, falls down. He has absolutely no way of knowing whether the same thing would happen if he took another stone, or the same one with his right hand. He's also still uncertain whether this same stone, under the same circumstances, would fall a second time, or whether it would have fallen if he'd picked it up an hour before. This one experience, at least, gives him no light on any of this.

The same man then takes another stone, and sees that it falls too when he lets go of it, whether from the left hand or the right. He makes the same trial with a third and a fourth, and always sees the same effect. From this he concludes that all stones have this property: when they're let go, or left without support, they fall down.

This is knowledge our man draws from the experiment he made. He's a long way from having tried every stone. And even if he had, what certainty does he have that the same thing would happen at all times? He knows nothing except for the moments when he did each experiment. And who assures him that the same effect would work for other men? Couldn't he think that this power of making stones fall belongs only to his own hands? A thousand other doubts could be raised on this point.

I, for example, have never tested the stones the cathedral of Magdeburg is built of, and yet I don't doubt that they're all heavy without exception, and that each one would fall as soon as it was detached. I even imagine that experience gave me this knowledge, though I've never made any experiment on those stones.

This example is enough to show Your Highness how experiments, though they deal only with individual objects, have led people to very universal knowledge. But we must admit that the understanding and the other faculties of the soul enter into it in a way that is very hard to work out properly. And if we wanted to be too scrupulous about every circumstance, we'd make no progress at all in our knowledge, and we'd be held up at every step.

In this respect, we have to admit that ordinary people have much more good sense than those scrupulous philosophers who obstinately doubt everything. Still, we must also take care not to fall into the opposite extreme, and neglect the necessary precautions.

All three sources from which we draw our knowledge each require certain precautions, which must be carefully observed to be sure of the truth. But in each of them the thing can be pushed too far, and we must always keep to a certain middle. The third source shows this only too plainly. It would surely be the greatest folly to believe everything others tell us, but on the other hand, too much distrust would be no less blameworthy. Whoever wants to doubt everything will never lack a pretext. When a man says or writes that he saw such and such an action, at once someone can say that it isn't true, and that the man enjoys surprising us. Then, even if his honesty were beyond any doubt, someone could say that he didn't see well, that he was dazzled. And you'll always find examples where someone was mistaken and wrongly imagined that he saw something. The rules laid down on this matter lose all their weight when you're dealing with a quibbler.

Ordinarily, to be sure of the truth of an account or a history, we require that the author was himself a witness, and that he had no interest in telling the thing otherwise than it happened. Next, if two or more people report the same thing with the same circumstances, that is always a great argument for its truth. Sometimes, though, too perfect an agreement down to the smallest trifles becomes suspect. For two people looking at the same event look at it from different points of view, and one will always notice some small circumstances that escaped the attention of the other. So a small difference between two accounts of the same event proves its truth rather than weakening it.

But it's always extremely difficult to reason about the first principles of our knowledge, and to try to explain the machinery and springs that our soul puts to work. It would be very fine if we could succeed at it, and it would shed light on many important matters concerning the nature of our soul and its operations. But it seems that we're meant rather to use our faculties than to probe all their workings to the bottom.
