Letters 121–125

Letter 121: On Whether We Know the Essence of Bodies

_21 April 1761_.

After so many reflections on the nature and faculties of our soul, Your Highness may be glad to return to bodies, whose main properties I've already had the honor of laying out for her.

I've remarked that the nature of bodies necessarily includes three things: extension, impenetrability and inertia. A being that lacks any one of these three cannot be admitted to the class of bodies. And conversely, once all three qualities are united in one being, nobody will hesitate to recognize it as a body.

So we are right to place the essence of a body in these three things, even though many philosophers claim that the essence of bodies is entirely unknown to us. That is not only the view of the skeptics and Pyrrhonists, who doubt everything. Other schools also maintain that the essence of all things is absolutely unknown to us, and in a certain respect they are not wrong. It is only too true of all the individual beings that actually exist.

Your Highness will readily see that it would be the greatest absurdity for me to claim that I know the essence even of the pen I'm using at this moment to write this letter. Suppose I knew the essence of this pen precisely. I don't mean pens in general, but only the one I'm holding between my fingers, which is what metaphysics calls an individual being, distinguished from every other pen in the world. If I knew the essence of this individual pen, I would be able to tell it apart from all the others, and it would be impossible to change it without my noticing at once. I would have to know thoroughly the nature, the number and the arrangement of all the parts it is made of. But how far I am from having such knowledge! While I get up for a moment, my children could easily swap this pen for another and put it in its place without my noticing. And even if I had noticed something, couldn't they imitate it with a different pen? And if that were impossible for my children, we would still have to agree that God could make another pen so like this one that I could never recognize the difference. It would nevertheless be a different pen, really distinct from mine, and God would undoubtedly know the difference. That is to say, God knows perfectly the essence of each of these two pens. But I can't find any difference between them, so it is certain that the essence of this individual pen is entirely unknown to me.

It is the same with all other individual things, and we can boldly maintain that only God knows the essence or nature of each one. Your Highness cannot name any really existing thing that we know so perfectly that it would be impossible ever to be mistaken about it. It is, so to speak, the stamp with which the Creator has marked all created things, and its nature will always remain a mystery to us.

So it is quite certain that we do not know the essence of individual things, that is, all the characteristics that distinguish each one from every other. But it is different with species and genera, which are general notions that embrace an infinity of individual things at once. They are not beings that actually exist. They are only notions that we form ourselves in our minds, by placing many individual things in the same class, which we call a species or a genus depending on whether the number of individual things included in it is smaller or larger.

To stay with the example of the pen: there is an infinity of things to each of which I give the same name of pen, although they all differ from one another. So the notion of a pen is a general idea that we ourselves create, and it exists only in our minds. This notion contains only the common characteristics that make up the essence of the general notion of a pen. That essence must be well known to us, since we are able to tell all the things we call pens apart from all the things we don't include under that name.

As soon as we notice certain characteristics or qualities in a thing, we say it is a pen, and we can distinguish it from all the things that are not pens, even though we are far from being able to distinguish it from all the other pens.

The more general a notion is, the fewer characteristics make up its essence, and so the easier it is to recognize that essence. We understand more easily what a tree is in general than what a cherry tree, a pear tree or an apple tree is, when those are species. When I say, "That thing I see in a garden is a tree," I'm not mistaken. But I could easily be mistaken if I said it was a cherry tree. So I must know the essence of a tree in general better than the essence of its species. I won't so easily confuse a tree with a stone as I would a cherry tree with a plum tree.

Now, a notion in the fullest generality reaches infinitely further still, and so its essence includes only the characteristics common to all the beings we call bodies. It shrinks to very little, since every characteristic that distinguishes one body from others has to be left out of it.

So it is quite ridiculous to claim, as some philosophers do, that the essence of bodies in general is unknown to us. If it were, we could never say with assurance that a certain thing is a body or is not one. And since we cannot be mistaken in that, we must know well enough the nature or essence of bodies in general. And this knowledge comes down to extension, impenetrability and inertia.

Letter 122: On the True Notion of Extension

_25 April 1761_.

I have already had the honor of proving to Your Highness that the general notion of a body necessarily includes these three qualities, extension, impenetrability and inertia, and that without them no being can be placed in the class of bodies. Even the most scrupulous people can't deny that these three qualities are necessary to make a body. But they doubt whether these three characteristics are enough. Perhaps, they say, there are still several other characteristics that are equally necessary to the essence of a body.

But I ask them this. If God created a being stripped of those other, unknown characteristics, one that had only the three I've listed, would they hesitate to call that being a body? No, surely not. For if they had the slightest doubt about it, they couldn't say with assurance that the stones we meet in the street are bodies, since they would be unsure whether the supposed unknown characteristics are found in those stones or not.

Some people imagine that weight is also an essential property of all bodies, since all the bodies we know are heavy. But if God took weight away from them, would they stop being bodies? Then let them consider the heavenly bodies, which don't fall downward as they would if they were heavy like the bodies we touch, and yet they have no doubt about calling them bodies. And even if all bodies were heavy, it would not follow that weight is an essential property of bodies, since a body would remain a body even if its weight were destroyed by a miracle.

But this same reasoning does not apply to the three essential properties I've just put forward. If God annihilated the extension of a body, it would certainly no longer be a body. A body stripped of impenetrability would no longer be called a body; it would be a specter, a phantom. And the same holds for inertia.

Your Highness knows that extension is the proper object of geometry, where bodies are considered only insofar as they are extended, setting aside impenetrability and inertia. So the object of geometry is a much more general notion than that of bodies, since it includes not only bodies but also any beings that are merely extended, without impenetrability, if there are any. From this it follows that all the properties deduced in geometry from the notion of extension must also hold in bodies, insofar as they are extended. For whatever fits a more general notion, that of a tree for example, must also fit the notion of a cherry tree, a pear tree, an apple tree, and so on. This principle is in fact the foundation of all our reasoning, by which we always affirm and deny of species and individual things whatever we affirm and deny of the genus.

Yet there are philosophers, and most of today's, in fact, who loudly deny that the properties that belong to extension in general, that is, as it is considered in geometry, hold in really existing bodies. They say that the extension of geometry is an abstract being, and that nothing can be concluded from its properties about real things. So when I have shown that the three angles of a triangle together equal two right angles, that is a property that fits only an abstract triangle, and not a real triangle at all.

But these philosophers don't notice the troublesome consequences that flow naturally from the difference they set between objects formed by abstraction and real objects. If it were not permitted to conclude from the first to the second, no conclusion and no reasoning could stand any longer, since we always conclude from general notions to particular ones.

Now, all general notions are abstract beings just as much as geometrical extension is. A tree in general, or the general notion of trees, is formed only by abstraction, and exists no more outside our minds than geometrical extension does. The notion of man in general exists nowhere. All the men who exist are individual beings and answer to individual notions. The general idea that includes them all is formed only by abstraction.

The reproach these philosophers keep making against geometers, that they occupy themselves only with abstract things, is therefore quite misplaced, since all the other sciences deal chiefly with general notions, which are no more real than the object of geometry. The patient in general, whom the physician has in view, and whose idea includes all the patients who really exist, is only an abstract idea. And in fact, the merit of each science is greater the more general, that is, the more abstract, the notions it reaches.

By the next post I will have the honor of showing Your Highness what these reproaches of the philosophers against the geometers come to, and why they won't allow the properties that fit extension in general, or abstract extension, to be attributed to real extended beings, that is, to existing bodies. They fear that their principles of metaphysics would suffer for it.

Letter 123: On the Infinite Divisibility of Extension

_28 April 1761_.

The controversy between the modern philosophers and the geometers, which I've had the honor of mentioning to Your Highness, turns on the divisibility of bodies. This property is doubtless founded on extension, and it is only insofar as bodies are extended that they are divisible and can be divided into parts.

Your Highness will remember that in geometry a line can always be split into two equal parts, however small it is. Geometry also teaches how to divide a small line, such as ai, into as many equal parts as we like, and the construction for this division is demonstrated so that its correctness can't be doubted.

[Figure platec: Plate I of the second volume, Figures 1 to 27: infinite divisibility, electricity, the globe and its circles, longitude, and the compass.]

We only have to draw a line AI parallel to the line ai (Figure 1), as long as we like and at whatever distance we like, and mark off on it as many equal parts AB, BC, CD, DE, etc. as the number of equal parts the given small line is to be divided into, for example eight. Then through the ends A, a, and I, i we draw the straight lines AaO and IiO until they meet at O. From this point O we draw straight lines OB, OC, OD, OE, etc. to all the division points B, C, D, E, etc., and these will cut the small line ai, too, into eight equal parts.

This operation works however small the given line ai is, and however large the number of parts may be. It is quite true that in practice we can't go too far. The lines we draw always have some width, which makes them run together, as Your Highness can see in the figure near the point O. But the question here is what is possible in itself, not what we are able to carry out. And in geometry, lines have no width and so never run together. From this it follows that such a division is limited by no boundary.

Once Your Highness grants me that a line can be divided into a thousand parts, then by splitting each part in two she will also grant that it can be divided into two thousand parts, and for the same reason into four thousand, and then eight thousand, without ever arriving at parts so small that they can't be divided further. However small a line we imagine, it can be divided into two halves, then each half again into two, and each of those again into two, and so on to infinity.

What I have just said about a line applies easily to a surface, and even more strongly to a solid with all three dimensions of length, width and depth. That is why we say that all extension is infinitely divisible, and this property is called infinite divisibility.

Anyone who wanted to deny this property of extension would have to maintain that we would finally arrive at parts so small that they could not be divided any further, and this because they would no longer have any extension. Yet all these particles taken together must reproduce the whole whose division led us to them. So, since the quantity of each one would be nothing, or zero, several zeros taken together would produce some quantity, which is plainly absurd. For Your Highness knows well from arithmetic that two or more zeros put together never give anything.

So this view is absolutely untenable: that in dividing an extent, or any quantity at all, we would finally come to particles so small that they could no longer be divided because of their smallness, where there would be no more quantity.

To make the absurdity more obvious, suppose that a line one inch long has been divided into a thousand parts, and that these parts are so small that they allow no further division. Then each part would have no size at all, for if it still had some size, it would still be divisible. Each particle would therefore be nothing, a real nothing. But if all these thousand particles together made up the length of an inch, then the thousandth part of an inch would be nothing. That is as absurd as maintaining that half of a quantity is nothing. And if it is absurd that half of a quantity is nothing, it is equally absurd that half of a half, or a quarter of the quantity itself, is nothing. What is granted to me for the quarter must also be granted for the thousandth part, and for the millionth part. In short, however far we have already pushed the division of an inch in imagination, it is always possible to push it further, and we will never get so far that the last parts are absolutely indivisible. These parts will certainly become smaller and smaller, and their size will come closer and closer to zero, but they will never reach it.

So geometry is right to say that every magnitude is infinitely divisible, and that in such a division we can never get so far that a further division is impossible in itself. But here we must always distinguish carefully between what is possible in itself and what we are actually able to do. Our practice has many limits. After dividing an inch, for example, into a thousand parts, those parts are so small that they escape our sight, and a further division would certainly be impossible for us.

But we only have to look at this thousandth part of an inch through a microscope that magnifies, say, a thousand times, and each particle will look as big to us as an inch does to the naked eye. From this we are convinced that it is possible to split each of these particles again into a thousand parts, and the same reasoning can be pushed further and further without ever being stopped.

So it is an indubitable truth that every magnitude is infinitely divisible. It holds not only for extension, which is the object of geometry, but also for all the other kinds of quantity, such as time and number.

Letter 124: On Whether Infinite Divisibility Holds in Actual Bodies

_2 May 1761_.

So it is a well-established truth that extension is infinitely divisible, and that it is impossible to conceive of parts so small that they can't be divided further. The philosophers, too, don't dispute this truth, but they deny that it holds in bodies that actually exist. They say that the extension whose infinite divisibility has been demonstrated is only a chimerical object formed by abstraction, and that a mere extension, as geometry considers it, cannot exist in the world.

In this respect they are quite right, and extension is indeed a general idea formed by abstraction, like the idea of man, or of a tree in general, which is formed only by abstraction. And just as man or tree in general do not exist, extension in general does not exist either. Your Highness understands that only individual beings exist, and that general notions are found only in our minds. But we can't say on that account that these general notions are chimerical. They contain, rather, the foundation of all our knowledge.

Whatever fits a general notion, and all the properties attached to it, must necessarily hold also in all the individuals included in that general notion. When we say that the general notion of man includes an understanding and a will, we certainly mean that each individual man is endowed with those faculties. And how many properties do these same philosophers boast of demonstrating that belong to substance in general, which is surely as abstract an idea as extension! Yet they maintain that all these properties fit all individual substances, every one of which is extended. Indeed, if such a substance did not have these properties, it would be false that they fit substance in general.

So if bodies, which are certainly extended beings, or beings endowed with extension, were not infinitely divisible, it would also be false that infinite divisibility is a property of extension. But these philosophers admit that this property fits extension, while claiming that it can't hold in extended beings. It is as if I wanted to say that understanding and will are indeed attributes of the notion of man in general, but that they can't hold in the individual men who exist.

From this Your Highness will easily draw the conclusion. If infinite divisibility is a property of extension in general, it must necessarily fit all individual extended beings as well. Or else, if actual extended beings are not infinitely divisible, it is false that infinite divisibility is a property of extension in general.

We can't deny either of these consequences without overturning the most solid principles of all our knowledge. The philosophers who don't admit infinite divisibility in real extended beings ought not to admit it in extension in general either. But since they grant the latter, they fall into an open contradiction.

Your Highness need not be surprised by this. It is a fault from which the greatest men are not exempt. But what is very surprising is that these philosophers, trying to get out of this predicament, take it into their heads to deny that bodies are extended. They say that only the appearance of an extension is found in bodies, and that extension doesn't belong to them at all.

Your Highness will readily see that this is a wretched quibble, by which they deny the principal and most evident property of all bodies. It is an extravagance just like the one for which the Epicurean philosophers were once reproached. They maintained that everything that exists in the world is material, not even excepting the gods, whose existence they admitted. But since they understood that such bodily gods would be exposed to the greatest difficulties, they invented an escape like that of the philosophers of our day, saying that the gods did not have bodies but quasi-bodies, and did not have senses but quasi-senses, and so on for all their members. The other schools of philosophers in antiquity made fun of these quasi-bodies and quasi-senses. And they would make fun today, with just as much reason, of the quasi-extension that our philosophers attribute to bodies. That name, quasi-extension, seems to express perfectly this appearance of extension that is not a true extension.

To confound them, the geometers would only have to say that the objects whose infinite divisibility they proved were also of a quasi-extension, and so that all beings endowed with a quasi-extension were necessarily infinitely divisible. But there is nothing to be gained with these people. They are more ready to maintain the greatest absurdities than to admit a fault. Your Highness will notice that this is the character of most learned men.

Letter 125: On the Famous Dispute About Monads

_5 May 1761_.

When people talk about philosophical matters in company, the conversation usually turns to topics that have caused great disputes among philosophers.

The divisibility of bodies is one such topic, and the views of the learned are sharply divided on it. Some maintain that this divisibility goes on to infinity, without our ever arriving at particles so small that they could not be divided further. But others claim that the division goes only to a certain point, and that we finally arrive at particles so small that, having no size at all, they can't be divided any more. They call these last particles, which enter into the composition of all bodies, simple beings and monads.

There was a time when the dispute over monads was so lively and so widespread that people talked about it with great heat in every company, even in the guardrooms. At court there were hardly any ladies who had not declared themselves for or against the monads. In short, the talk everywhere fell on monads, and people spoke of nothing else.

The Royal Academy of Berlin took a large part in these disputes. It has the custom of proposing a question every year and awarding a prize, a gold medal worth fifty ducats, to whoever best discusses the proposed question in the Academy's judgment. For the year 1747 it chose the question of the monads. A great number of entries were received on the subject, and the late President de Maupertuis appointed a commission to examine them. He placed its direction in the hands of the late Count Dohna, Grand Master of the Household to Her Majesty the Queen, who, being an impartial judge, examined with all imaginable care the proofs offered both for and against the existence of monads. In the end it was found that the proofs meant to establish their existence were so weak and so chimerical that all the principles of our knowledge would be overturned by them. So the Academy decided in favor of the opposite view, and the prize was awarded to the entry of Monsieur von Justi, who had done the best job of opposing the monads.

Your Highness will easily understand that this step by the Academy terribly angered the partisans of the monads, at whose head stood the great and famous Monsieur Wolff, who claimed to be no less infallible in his decisions than the pope. His followers, who were then far more numerous and formidable than they are today, cried out loudly against the injustice and partiality of the Academy. And it was a near thing that their chief did not hurl the thunderbolt of philosophical anathema against the whole Academy. I no longer remember to whom we owe the fact that it escaped.

Since this matter made a great deal of noise, Your Highness will surely not mind if I dwell on it a little. The whole dispute comes down to this question: are bodies infinitely divisible or not? Or, is there a limit to the divisibility of bodies or not? On that, I have already remarked that both sides agree that the extension considered in geometry is infinitely divisible. However small a magnitude is, we can still conceive of its half, and of that half its half again, and so on without end.

This notion of extension is indeed an abstract notion, like the notions of all genera, such as man, horse, tree and so on, insofar as these notions are not applied to an individual, determinate being. Next, it is the surest principle of all our knowledge that whatever fits the genus also fits all the individuals included under that genus. So if all bodies are extended, all the properties that fit extension must also fit each body in particular. Now, all bodies are extended, and extension is infinitely divisible; therefore every body will be too. That is a syllogism in the best form. And since the first proposition can't be doubted, the only thing left to settle is whether the second is true or not; that is, whether it is true or not that bodies are extended.

The partisans of the monads, to maintain their view, are obliged to say that bodies are not extended, and that they have only an apparent extension, or a quasi-extension. By this they think they have sufficiently demolished the argument given for infinite divisibility. But if bodies are not extended, I would like to know where we got our idea of extension. For if bodies are not extended, nothing in the world is extended, since spirits are even less so. Our idea of extension would then be entirely imaginary and chimerical.

In that case geometry would be an entirely useless and illusory speculation, and it could never be applied to anything that really exists in the world. For if nothing is extended, what is the use of studying the properties of extension in depth? But since geometry is beyond question one of the most useful sciences, its object can't be a pure chimera.

So we will have to grant that the object of geometry is at least the same apparent extension that these philosophers admit in bodies. Now, this same object is infinitely divisible; therefore the existing beings endowed with this apparent extension will necessarily be so too.

In short, however these philosophers twist and turn to defend their monads, those last and smallest particles with no size at all, of which, according to them, all bodies are composed, they always plunge into the greatest difficulties, from which they can never extricate themselves. They do say that only coarse minds can't appreciate their sublime doctrine. But one notices all the same that the dullest wits are the ones who succeed with it best.
