Letters 133–136

Letter 133: Clarifications on the Nature of Colors

_2 June 1761_.

I can't deny that the thoughts on colors I once had the honor of presenting to Your Highness are still far from the degree of clarity I would have liked to give them. This subject has always been a stumbling block for philosophers, and I can't flatter myself that I will remove all its difficulties. Still, I hope the clarifications I'm about to lay out will make a good part of them vanish.

The ancient philosophers counted colors among those qualities of bodies of which we know only the names. When they were asked why a certain body was, say, red, they answered that it was because of a quality that made the body look red. Your Highness will easily see that this gets us nowhere, and that it would have been just as well to admit frankly that they didn't know the answer.

Descartes, who was the first to have the courage to probe the mysteries of nature deeply, attributed colors to a certain mixture of light and shadow. But shadow is nothing other than a lack of light, since shadow is always found where light cannot get in. So it's clear that light mixed with a lack of light could never produce the different colors we observe in bodies.

We know that we see nothing except by means of rays that enter our eyes. So the rays that stir up in our eyes the sensation of red must be of a different nature from those that stir up the sensation of the other colors. From this it's easy to see that each color is tied to a certain quality of the rays that strike our sense of sight. A body looks red to us, for example, when the rays thrown off from it are of such a nature that they excite in our eyes the sensation of red.

So everything comes down to digging into this difference between rays, the difference that makes some of them excite the sensation of red and others the sensation of the other colors. There must be a great difference among rays if they are to produce such different sensations in our eyes. But what could this difference consist of? That is the great question to which our whole inquiry is reduced.

The first difference that presents itself among rays is that some are stronger than others. There is no doubt that the rays of the sun, or of any other very bright or brightly lit body, are much stronger than those that come from a body that is dimly lit or gives only a very faint light. Our eyes are surely struck by them very differently.

From this one might suspect that the different colors result from the strength of the rays, so that the strongest rays would produce red, for example, the less strong would produce yellow, and after that green and blue.

But nothing is easier than to overturn this view, since we know from experience that the same body always looks the same color, whether it is lit more or less, and whether its rays are strong or weak. A red body, for example, looks just as red whether it's exposed to the full brilliance of the sun or sitting in a dark place where the rays are certainly very weak. So it isn't in the different degrees of strength of the rays that we should look for the cause of the different colors. The same color can be carried just as well by very strong rays as by very weak ones. The faintest glimmer shows us the difference between colors just as well as the greatest blaze of light.

So there absolutely must be some other difference among rays, one that marks their nature with respect to the various colors. Now, to discover this difference, Your Highness will no doubt agree that it's best to understand the nature and origin of rays, that is, what it is that can enter our eyes and excite the sensation of vision. This description or definition of a ray is surely the most accurate, since a ray is indeed nothing other than what enters the eye through the pupil, as I have just said, and excites the sensation there.

I have already had the honor of telling Your Highness that there are only two systems or theories for explaining the origin and nature of rays. One is Newton's, which holds that rays are actual emanations that come out of the sun and the other shining bodies. The other is the one I have tried to prove to Your Highness, and of which I am regarded as the author, though others before me had more or less the same ideas. Perhaps I have managed to bring it to a higher degree of clarity. So it will be good to show, in each of the two systems, what principle the difference between colors could rest on.

In the system of actual emanation, the rays are supposed to come out of shining bodies like a jet of water, darted out in every direction. The particles thrown off are supposed to differ either in size or in material, in the same way that a jet of water might throw off wine, oil, and other liquids. So the different colors would be caused by the different subtle matter thrown off from the luminous body. Thus one kind of subtle matter thrown off from a luminous body would be the color red, another kind of matter would be yellow, and so on for the other colors. This explanation would show the origin of the different colors quite clearly, if the system itself could stand. By the next post, I will have the honor of speaking about it more fully to Your Highness.

Letter 134: Reflections on the Analogy Between Colors and Sounds

_6 June 1761_.

Your Highness will surely remember the arguments I used to fight the system of the actual emanation of light. They seemed to me so strong that this system can no longer be admitted in natural philosophy. And I have convinced several great natural philosophers, who have embraced my view with the greatest satisfaction.

So the rays of light are not an actual emanation from the sun and other shining bodies, and they don't consist of a subtle matter thrown off from the sun and reaching us with that terrible speed at which Your Highness was right to be astonished. It would certainly be a terrible torrent if rays traveled from the sun to us in less than eight minutes, and the body of the sun, however great it is, would soon be used up by it.

According to my system, the rays of the sun that we feel here were never in the sun. They are only the particles of the ether that lie in our surroundings, which have been put into a vibrating agitation communicated to them by a similar agitation of the sun itself, without their changing place to any noticeable degree.

This spreading of light happens in a way similar to the way sound comes from sounding bodies. When Your Highness hears the noise of a bell, it isn't that the bell throws off particles that enter your ears. You only have to touch a bell when it has been struck to be sure that all its parts are shaken by a very noticeable trembling. This agitation is passed first to the nearest particles of the air, and then to the more distant ones, so that all the particles of the air in turn receive a similar trembling, which enters the ear and excites there the sensation of a sound. The strings of a musical instrument leave no doubt about this. You can see them tremble, or go back and forth, and you can even work out by calculation how many times each string trembles in a second. Since a similar agitation is passed to the particles of the air next to the organ of hearing, our ear is struck exactly that many times in a second. And it is the perception of this trembling that makes up the nature of the sound we hear. The greater the number of vibrations the string completes in a second, the higher and shriller the sound is, while less frequent vibrations produce low and deep sounds.

All these circumstances that go with the sensation of hearing are found in a completely analogous way in the sensation of sight. The only differences are the medium and the speed of the vibrations. In the case of sound, it is the air through which the vibrations of sounding bodies are carried. In the case of light, it is the ether, that medium incomparably subtler and more elastic than air, which is spread everywhere that air and coarse bodies leave gaps.

So every time this ether is put into a trembling or shaking and is carried into an eye, it excites there the sensation of vision, which is then nothing other than a similar shaking, with which the finest nerve fibers at the back of the eye are agitated.

Your Highness will easily understand that the sensation must differ according to whether this shaking is more or less frequent, that is, according to whether the number of vibrations that happen in a second is greater or smaller. The result must be a difference like the one that occurs in sounds when the vibrations produced in a second are more or less frequent. This difference is very noticeable to our ear, since the low and the high in sounds depend on it. Your Highness will remember that the note marked C on the harpsichord completes about 100 vibrations in a second, that the note D makes 112, the note E 125, the note F 133, the note G 150, the note A 166, the note H 187, and the note c 200. That is how the different nature of sounds depends on the number of vibrations completed each second.

So there is no doubt that the sense of sight is also affected differently according to whether the number of vibrations that excite the nerve fibers at the back of the eye is greater or smaller. When these fibers tremble 1,000 times in a second, the sensation must be quite different from what it would be if they trembled 1,200 or 1,500 times in the same time.

It is quite true that our organ of sight is not able to count such large numbers, any more than our ear could count the vibrations that make up sounds. But we can still distinguish very well the more from the less.

So it is in this difference that we must look for the cause of the different colors. And it is certain that each color answers to a certain number of vibrations with which the fibers of our eyes are struck in a second, although we are not yet able to determine the number that suits each color, as we are for sounds.

It took a great deal of research to arrive at the numbers that answer to all the notes of the harpsichord, even though people were already convinced that the difference between these notes is founded on the difference in those numbers. So we should be content to know that the diversity of colors is founded on the different numbers of vibrations found in the rays. Our knowledge is still quite advanced, because we know that such a beautiful resemblance reigns between the various notes of the harpsichord and the various colors.

In general, we see such an admirable analogy between the objects of our hearing and those of our sight that the circumstances of one serve to clarify those of the other. This analogy is also what supplies the most convincing proofs in support of my system. But I will have the honor of backing up my view on colors in particular with reasons that are more solid still, which will put it beyond all doubt.

Letter 135: Continuation of These Reflections

_June 1761_.

Nothing is better suited to clearing up the nature of vision than the beautiful analogy we find almost everywhere between it and hearing. What the various sounds in music are to hearing, the various colors are to sight. Colors differ from one another in a way similar to the way low and high sounds differ from one another. Now, we know that the low and the high in sounds depend on the number of vibrations that strike the organ of hearing in a certain time, and that the nature of each sound is determined by a certain number that marks the vibrations produced in a second. From this I conclude that each color is likewise bound to a certain number of vibrations that act on the organ of vision.

The only difference is that the vibrations that produce sounds live in the coarse air, while those of light and colors are carried by a medium incomparably subtler and more elastic than air. The same goes for the objects of the two senses. Those of hearing are all the bodies fit to give off sounds, that is, those capable of a vibrating or shaking motion, which, communicating itself to the air, then excites in our organ the sensation of a certain sound that matches the speed of the vibrations.

Musical instruments are like this. To stay mainly with the harpsichord, each string is assigned a certain note that it gives off when struck. So one string is named for the note C, another for the note D, and so on. A string is said to be C when its tension and construction are such that, when struck, it makes about 100 vibrations a second. If it made more or fewer vibrations in the same time, it would take the name of another note, higher or lower.

Your Highness will remember that the sound of a string depends on three things: first, its length; second, its thickness; third, the force with which it is stretched. The more it is stretched, the higher the sound becomes. So as long as a string keeps the same condition, it keeps the same sound, but as soon as it undergoes some change, its sound changes too.

Let's apply all this to bodies as objects of our sight. The smallest particles that make up the fabric of their surface can be regarded as stretched strings, in so far as they have a certain degree of elasticity and mass. So when they are properly struck, they receive a vibrating motion, of which they will complete a certain number in a second, and it is on this number that the color we attribute to the body depends.

So a body is red when the particles of its surface have such a tension that, when shaken, they make exactly as many vibrations in a second as are needed to excite in us the sensation of red. Another degree of tension, which would produce faster or slower vibrations, would excite the sensation of another color, and the body would then be yellow, or green, or blue, and so on.

We haven't yet reached the point of being able to assign to each color the number of vibrations that makes up its essence. We don't even know which colors call for greater or smaller speed in the motion of the vibrations. Put another way, it isn't yet settled which colors answer to low sounds and which to high. But it's enough to know that each color is attached to a certain number of vibrations, even though that number is unknown to us, and that all you have to do is change the tension or the elasticity of the smallest particles that cover the surface of a body to make it change color too.

This is how we see that the most beautiful colors of flowers soon change and fade away. The reason is plainly the lack of nourishing sap, which makes the smallest particles lose their vigor or tension. A similar cause can be observed in all the other changes of colors.

To put this in a clearer light, let's suppose that the sensation of red requires such a speed in the motion of the vibrations that 1,000 are completed in a second, that orange requires 1,125, yellow 1,250, green 1,333, blue 1,500, and violet 1,666. Although these numbers are no doubt false, that makes no difference to my purpose. Everything I say about these false numbers can be said in the same way about the true numbers, when they are perhaps known one day.

With that supposed, a body will be red when the smallest particles of its surface are in such a condition that, when set vibrating, they complete 1,000 of them a second. Another body will be orange when its particles are disposed to make 1,125 vibrations a second, and so on. From this we understand that there is an infinity of intermediate colors between the six principal colors I have just listed. And we also see that if a body were such that its particles, when shaken, would make 1,400 vibrations a second, that body would have a color halfway between green and blue, since green answers to the number 1,333 and blue to the number 1,500.

In this way our knowledge about colors is incomparably more perfect than that of ordinary people, and even of philosophers, the ones who boast of being the most clear-sighted having gone so far astray as to regard colors as pure illusions and to deny them any reality.

Letter 136: How Opaque Bodies Become Visible

_13 June 1761_.

Your Highness will find no difficulty in the idea of colored bodies that I have just set out. The smallest particles that cover the surfaces of all bodies always have a certain degree of elasticity, which makes them capable of a vibrating or agitated motion, just as a string is always capable of a certain sound. And it is the number of vibrations these particles can make in a second that determines the kind of color.

If the particles of the surface are too slack to receive such an agitation, the body will be black. Blackness is nothing other than a lack of light, and all the bodies from which no ray is passed into our eyes look black to us.

I come now to a very important question, about which Your Highness may well still have some doubts. What is the cause that actually shakes the particles I've mentioned, the ones in which the colors of bodies reside, so that they receive this vibrating motion that then gives off rays of the same color?

Indeed, everything comes down to discovering this cause that is able to produce an agitation. For as soon as those particles are put into a vibrating motion, the ether spread through the air at once receives a similar agitation from them. Carried on into our eyes, this agitation makes up what we call rays, and vision is excited by them.

First I notice that the particles of bodies are not set in motion by themselves. A foreign force is needed for that, just as a stretched string would always stay at rest if some force didn't strike it. This is also the situation of all bodies during the night or in darkness. Since we don't see them, that is a sure sign that they give off no rays and that their particles are at rest. That is, during the night or in darkness, bodies are in the same situation as the strings of an instrument that isn't being touched, or that makes no sound. Whereas as long as bodies are visible, they are to be compared with strings that are actually sounding.

Now, since bodies become visible as soon as they are lit, that is, as soon as the rays of the sun or of some other luminous body fall on them, the same cause that lights them must also excite their smallest particles to this vibrating motion, which is fit to generate rays and to excite the sensation of vision in our eyes. So it would be the rays of light, as they fall on a body, that make the smallest particles tremble and so make them visible.

This seems very surprising at first, given that when we hold our hands out in the strongest light, we don't feel the slightest impression from it. But we have to consider that our sense of touch is too coarse to feel these subtle and slight impressions, whereas the sense of sight, being incomparably more delicate, is struck by them very vividly. This gives us an undeniable proof that rays of light, when they fall on a body, have enough force to act on the smallest particles and make them tremble. And this is precisely the action I need in order to explain how bodies, when they are lit, are put in a state to produce rays of their own, by means of which they become visible to us. It's enough that bodies are lit, or exposed to another light, for their smallest particles to be agitated by it, and so put in a state to generate rays themselves that make them visible to us.

The beautiful harmony between hearing and sight carries this explanation to the highest degree of certainty. All you have to do is expose a harpsichord to a great noise, and you will see that not only are its strings set vibrating, but you will also hear the sound of each one almost exactly as if it had actually been plucked. The mechanism of this phenomenon is also easy to understand, as soon as you recognize that an agitated string is able to pass a similar vibrating motion to the air, which, carried to the ear, excites there the sensation of the sound this same string gives off.

Now, in the same way that a string excites such a motion in the air, it follows conversely that such a motion in the air is also able to act on the string and make it tremble. So since it's certain that a noise is able to set the strings of a harpsichord in motion and make them sound, the same thing must also happen with the objects of our sight.

Colored bodies are like the strings of a harpsichord, and the different colors are like the different notes, as far as low and high are concerned. The light that lights these bodies is like the noise to which the harpsichord is exposed. And as this noise acts on the strings, the light that lights a body will act in a similar way on the smallest particles on the surface of that body. Making them produce vibrations, it gives birth to rays, just as if those particles were luminous. Light is nothing other than the vibrating motion of the smallest particles of a body, communicated to the ether, which then carries it on into our eyes.

After this clarification, it seems to me that all the doubts Your Highness might still have had about my system of colors must vanish. At least I flatter myself that I have established the true principle of all the different colors, and also explained how these colors become visible to us by the light alone with which bodies are lit, unless your doubts turn on some other point that I haven't touched.
