Letters 137–141

Letter 137: On the Wonders of the Human Voice

_16 June 1761_.

When I had the honor of explaining the theory of sound to Your Highness, I considered only two kinds of difference. The first concerned the loudness of sounds. I had noticed that a sound is louder the more violent the vibrations it stirs up in the air. That is why the noise of a cannon or the sound of a bell is louder than the sound of a string or of a man speaking.

The other difference is entirely independent of this one, and it concerns how low or high a sound is, which is what we mean when we say some sounds are high and others low. As for this difference, I had noticed that it depends on the number of vibrations completed in a certain time, such as a second. The greater that number, the higher or shriller the sound, and the smaller it is, the lower or deeper the sound.

Your Highness understands that one and the same note can be loud or soft. We also see that the forte and the piano the musicians use change nothing in the nature of sounds. Among the good qualities of a harpsichord, we require that all the notes have about the same strength, and it is always a great fault when some of the strings are plucked harder than others. Now, high and low apply only to simple sounds, whose vibrations all follow one another regularly and at equal intervals, and only these sounds, which we call simple, are used in music. The chords used there are compound sounds, a mass of several sounds produced at once, among whose vibrations a certain order must reign, and that order is the foundation of harmony. But when no order can be found in the vibrations, the result is a confused noise, and we can't say which note of the harpsichord it agrees with. The noise of a cannon or a musket is an example.

But even among simple sounds there is one more very remarkable difference, which seems to have escaped the attention of the philosophers. Two sounds can be equally loud and agree with the same note of the harpsichord, and yet they can be very different to the ear. The sound of a flute is entirely different from that of a horn, though both match the same note of the harpsichord and are equally loud. So every sound carries something of the instrument that makes it, and we can hardly say what this quality consists of. The very same string, in fact, gives different sounds in this respect, depending on whether it is struck, touched, or plucked. And Your Highness can tell the sounds of horns, flutes, and other instruments apart very well.

The most admirable variety is found in the human voice, which offers us the most marvelous masterpiece of the Creator, not to mention the different articulations from which speech is formed. I ask only that Your Highness think about the various vowels that the mouth pronounces, or simply sings. When we pronounce or sing the letter a, the sound is entirely different from what we get when we pronounce or sing the letter e, or o, or i, or u, or ai, and so on, even though we stay on the same note. So the reason for this difference can't be sought in the speed or the order of the vibrations. It seems so hidden that the philosophers haven't yet been able to get to the bottom of it.

Your Highness will easily see that to pronounce these various vowels we have to give the cavity of the mouth a different shape each time, and our mouth is suited to this in a way that no animal's is. We see, too, that some birds that learn to imitate the human voice are never able to pronounce the different vowels distinctly. In this respect it is always a very imperfect imitation.

Many organs have a stop called the human voice. Usually it produces only sounds that give the vowel ai or œ. I don't doubt that with some changes one could also produce the sounds of the other vowels, a, e, i, o, u, ou. But all of that still wouldn't be enough to imitate a single word of the human voice. How could one add the consonants, which are so many modifications of the vowels? Our mouth is so admirably fitted together that, common as its use is, it is almost impossible for us to grasp its true mechanism.

We can observe three organs that produce the consonants: the lips, the tongue, and the palate. But the nose also contributes very essentially. If we close the nose, we can't pronounce the letters m and n. We then hear only b and d. A great proof of the marvelous structure of our mouth, which fits it for pronouncing words, is surely that human skill has not yet succeeded in imitating it with any machine. Singing has been imitated well enough, but without any articulation of the sounds or distinction between the various vowels.

It would surely be one of the most important discoveries to build a machine able to produce all the sounds of our speech, with all the articulations. Suppose someone someday succeeded in building such a machine, and could make it pronounce any words by means of certain keys, as on an organ or a harpsichord. Everyone would rightly be astonished to hear a machine pronounce whole speeches, or sermons, which could be accompanied with the best grace. Preachers and orators whose voices aren't pleasant enough could then play their sermons and speeches on such a machine, just as organists play pieces of music. The thing doesn't seem impossible to me.

Letter 138: A Summary of the Main Phenomena of Electricity

_20 June 1761_.

The subject I would now like to discuss with Your Highness almost frightens me. Its variety is astonishing, and a count of the facts serves to dazzle us rather than enlighten us. I am speaking of electricity, which has for some time become such an important item in natural philosophy that hardly anyone may still be ignorant of its effects.

I don't doubt that Your Highness has already heard it spoken of very often, though I don't know whether you have also seen the experiments performed. All the natural philosophers talk about it today with the greatest eagerness, and new phenomena are discovered almost every day, of which the description alone would fill several hundred letters, and perhaps I would never finish.

That is the difficulty I find myself in. I wouldn't like to leave Your Highness ignorant of a part of natural philosophy so essential. But I wouldn't like to bore you either with a long-winded description of all the phenomena, which, besides, wouldn't provide the clarifications Your Highness would be entitled to demand on this subject. I flatter myself, however, that I have found a route by which I hope to acquaint Your Highness so thoroughly with this tangled subject that you will very easily gain a much more perfect knowledge of it than most natural philosophers have, who work day and night to get to the bottom of these mysteries of nature.

Without stopping to set out for Your Highness all the different phenomena and effects of electricity, which would surely commit me to a detail as long as it is tiresome, at the end of which we would be no further along in true knowledge of the causes that produce all these effects, I will take a completely opposite road. I will begin by explaining to Your Highness the true principle of nature on which all these phenomena, however varied they seem, are founded, and from which it is very easy to derive them all without the slightest difficulty.

For this purpose, it will be enough to remark, in general, that electricity is excited by rubbing a glass tube well. By this means the tube becomes electric. It will then alternately attract and repel light bodies presented to it, and when other bodies are brought near it, sparks can be seen coming out between them. When made stronger, these sparks set fire to spirits of wine and other combustible materials. When the tube is touched with a finger, besides the spark that comes out, one feels a sting, which under certain circumstances can become so great that a shock is felt throughout the whole body.

Instead of a glass tube, people also use a glass globe, which is made to turn on an axis, as on a lathe. While it turns, it is rubbed with the hand, or with a cushion pressed against it. In this way the globe becomes electric just the same, and produces the same phenomena as the tube.

Besides glass, resinous bodies such as sealing wax and sulfur also have the same property of becoming electric by rubbing. But only certain kinds of bodies can be made electric by rubbing, and among them glass, sealing wax, and sulfur are the chief ones.

With other bodies, you can rub as much as you like and you will never notice the slightest sign of electricity. But when they are brought near the first kind after those have been made electric, they immediately acquire the same property. So these bodies become electric by communication, since mere contact, and often only the nearness of electric bodies, makes them so.

From this, all bodies divide into two classes. The first includes the bodies that become electric by rubbing, and the other those that become so by communication, and on which rubbing produces no effect. Here it is quite remarkable that the bodies of the first class receive no electricity by communication. When one presents to a glass tube or globe, strongly electrified, other pieces of glass or other bodies that rubbing can make electric, this contact communicates no electricity to them. This makes the distinction between the two classes of bodies all the more worthy of attention: the one kind are fit to become electric by rubbing, and not at all by communication, while the others, on the contrary, become electric only by communication, and not at all by rubbing.

All the metals belong to this last class, and the communication goes so far that when one end of a brass wire is presented to an electric body, the other end becomes electric, however long the wire is. And if another wire is attached to the far end of the first, the electricity will spread through the whole length of that other wire too. By this means one is able to carry electricity to the greatest distances.

Water is likewise a material that readily receives electricity by communication. Whole ponds have been electrified, so that when a finger was brought near, sparks were seen to come out, and pain was felt.

It is also now beyond doubt that lightning and thunder are only the effect of the electricity of clouds, which have become electric by some cause or other. A thunderstorm shows us on a grand scale the same phenomena of electricity that the natural philosophers show us on a small scale in their experiments.

Letter 139: The True Principle of Nature Behind Electricity

_23 June 1761_.

The summary I have just given of the main phenomena of electricity will no doubt have aroused Your Highness's curiosity about the hidden forces of nature that are able to produce such surprising effects.

Most natural philosophers confess their ignorance on this point. They seem so dazzled by the infinite variety they discover every day, and by the utterly marvelous circumstances that accompany these phenomena, that they lose all courage to dig into the true cause. They do recognize a subtle matter there as the first agent, and they call it the electric matter. But they are so puzzled in determining its nature and properties that this great part of natural philosophy becomes more tangled than clear.

There is no doubt that the source of all the phenomena of electricity must be sought in a certain fluid and subtle matter. But we have no need to invent one in our imagination. That same subtle matter called the ether, whose reality I have already had the honor of proving to Your Highness, is enough to explain, quite naturally, all the strange effects we observe in electricity. I hope to acquaint Your Highness so well with this matter that no electric phenomenon will remain, however bizarre it may seem, whose explanation could leave you puzzled.

All that is needed is to know the nature of the ether well. The air we breathe extends only to a certain height above the earth. The higher one climbs, the thinner it becomes, until at last it disappears entirely. Beyond the air we can't say that a perfect void occupies all that immense space between the heavenly bodies. The rays of light that spread in every direction from all the heavenly bodies prove to us well enough that all these spaces are filled with a subtle matter.

If rays of light were actual emanations shot out from shining bodies, as some philosophers have maintained, then all the spaces of the heavens would have to be filled with these rays, which would even cross them with the greatest speed. Your Highness has only to remember the terrible speed at which the sun's rays reach us. On this hypothesis, not only would there be no void, but all the spaces would be filled with a subtle matter in the most terrible agitation.

But I believe I have proved sufficiently that rays of light are not actual emanations shot out from luminous bodies, any more than sound is an emanation from sounding bodies. It is much more certain that rays of light are nothing other than a shaking or agitation in a subtle matter, just as sound consists of a similar agitation stirred up in the air. And in the same way that sound is excited and transmitted by the air, light is excited and transmitted by a much more subtle matter, called the ether, which consequently fills all the spaces between the heavenly bodies.

The ether is therefore a medium fit to excite rays of light, and this same quality puts us in a position to know its nature and properties better. We have only to reflect on the properties of the air that make it fit to excite and transmit sound. The chief cause lies in its elasticity, or spring. Your Highness knows that air has a force to spread out in every direction, and that it actually spreads as soon as obstacles are removed. Air is at rest only so long as its elasticity is the same everywhere. As soon as it is greater in one place than in others, the air spreads out from there. Experience shows us as well that the more the air is compressed, the more its elasticity is increased. That is where the force of air guns comes from, in which air, compressed with great force, is able to drive the ball through the barrel at great speed. The contrary effect happens when the air is rarefied: its elasticity becomes smaller the more rarefied it is, or the larger the space it is spread over.

Now the speed of sound, which covers a distance of about a thousand feet in a second, depends on the elasticity of the air in relation to its density. If the air's elasticity were greater while its density stayed the same, the speed of sound would be greater. The same thing would happen if the air were thinner or less dense than it is while its elasticity stayed the same. In general, the more elastic and the less dense at once such a medium is, similar to air, the more quickly the agitations excited in it will be transmitted. So, since light is transmitted so many thousand times faster than sound, the ether, that is, the medium whose shakings make up light, must be several thousand times more elastic than air, and at the same time several thousand times thinner or more subtle. Both of these contribute equally to speeding up the spread of light.

From this Your Highness understands why the ether is supposed to be several thousand times more elastic and at the same time several thousand times more subtle than air. Its nature is otherwise like that of air, in that it too is a fluid matter, capable of compression as well as rarefaction. It is this quality that will lead us to the explanation of all the phenomena of electricity.

Letter 140: Continuation: How Different Bodies Behave in Electricity

_27 June 1761_.

The ether being a subtle matter like air, but several thousand times thinner and more elastic, it can't be at rest unless its elasticity, that is, its force to spread out, is the same everywhere.

As soon as the ether is more elastic in some place, which happens when it is more compressed there than in the surroundings, it will spread out from there, pressing on the ether around it, until it has reached the same degree of elasticity everywhere. Then it is said to be in equilibrium, equilibrium being nothing other than the state of rest, when the forces that tend to disturb it balance one another.

So when the ether is not in equilibrium, the same thing must happen in it as in the air when its equilibrium is disturbed. That is, it must spread from the place where its elasticity is greater toward the place where it is smaller. But because of its greater elasticity and subtlety, this motion must be much faster than in air. The loss of equilibrium in the air causes a wind, by which the air is carried from one place to another. So there will also be a kind of wind when the equilibrium of the ether is disturbed, but a wind incomparably more subtle, by which the ether passes from the places where it was more compressed and more elastic to those where the elasticity is smaller.

That being so, I venture to put forward that all the phenomena of electricity are a natural consequence of a lack of equilibrium in the ether. Wherever the equilibrium of the ether is disturbed, the phenomena of electricity must follow. Or, to put it another way, I say that electricity is nothing other than a disturbance in the equilibrium of the ether.

To work out all the effects of electricity, we have to consider the way the ether is mixed and wrapped up with all the bodies around us. Here below, the ether is found only in the small gaps that the particles of air and all other bodies leave between them. Nothing is more natural than that the ether, because of its extreme subtlety and its elasticity, works its way into the smallest pores of all bodies where the air can't enter, and even into the pores of the air. Your Highness will remember that all bodies, however solid they seem, are full of such pores. Many experiments prove beyond dispute that in all bodies the pores take up much more room than the solid parts. Finally, the lighter a body is, the fuller it must be of these pores that contain only ether. From this it is clear that although the ether is scattered through the smallest pores of bodies, it must still be found in very great abundance around the earth.

Your Highness will very easily understand from this that there must be a very great difference among these pores, both in their size and in their shape, according to the different nature of bodies, since the diversity of bodies probably depends on the diversity of their pores. So there will no doubt be pores that are more closed, with less communication with other pores. The ether shut up in them is then more tightly held, and gets free of them only with great difficulty, even though its elasticity is much greater than that of the ether in the neighboring pores. There will also, on the contrary, be pores that are quite open, and in free communication with the neighboring pores. Then it is clear that the ether in these pores doesn't hold so firmly as in the preceding case, and if it is more or less elastic than in the neighboring pores, it will soon come into equilibrium.

To tell these two kinds of pores apart, I will call the first closed and the others open. Most bodies will therefore have pores of a middling kind, which it will be enough to distinguish by the words more or less closed, and more or less open.

That being so, I first remark that if all bodies had perfectly closed pores, it would not be possible to change the elasticity of the ether they contain. And even if the ether in some of these pores had acquired, by some cause or other, a higher degree of elasticity than in the others, since all communication is forbidden to it, it would always stay in that state and would never return to equilibrium. In that case, no change would happen in bodies. Everything would stay just as if the ether were in equilibrium, and no phenomenon of electricity could take place.

The same would happen if all the pores of all bodies were perfectly open. For then, even if the ether in some pores were more or less elastic than in the others, because of the entirely free communication the equilibrium would be restored in an instant, and so fast that we would not be able to notice the slightest change. For the same reason, it would even be impossible to disturb the equilibrium of the ether contained in such pores. Each instant that the equilibrium was disturbed, it would be restored at once, and no sign of electricity could be discovered.

But since the pores of all bodies are neither perfectly closed nor perfectly open, it will always be possible to disturb the equilibrium of the ether in their pores. And when this happens, by whatever cause, the equilibrium will not fail to be restored again. Now this restoration will take some time, and certain phenomena must be produced during it. Your Highness will soon see with great satisfaction that these phenomena are precisely the same as those that electrical experiments reveal to us. You will then agree that the principles on which I am going to build the theory of electricity are very simple, and perfectly established.

Letter 141: On the Same Subject

_30 June 1761_.

I hope I have now overcome the greatest difficulties one meets in the theory of electricity. Your Highness has only to hold on to the idea of the ether that I have just set out: this extremely subtle and elastic matter spread not only through all the empty spaces of the world, but also into the smallest pores of all bodies, in which it is sometimes more and sometimes less tightly held, according to whether these pores are more or less closed. This consideration leads us to two main kinds of bodies, of which some have their pores more closed and the others more open.

That being so, suppose the ether shut up in the pores of bodies doesn't have the same degree of elasticity everywhere, so that in some it is more or less compressed than in others. It will then make efforts to come into equilibrium. And it is precisely from this that the phenomena of electricity are born. They will therefore be all the more varied the more different the pores of the bodies holding the ether are, and the more or less free the communication they allow it with the others.

This difference among the pores of bodies corresponds perfectly with the one that the first phenomena of electricity made us notice among bodies. Some of them easily become electric by mere communication, or in the neighborhood of an electric body, while others suffer almost no change from it. From this Your Highness will at once judge that the bodies that so easily receive electricity by mere communication are those that have open pores, and that the others, which are almost insensible to electricity, must have their pores closed, either entirely or for the most part.

So it is from the phenomena of electricity themselves that we will be able to conclude which bodies have closed pores and which have open ones. On this I can give Your Highness the following clarifications.

First, the common air we breathe has its pores almost entirely closed. So the ether enclosed in it can get out only with great difficulty, and finds just as much difficulty in getting in. Thus, although the ether spread through the air is not in equilibrium with that found in other bodies, being more or less compressed there, the return to equilibrium happens only with great difficulty. Now this must be understood of dry air, since moisture is of an entirely different nature, as I will remark shortly.

Next, in this same class of bodies with closed pores we must place glass, pitch, resinous bodies, sealing wax, sulfur, and in particular silk. All these materials have their pores so stopped up that the ether can enter or leave them only with great difficulty.

The other main class, of bodies whose pores are open, contains first of all water and the other liquids, whose nature is entirely contrary to that of air. That is the reason why air, when it becomes moist, changes its nature completely with respect to electricity, since then the ether can enter and leave it almost without any difficulty. To this same class of bodies with open pores we must assign all the metals and the bodies of animals.

As for the other bodies, such as wood and several stones and earths, they hold a middle nature between the two main kinds I have just described. The passage of the ether, both in and out, is more or less easy according to the particular nature of each kind.

After these clarifications about the different nature of bodies with regard to the ether held in them, Your Highness will see with much satisfaction how all the phenomena of electricity, which are regarded as prodigies, flow very naturally from it.

Everything depends on the state of the ether spread or scattered through the pores of all bodies, in so far as it doesn't have the same degree of elasticity everywhere, or is more compressed in some bodies than in others. For then the ether, not being in equilibrium, will make efforts to put itself back into it. From the places where it is compressed, it will try to free itself as far as the opening of the pores allows, to spread out and enter the pores where the compression is less. And this will last until it is restored everywhere to the same degree of compression and elasticity, to stay there in equilibrium.

Here I first remark that when the ether passes from a body where it was compressed into another where the compression was less, it will meet great obstacles in the air between the two bodies, because of the almost entirely closed pores of the air. Still, it will break through the air as through a liquid and very fine matter, provided its force isn't too small or the gap between the bodies too great. Now since this passage of the ether is much hindered and almost blocked by the pores of the air, the same thing will happen to it that happens to air when it is forced to pass very quickly through small holes. We then hear a hissing, which is a sign that the air is put into a motion of agitation that causes the sound.

So it is very natural that the ether, when forced to push through the pores of the air, should also receive a kind of agitation there. Now Your Highness will remember that just as an agitation in the air produces a sound, so a similar agitation in the ether is the cause of light. Therefore, every time the ether escapes from one body to pass into another, its passage through the air must be accompanied by a light, which appears sometimes in the form of a spark, and sometimes in that of a flash of lightning, when the quantity is large enough.

That is the most remarkable circumstance accompanying most electric phenomena, and it is explained with evidence by our principles. But it will be good to go into greater detail, which will give me a very pleasant subject for some of the letters that follow.
