Letters 146–150

Letter 146: On Electrifying People and Animals

_18 July 1761_.

Just as electricity can be carried from the glass into an iron bar by a chain that makes a connection between them, it can be passed in the same way into a person's body. Animal bodies share a property with metals and water: their pores are wide open. But the person must not touch any other body whose pores are also open.

To arrange this, we set the person on a large cake of pitch, or seat him on a chair held up by glass pillars, or else hang the chair from silk cords. All of these materials have pores closed tightly enough that they don't let the ether escape, and it is the ether that overloads the person's body when he is electrified.

This precaution is absolutely necessary. If the person's body stood on bare earth, which also has its pores quite open, then as soon as the ether in his body was pushed to a higher degree of compression, it would discharge straight into the ground. We would have to be able to overload the entire earth with ether before the man could become electric. Your Highness will readily see that the cushion that rubs the glass globe could never supply such a prodigious quantity of ether. And even if we tried to draw it from the earth itself, we would gain nothing, since we would be taking as much from the earth on one side as we had given it on the other.

So once the person we want to electrify has been placed as I have just described, all we have to do is have him touch the glass globe with his hand while it turns. The ether piled up in the globe will pass easily into the open pores of his hand and spread through his whole body. From there it can no longer escape so easily, since the air and all the bodies around him have their pores closed. Instead of touching the globe with his hand, he can also just touch the chain, or the very iron bar I described in my last letter. But in that case not only the man himself but also the chain and the iron bar have to be overloaded with ether. Since that takes a greater quantity of ether, we have to work longer at turning the globe to supply enough.

In this way the man becomes electric all over. That is, his whole body is overloaded with ether, which is therefore held there at the highest degree of compression and elasticity, and it strains to escape.

Your Highness will judge that this violent state cannot be a matter of indifference to the man. Our body, down to its smallest parts, is completely penetrated by ether. The tiniest fibers, and the nerves as well, are so full of it that this ether undoubtedly holds the principal springs of the motions of animals and of life. And indeed we observe that the pulse of an electrified man beats faster, that sweat is stirred up in him, and that the motion of the finest liquids that fill our body grows quicker. One also feels a certain change all through the body that can't be described, and we are only too sure that such a state has a great influence on health, although not enough experiments have yet been made to settle in which cases the influence is beneficial and in which it is not. Sometimes it may be good for the blood and the other fluids to be set in livelier circulation, and certain blockages that could have unpleasant consequences may be prevented. But sometimes too strong an agitation may well harm health. The matter fully deserves to have physicians take more care in examining it. People boast of some very surprising cures performed by electrification, but we still can't distinguish well enough the occasions when good results can be expected.

To return to our electrified man, it is very remarkable that in the dark he is seen surrounded by a light like the one painters put around the heads of saints. The reason is quite evident. Some parts of the ether that overloads his body are continually escaping from it, and since the ether meets great resistance in the closed pores of the air, it is put into a certain agitation, which is the origin of all light, as I have had the honor of proving to Your Highness.

But in this state, the electrified man shows some very surprising phenomena. When someone touches him, not only do very strong sparks come out of the place touched, but the man also suffers a very sharp pain there. And if it is another man in his natural state, that is, not electrified, who touches him, both of them feel this pain, which could well have deadly consequences, especially if he is touched on the head or in some other very sensitive place. From this Your Highness understands how far from indifferent it is to us whether some of the ether contained in our body escapes from it, or new ether enters it, especially when this happens with such prodigious speed.

For the rest, the light we see around an electrified man in the dark wonderfully confirms what I said about the electric atmosphere that surrounds all bodies. And Your Highness will find no more difficulty with most electrical phenomena, however inexplicable they seem to others.

Letter 147: The Two Kinds of Electricity

_21 July 1761_.

Your Highness remembers that glass isn't the only material that becomes electric by rubbing. Other materials, such as sealing wax and sulfur, have the same property, insofar as their pores are also closed. So whether too much ether is driven into them or some of it is taken out, they stay in that state for some time, and the balance isn't quickly restored.

So instead of a glass globe we can also use globes of sealing wax or sulfur, and turn them on an axis while they rub against a cushion, in the same way I have had the honor of describing for a glass globe. By this means these globes are made electric just as the glass one is. If we bring up an iron bar that touches them only through thin threads or fringes of metal, which can't damage the globe, the electricity is at once communicated to this bar, and from there it can be passed on to other bodies at will.

Here, however, we find a very remarkable difference. A glass globe made electric in this way becomes overloaded with ether, and the iron bar, or any other bodies put in communication with it, acquire electricity of the same nature. That is, the ether in them is under too great a compression, and its elasticity is increased. This electricity is called positive, or electricity in excess. But when we treat a globe of sealing wax or sulfur in the same way, the electricity that arises is directly opposite. It is called negative, or electricity in deficit, because we observe that by rubbing, these globes are stripped of some of the ether held in their pores.

Your Highness will be surprised to see how the same rubbing can produce completely opposite effects. But this depends on the nature of the bodies doing the rubbing and being rubbed, and on the stiffness of the tiniest particles that contain the pores. To explain how this difference is possible, it is first evident that when two bodies are strongly rubbed against each other, the pores of one will usually suffer greater compression than those of the other. Then the ether contained in the pores that are more compressed is squeezed out and forced to work its way into the pores of the other body, which are less compressed.

With that granted, we can say that when glass is rubbed by a cushion, the pores of the cushion suffer greater compression than those of the glass, so the ether of the cushion passes into the glass and produces positive electricity, or electricity in excess, as I have already had the honor of explaining to Your Highness. But when we put a globe of sealing wax or sulfur in place of the glass, these materials can be compressed in their pores more than the material of the cushion that rubs them. So part of the ether contained in these globes is squeezed out and forced to enter the cushion. The globes of sealing wax or sulfur are thus stripped of part of their ether, and end up with negative electricity, or electricity in deficit.

The electricity received by an iron or metal bar connected to a globe of sealing wax or sulfur is of the same nature, and so is the electricity given to a man standing on a mass of pitch or hung from silk cords. When we touch such a man, or any other body electrified in this way, having open pores, we observe about the same phenomena as with positive electricity, or electricity in excess. The touch is likewise accompanied by a spark and a sting on both sides. The reason is evident. The ether that escapes from bodies in their natural state to enter the electrified bodies is hindered, and so it must be accompanied by an agitation that causes light. Still, we notice a clear difference in the shape of the spark, depending on whether the electricity is positive or negative.

If the bar AB (Figure 8) has positive electricity and we hold a finger C up to it, the light that comes out of the bar appears in the form of a brush mn, and near the finger we see a luminous point at p.

But if the bar AB (Figure 9) has negative electricity, and we hold a finger C up to it, it is from the finger that the luminous brush nm comes out, and we see the luminous point p near the bar.

That is the main mark by which positive electricity is told apart from negative. Wherever the ether escapes, the spark has the shape of a brush. But where the ether enters a body, the spark is a luminous point.

Letter 148: One Globe Giving Both Kinds

_25 July 1761_.

Your Highness will understand the difference between positive and negative electricity better when I have the honor of explaining how a single glass globe can produce both kinds of electricity. This will also serve to shed more light on these admirable phenomena of nature.

Let AB (Figure 10) be the glass globe, turned on its axis C and rubbed by the cushion D. Opposite the cushion, the globe is touched by metal fringes F, attached to the iron bar FG. The bar is hung from silk cords H and I, so that it touches no bodies with open pores anywhere.

That being so, Your Highness knows that by rubbing against the cushion D, the ether passes from the cushion into the glass, where it becomes more compressed and therefore more elastic. From there it will pass through the fringes F into the iron bar FG. The pores of the glass are closed enough that the ether piles up in the globe more and more as it is rubbed. But soon it becomes so overloaded that it escapes through the metal fringes to discharge into the bar, and so the bar becomes electric as well.

From this Your Highness sees that all this surplus of ether is supplied by the cushion. The cushion would soon be stripped of it if it didn't have a free connection with the frame that supports the machine, and through the frame with the whole earth. From the earth the cushion is filled with fresh ether at every moment, so that as long as the rubbing lasts, it has plenty with which to compress further the ether found in the globe and the bar. But suppose the whole machine rests on glass pillars like M and N, or is hung from silk cords. Then the cushion has no connection with bodies with open pores, from which the lack of ether could be made up. The cushion will soon be stripped of its ether, and the electricity in the globe and the bar can't be raised beyond a certain degree, which will hardly be noticeable, unless the cushion were of prodigious size. To make up for this, we connect the cushion D to a large mass of metal E, whose ether is enough to supply the globe and the bar generously and to bring the ether in them to so high a degree of compression.

By this means we give the globe and the bar positive electricity, as I have had the honor of explaining to Your Highness. But as the globe and the bar become overloaded with ether, the cushion and the metal mass E lose exactly as much, and so acquire negative electricity. So here we have both kinds of electricity at once: positive in the bar, and negative in the metal mass. Each produces its effect according to its nature. When we hold a finger up to the bar, a spark in the form of a brush will come out of the bar, and we will see a luminous point at the finger. But if we hold the finger up to the metal mass, the brush will come out of the finger, and we will see the luminous point at the mass.

Let us also imagine two men standing on masses of pitch, so that they are out of all connection with bodies with open pores. One touches the bar and the other touches the metal mass while the machine is running. It is clear that the first, who touches the bar, will become electric positively, or overloaded with ether, while the other, who touches the metal mass, will acquire negative electricity and be stripped of his ether.

So here are two men, both electric, but of completely opposite natures, even though they were made electric by the same machine. Each will be surrounded by an electric atmosphere, which in the dark will appear in the form of a glow, much as painters represent saints. The reason is that the surplus ether of one escapes little by little into the surrounding air, while for the other, the ether contained in the air works its way little by little into his body. This passage, though imperceptible, will be accompanied by an agitation of the ether, from which light results.

It is clear that these two electricities are directly opposed. To convince themselves, the two men need only shake hands, or even just touch each other. Very strong sparks will come out of them, and they themselves will feel very sharp pains.

If these two men were electrified in the same way, which would happen if both touched the bar, or both touched the metal mass, they could touch each other with impunity, without the slightest sign of a spark or of pain. The ether in both of them would be in the same state, whereas in the other case their states are completely opposite.

Letter 149: On the Leyden Experiment

_28 July 1761_.

I will now tell Your Highness about a quite singular phenomenon of electricity, one that has made a great stir and is known as the famous Leyden experiment, since Monsieur Muschenbroeck, professor at Leyden, is its inventor. What is singular about this experiment is the terrible force that results from it, whose harshest blows several people can feel at the same time.

Figure 11 will put Your Highness in a position to understand the nature of this curious experiment. C is the glass globe, turned by means of the crank E and rubbed by the cushion DD, which is pressed against the globe by the spring O. At Q are the metal fringes that pass the electricity into the iron bar FG through the metal chain P.

Up to here nothing differs from the procedure I have already described to Your Highness on several occasions. But to perform the experiment in question, we attach to the bar one more metal chain H. We put its other end I into a glass flask KL filled with water, and the flask itself is set in a basin LL, also filled with water. We also sink into the water of the basin another chain A, if we like, whose other end trails on the floor.

Now suppose we have run the machine for some time so that the bar becomes sufficiently electric. Your Highness knows that if someone held his finger up to the end of the bar at a, he would feel the ordinary shock of electricity from the spark that comes out of it. But if this same man at the same time put his other hand into the water of the basin at A, or even just touched with his body the chain dipped in this water, he would feel an incomparably harsher blow, which would send shocks through his whole body.

We can even make several people feel these same shocks at once. They only have to join hands, or it is enough for them just to touch each other by their clothes. Then the first person puts his hand in the water of the basin, or just touches the chain with one end in it. Next, as soon as the last person holds his finger up to the bar, a much stronger spark than usual comes out of it, and all the people are struck at the same instant by very harsh blows through their whole bodies.

That is the famous Leyden experiment. It is all the more surprising because it is hard to see how the flask and the water of the basin contribute to strengthening the effect of electricity so terribly. To overcome this difficulty, I will have the honor of offering the following reflections.

I. While the ether is compressed in the bar by the action of the machine, it passes through the chain H into the water contained in the flask I. Since it meets open pores there, the water of the flask will become as overloaded with ether as the bar itself.

II. Now, the flask being of glass, it has its pores closed, which don't allow the ether compressed inside to pass through the substance of the glass and discharge into the outside water in the basin. So the water of the basin stays in its natural state and doesn't become electric. And even if some ether did escape through the glass, it would soon be lost in the basin and the pedestal, whose pores are open.

III. Let us now consider a man holding one hand in the water of the basin, or just touching the chain A, one end of which is dipped in this water. Let him now hold his other hand toward the bar at a. The first effect will be that with the spark that comes out of the bar, the ether will escape from the bar very rapidly and pass freely through the man's body, finding open pores everywhere.

IV. So far we see only the ordinary effect of electricity. But while the ether passes so rapidly through the man's body, it leaves it with similar rapidity by the other hand, or by the chain A, to pour out into the water of the basin. Since it enters there with such great force, it will easily overcome the obstacle the glass puts in its way, and it will push through into the water contained in the flask.

V. Now, the water in the flask already contains ether that is too compressed. By this addition it will gain new strength and spread out with great force, both through the chain IH and through the bar itself. Consequently it will escape at a with fresh efforts, and since this happens in an instant, it will enter the finger with increased force to pass through the man's body.

VI. From there, passing again into the water of the basin and then penetrating the flask, it will increase still further the agitation of the compressed ether in the water of the flask and in the bar. And this will go on until everything is restored to balance, which will happen very quickly, because of the great rapidity with which ether acts.

VII. The same thing will happen if several people are used. And now Your Highness readily understands, I hope, where this surprising increase in the force of electricity comes from in this experiment of Muschenbroeck's, which is capable of producing such prodigious effects.

VIII. If there were still some doubt about what I said at first, that the ether compressed in the water of the flask can't pass through the glass, and about my later supposition that it finds a fairly free passage, all this doubt will vanish when we consider that in the first case everything is quiet, and in the latter the ether is in a terrible agitation. That must surely help a great deal to force even the most closed passages.

Letter 150: The Cause and Nature of Electricity

_1 August 1761_.

After these explanations, Your Highness will no longer be at a loss about the cause of the prodigious effects observed in the phenomena of electricity.

Most of the authors who have written about it muddle the experiments so much that in the end one understands absolutely nothing, especially when they try to give an explanation. All of them fall back on a certain subtle matter that they call the electric fluid. They attribute such bizarre qualities to it that our minds are completely revolted, and in the end they are obliged to admit that all their efforts are anything but sufficient to give us a solid knowledge of these important phenomena of nature.

But from what I have had the honor of laying out for Your Highness, it is clear that bodies become electric only insofar as the elasticity, or state of compression, of the ether in the pores of bodies is not in balance, that is, when in some bodies it is more or less compressed than in others. For then the prodigious elasticity that the ether is endowed with makes great efforts to put itself back in balance, and to restore itself everywhere to the same degree of elasticity, as far as the nature of the pores, which are more or less open in different bodies, allows. And it is always this actual restoration to balance that produces the phenomena of electricity.

When the ether escapes from a body where it is more compressed to discharge into another where its compression is less, this passage is always hindered by the closed pores of the air. That is why it is put into a certain agitation, or violent motion of vibration, which we have seen is what light consists of. The more violent this motion is, the brighter the light becomes, and it can even set bodies alight and burn them.

Next, while the ether pushes through the air with such great violence, the particles of the air are put into a motion of vibration too, which is the very cause of sound. And indeed we observe that the phenomena of electricity are accompanied by a crackling, or by some noise, greater or smaller depending on the circumstances.

Besides this, the bodies of people and animals are filled with ether in their smallest pores, and the action of the nerves in particular seems to depend on the ether they contain. So people and animals can't be indifferent to electricity. When the ether in them is thrown into great agitation, the effect must be noticeable, and, depending on the circumstances, sometimes beneficial and sometimes harmful. The terrible shocks of the Leyden experiment must surely be counted in this last class. There is no doubt that it could be pushed to a degree of force capable of killing people, since by this means a good number of small animals, such as mice and birds, have in fact already been killed.

Although friction is ordinarily used to produce electricity, Your Highness will readily understand that there are other means suited to the purpose. Anything that can bring the ether contained in the pores of a body to a greater or lesser degree of compression than usual makes that body electric at the same time. If its pores are closed, the electricity will last some while there. In bodies whose pores are open, on the other hand, it can't last, unless they are surrounded on all sides by air or by other bodies whose pores are closed.

So it has been observed that heat often takes the place of friction. When sealing wax or sulfur is left to heat or melt in a spoon, then after it cools we find a very noticeable electricity in these materials. The reason should no longer be hidden from us, since we know that heat widens the pores of all bodies. Indeed, we see that all bodies, when heated, take up a greater volume than when they are cold.

Your Highness knows that the mercury in a thermometer rises in the heat and falls in the cold. This is because mercury, when it is warm, takes up a greater volume, or fills more space in the glass, than when it is colder. For the same reason we find that a well-heated iron bar is always a little longer than when it is cold. This property is common to all the bodies we know.

So when we melt a mass of sealing wax or sulfur over the fire, its pores are widened, and probably more open, and so a greater quantity of ether has to enter to fill these pores. Then, when we let these materials cool, the pores narrow and close at the same time. The ether is thus reduced to a smaller space, and consequently forced to a higher degree of compression, which increases its spring. These masses will therefore acquire positive electricity, and they do show its effects.

A similar property is seen in most precious stones, which become electric when they are heated. There is even a stone from Ceylon, called tourmaline, which, when rubbed or heated, acquires both kinds of electricity at once. This is because the ether in one part of the stone is driven out to compress the ether in the other part more, and the pores are too closed to allow balance to be restored.
