Letters 173–176

Letter 173: Why Magnetic Needles Point and Drift

_20 October 1761_.

Your Highness will no doubt be curious to learn why magnetic needles take a definite direction at every place on the earth, why that direction is different in different places, and why at the same place it changes with time. On these important questions I will have the honor of telling all I know, though it may well fall far short of satisfying Your Highness's curiosity.

First I notice that magnetic needles share this property with every magnet, and that it's only their shape, which suits them to balance on a pivot and turn freely there, that makes the property more obvious. Any magnet hung from a thread always turns toward a certain side. Or if you put it in a little vessel to float on water, the vessel with the magnet in it will always settle in a certain direction. A needle has two ends, one pointing roughly north and the other roughly south. Every magnet has the same thing: two similar points, one of which seeks the north and the other the south, with about the same variations as in the needles.

These points are also very easy to find in any magnet, because that is where it pulls iron with the greatest force. They are called the poles of a magnet, a name borrowed from the poles of the earth or of the sky, because one of them tries to direct itself toward the north pole of the earth and the other toward the south pole. This is only roughly true, since declination was not yet known when the names were introduced. The pole of the magnet that points toward the north is called its north pole, and the one that points toward the south is called its south pole.

I have already remarked that a magnetic needle, just like the magnet itself, takes this position, which seems natural to it, only when it is away from the neighborhood of some other magnet or of iron. If a magnetic needle is close to a magnet, it sets itself by the poles of that magnet, so that the north pole of the magnet attracts the south end of the needle, and the south pole of the magnet attracts the north end of the needle. That is why, when two magnets are brought together, the poles with different names are called friendly poles, and those with the same name hostile poles. This property is very striking when you bring two magnets near each other. You will see not only that poles with different names attract each other, that is, the north pole of one and the south pole of the other, but also that poles with the same name flee from each other and push each other away. You can see it even more clearly when you bring two magnetic needles close together.

For our purpose it will be very important to consider carefully the position a magnetic needle takes near a magnet.

In Figure 23, the bar AB represents a magnet whose north pole is at B and whose south pole is at A. Your Highness sees several positions of the magnetic needle, which I draw in the shape of an arrow whose end marked b is the north pole and whose end marked a is the south pole. In all these positions, the end b of the needle turns toward the pole A of the magnet, and the end a toward the pole B. The point c marks the pivot on which the needle turns. Your Highness only has to look closely at the figure to judge what position the needle will take wherever the pivot c is placed around the magnet.

So if there were a very large magnet AB somewhere, the magnetic needles placed around it would take a definite position at each spot, just as we see them do around the earth. Or, if the earth itself were that magnet, we would understand why magnetic needles set themselves everywhere in a certain direction. Natural philosophers, to explain this phenomenon, do maintain that the whole earth has the property of a magnet, or that we must regard it as a very large magnet. Some of them claim that near the center of the earth there is a very large magnet that exerts its force on all magnetic needles, and even on all the magnets on the surface of the earth, and that it is this force that directs them at each place in the same directions we observe there.

But we have no need to appeal to such a magnet hidden in the earth's depths. Its surface itself is so full of iron mines and magnets everywhere that their combined force can easily make up for the lack of this supposed great magnet. Indeed, all magnets are taken out of mines, which is a very sure sign that these minerals are found in great abundance in the depths of the earth, and that all their forces combined supply the general force that produces all the magnetic phenomena. This also lets us explain why, at the same place, the magnetic declination changes with time. For it is known that the mines of all the metals are subject to continual changes, and in particular those of iron, to which magnets must also be counted. At one spot iron is being produced, at another it is being destroyed, so that today there are iron mines where there were none before, and where such mines were once found in abundance, almost nothing is found today. This proves well enough that the total mass of all the magnets contained in the earth undergoes very considerable changes, and so, without a doubt, the poles by which the magnetic declination is set will change with time as well.

So this is where we must look for the cause of the magnetic declinations being subject to such considerable changes at the same places on the earth. But this same reason, founded on the inconstancy of what goes on in the depths of the earth, leaves us no hope of ever managing to predict the magnetic declination in advance, unless some way is found to bring the changes of the earth under some fixed law. A long series of observations, continued for several centuries, might perhaps give us some light on the matter.

Letter 174: Further Light on Declination

_24 October 1761_.

Those who claim that the earth holds a great magnet in its bosom, like a kernel, are obliged to say, to explain the magnetic declination, that this kernel gradually changes its position. The kernel would then have to be detached from the earth in all its parts. And since its motion would no doubt follow a certain law, we could hope to discover one day the law by which the declination changes with time. But whether there is such a magnetic kernel in the earth, or whether the magnets scattered through its interior combine their forces to produce the magnetic phenomena, we can always regard the earth itself as a magnet, toward which all the particular magnets and all the magnetic needles direct themselves.

Some natural philosophers have enclosed a magnet of very great strength inside a globe. They placed a magnetic needle on the surface of the globe, and after setting the magnet inside in several different ways, they observed there phenomena similar to those that occur on the earth. Now, if we consider the earth as a magnet, it will have its magnetic poles, which must be carefully distinguished from its natural poles, the ones it turns around. These different poles have nothing in common but the name. But it is from the position of the magnetic poles in relation to the natural ones that the apparent irregularities in the magnetic declination arise, and in particular in the lines drawn on the earth, which I had the honor of describing to Your Highness.

To make this matter clearer, I observe that if the magnetic poles fell exactly on the natural poles, there would be no declination on the earth. Everywhere the magnetic needles would point exactly from north to south, and their position would be exactly the same as that of the meridian line. That would no doubt be a very great advantage for navigation, since we would then know exactly the course of the ship and the direction of the wind. As things are, we always have to find the declination of the compass before we can determine the true points of the compass. But then the compass would also give no help in determining longitudes, a goal that the declination may well lead to one day.

From this we can conclude that if the earth's magnetic poles differed greatly from the natural poles and were directly opposite each other, which would happen if the earth's magnetic axis (the straight line drawn through the two magnetic poles) passed through the center of the earth, then the magnetic needles would point everywhere toward these magnetic poles, and it would be very easy to assign the magnetic direction for every place. We would only have to draw through each place a circle passing through both magnetic poles at once, and the angle this circle made with the meridian of the same place would give the magnetic declination. In that case the two lines along which the declination is zero would be meridians drawn through the magnetic poles. Now, since we have seen that these two lines, where there is no declination, are actually not meridians but take a very odd course, it's clear that this case doesn't hold on the earth. Halley clearly recognized this consequence, and felt obliged by it to suppose a double magnet in the depths of the earth, one fixed and the other movable. Accordingly he set up four poles on the earth, two of them near the north pole and the other two near the south pole, at unequal distances. But this conclusion seems to me a little rash. From the fact that the lines without declination are not meridians, it doesn't follow that there are four magnetic poles on the earth. It follows rather that there are only two, and that these two poles are not directly opposite each other, or, what comes to the same thing, that the magnetic axis does not pass through the center of the earth.

So we still have to consider the cases where the two magnetic poles are not directly opposite each other and where the magnetic axis does not cross the earth through its center. For, in fact, if we adopt the hypothesis of the magnetic kernel in the earth, what necessity is there that one of the magnetic poles be precisely opposite the other? The kernel might well not lie in the middle of the earth but at some distance from the center. Now, as soon as the magnetic poles are no longer diametrically opposite each other, the lines along which the declination is zero do take a course like the one concluded from the observations. It is even possible to assign to the two magnetic poles such places on the earth that not only would these lines agree with the observations, but for every degree of declination, western as well as eastern, we would find lines just like the ones that first struck us as so odd.

So to know the state of the magnetic declination, all we need to do is fix the two magnetic poles. Then it is a problem in geometry to determine the course of all those lines I spoke of in my previous letter, which are drawn through all the places where the declination is the same. By this means we would also be able to correct these lines and to fill in regions where we lack observations. And if we could assign, for all future times, the places of the two magnetic poles on the earth, that would no doubt be the finest solution to the problem of longitudes.

So we have no need of a double magnet in the earth, or of four magnetic poles, to explain the phenomena of magnetic declination, as the great Halley believed. A single magnet, or two magnetic poles, is perfectly sufficient, provided each is given its proper place. It seems to me that by this reflection we have made much progress in our knowledge of magnetism.

Letter 175: On Magnetic Inclination

_27 October 1761_.

May it please Your Highness to remember that when we rubbed or touched a needle on a magnet, it acquired not only the property of pointing toward a certain point of the horizon, but its north end also went down, as if it had become heavier. That obliged us to take something off it, or add something to the opposite end, to bring the needle back into balance. Now, without using that remedy, I performed several experiments to find out how far the magnetic force makes the north end of the magnetic needle go down, and I found that it dropped until it made an angle of 72 degrees with the horizon, and that in this position the needle stayed at rest. It's worth noting that I did these experiments here in Berlin about six years ago, because I will show later on that this position below the horizon is as variable as the magnetic declination.

We see from this that the magnetic force has a double effect on needles. One is the effect I have already spoken about at great length, by which it directs the needle toward a certain side of the horizon, and the distance of that side from the meridian line is what we call the magnetic declination. But the other effect gives the needle an inclination toward the horizon, making one end or the other sink below the horizon, down to a certain angle.

Let dh (Figure 24) be the horizontal line drawn along the magnetic declination. Here in Berlin the needle will take the position ba, which makes with the horizon the angle dch or eca, which is 72°, and so makes with the vertical fg an angle bcg or acf of 18°. This second effect of the magnetic force, by which magnetic needles take a certain inclination to the horizon, is as remarkable as the first. As the first is called the magnetic declination, the second is known by the name of the magnetic inclination, and it deserves, just as much as the declination, to be observed everywhere with every possible care, since it shows just as great a variety.

The inclination was found in Berlin to be 72°, whereas in Basel it has been observed to be only 70°, the north end of the needle being lowered, and the other end therefore raised, by that angle. This happens in our part of the world, which is nearer to the earth's north magnetic pole. The closer we come to that pole, the greater the needle's inclination becomes, that is, the nearer it comes to the vertical line. So if we could reach that pole itself, the needle would actually take the vertical position there, with its north end turned down and its south end up. On the contrary, the farther we move from the north magnetic pole of the earth and the nearer we come to the south one, the smaller the inclination becomes. At last it disappears, and the needle takes a horizontal position, when we are at equal distances from the two poles. Then, as we come nearer to the south pole of the earth, it is the south end of the needle that sinks more and more below the horizon, with the north end rising above it, until at that pole itself the needle becomes vertical again, with its south end turned down and its north end up.

It would be very much to be wished that experiments as careful were made everywhere to determine the magnetic inclination as are made for the declination. But so far this important article of experimental physics has been too much neglected, though it is certainly no less curious or interesting than the declination. Still, we shouldn't be surprised. This kind of experiment is subject to too many difficulties, and almost all the ways imagined up to now for observing the magnetic inclination have failed. Only a craftsman in Basel named Diterich has succeeded, having built a machine suited to the purpose, following the ideas of the famous Monsieur Daniel Bernoulli. He sent me two of these machines, by means of which I observed here this inclination of 72°. And however curious the English and the French are otherwise about discoveries of this sort, they made little of Monsieur Diterich's machine, even though it is the only one fit for the purpose. It is a great example showing how far prejudices are able to hold back the progress of the sciences. For this reason one can maintain that Basel and Berlin are still the only places on earth where the magnetic inclination is known.

The needles made for compasses are not really suited to show us the amount of the magnetic inclination, though they do indicate its effect roughly, since the north end becomes heavier in our part of the world. To use these needles, which are meant to reveal the declination, we are rather obliged to destroy the effect of the inclination, either by making the north end lighter or by making the south end heavier. To bring the needle into a horizontal position, the second remedy is usually used, and a little wax is attached to the south end of the needle. But Your Highness easily understands that this remedy works only here, where the inclining force has a certain size. If we travel with such a needle toward the north magnetic pole of the earth, the inclining force will become greater too, so that to prevent its effect we would have to add still more wax to the south end. But if we travel south and approach the other pole of the earth, where the inclining force on the north end of the needle becomes smaller, then we have to reduce the wax attached to the other end, and afterward take it off altogether, because it's useless once we reach places where the magnetic inclination vanishes. Then, passing that point and coming still nearer to the south pole, the south end of the needle is pushed down, so that to prevent this effect we have to attach wax to the north end of the needle. This is in fact the method used on long voyages to keep the compass in a horizontal position.

Now, to observe the magnetic inclination, we would need instruments made expressly for it, and even like the one the Basel craftsman invented. Such an instrument is called an inclinatory, but there's no sign that it will come into use any time soon.

Still less can we hope that maps of the magnetic inclination will be made soon, like the ones that have shown us the declination. The same method could well be followed there, drawing lines through all the places where the magnetic inclination is the same. So there would be lines without inclination, then other lines where the inclination is 5°, 10°, 15°, 20°, and so on, both toward the north and toward the south.

Letter 176: The True Magnetic Direction

_31 October 1761_.

To form a right idea of the effect of the earth's magnetic force, we have to take account of both the declination and the inclination of magnetic needles at each place on the earth. We know that in Berlin the declination is 15° toward the west, and that the inclination at the north end is 72°. By considering this double effect, the declination and the inclination, we get the true magnetic direction. So to find the true magnetic direction for Berlin, we first draw on a horizontal plane a line that makes an angle of 15° toward the west with the meridian. Then from there, going down toward the vertical line, we draw a new line making an angle of 72° with the first. This new line shows us the magnetic direction for Berlin. From this Your Highness understands how the magnetic direction should be assigned for any other place, provided we knew both the inclination and the declination there.

Now, every magnet shows us phenomena that are quite similar. You only have to put one on a table covered with iron filings, and you will see the filings arrange themselves around the magnet BA roughly as Figure 25 shows. Each bit of filing can be regarded as a little magnetic needle that shows us, at each point around the magnet, the magnetic direction. This experiment leads us to look for the cause of all these magnetic phenomena.

The arrangement we observe in the iron filings leaves us no doubt that it is a subtle, invisible matter that threads through the bits of filing and arranges them in the direction we see. Besides this, it is equally clear that this subtle matter passes through the magnet itself, entering by one of its poles and leaving by the other. By its continual motion around the magnet it forms a vortex that carries the subtle matter back from one pole to the other, and there is no doubt that this motion is extremely fast.

So the nature of magnets consists in a continual vortex, which is what distinguishes them from all other bodies. The earth itself, as a magnet, will be surrounded by such a vortex, which acts everywhere on magnetic needles and strives to arrange them along its own direction, the same one I called the magnetic direction earlier. This subtle matter therefore comes out continually by one of the earth's magnetic poles, and after going around to the other pole, it enters there and passes through the earth in its whole thickness until it escapes again by the first pole.

Now, we can't yet decide by which of the earth's two magnetic poles it enters or leaves. The phenomena that depend on it are so perfectly alike that they can't be told apart. It is also no doubt this general vortex of the earth that supplies subtle matter to all the partial magnets, and to magnetized iron or steel, and that keeps up the particular vortices around them.

To get to the bottom of the nature of this subtle matter and its motion, we must first notice that it acts only on magnets, iron and steel. All other bodies are completely indifferent to it. So it must stand in a quite different relation to magnets and iron than to all other bodies. Several experiments force us to maintain that this subtle matter passes freely through all other bodies, and even in every direction. For when a magnet acts on a needle, the action is exactly the same whether we put some bodies between them or none, as long as it isn't iron. A magnet also acts on iron filings in the same way. So this subtle matter must pass through all bodies except iron as freely as air, and even as pure ether, since these experiments succeed just as well in a space emptied of air by the air pump. This subtle matter is therefore also different from the ether, and much more subtle.

Next, because of the general vortex of the earth, we can say that it surrounds the whole earth and passes freely through its entire mass, just like other bodies, with the exception of iron and magnets. For this reason we could call iron and steel magnetic bodies, to distinguish them from all other bodies.

But if the magnetic matter passes freely through every nonmagnetic body, what relation will it have to magnetic bodies? We have just seen that the magnetic vortex enters by one of the poles of each magnet and leaves by the other, from which one might conclude that it also passes freely through magnets, which would not distinguish them from the rest. But when the magnetic matter passes through magnets only from one pole to the other, that is a very different circumstance from what happens in other bodies. Here, then, is the distinguishing mark. Nonmagnetic bodies are passed through freely by the magnetic matter, and in every direction. Magnets are passed through only in one direction, one of the poles being meant for entering and the other for leaving. As for iron and steel, when these are magnetized they too are passed through by the magnetic matter in only one direction, according to the nature of their magnetic poles. But when they are not yet magnetized, we can say they give the magnetic matter free passage in no direction at all.

This will seem strange, since iron has open pores that let through even the ether, which is still not so subtle as the magnetic matter. But we must clearly distinguish a mere passage from another kind, in which the magnetic matter can pass through the body with all its speed, meeting no obstacle.
