Letters 185–189

Letter 185: How Weak Magnets Make Strong Ones

_1 December 1761_.

Even though this method of magnetizing with a double touch is much better than the earlier one, there is a limit to how far it can raise the magnetic force. Whether we use a natural magnet or two magnetic bars to rub other bars, the bars being rubbed will never gain as much force as the ones doing the rubbing. The effect can never be greater than its cause.

If the bars we rub with have little force, the ones rubbed by them will have even less. The reason is plain. Bars with no magnetic force at all can't produce any in others, so a small magnetic force isn't able to produce a larger one, at least not by the method I have just described. But this rule shouldn't be taken too strictly, as if it were absolutely impossible to produce a greater magnetic force with the help of a smaller one. I will have the honor of explaining to Your Highness a method by which the magnetic force can be increased almost as far as we like, and starting from the smallest force at that. It is a discovery of recent times, and it deserves all the more attention because it throws far better light on the nature of magnetism.

Suppose, then, that at the start we have only a very weak magnet or, if we have no natural magnet, some iron bars made faintly magnetic by the vortex of the earth alone, as I had the honor of explaining to Your Highness in my earlier letters. Now let us get eight steel bars, quite small and not tempered, so that they can more easily take up the small magnetic force that the weak magnet, or the bars I've mentioned, which I suppose to be faintly magnetic, are able to give them by rubbing each pair or couple in the manner I described before. Once we have four pairs of bars that are at least slightly magnetic, we take two of the pairs and join them together.

We join the two bars in each pair by their poles of the same name, which makes a single bar of double thickness. Then we form a pair of compasses out of the two doubled bars AC and BD (Figure 45). They touch at the top, CD, where a piece of soft iron P can be placed to help keep the magnetic current going. At the bottom we open the legs as wide as we think fit, and with them we rub the other pairs, one after another. These will gain more force than they had before, since two pairs are combining their forces in the rubbing. Now we only have to join these two newly rubbed pairs together in the same way and use them to rub, one after another, the other two pairs that were used the first time, and the force of those will be considerably increased. Then we join those two pairs together and rub the others again to increase their magnetic force. In this way we keep going, rubbing two pairs alternately with the other two joined together. By this process we will soon bring them to a degree of force that can't be increased any further, even if we kept at it longer. When we have more than four pairs of such bars, we can also join three pairs together instead of two, and rub the other pairs with them. That brings them to the highest degree more quickly.

Now the greatest obstacles are overcome. With these bars, joining two or even more pairs together, we can rub others made of well-tempered steel, either of the same size as the first ones or even larger, and in this way we give these too the greatest force they are capable of.

Starting from small bars like the ones I've just described, we can carry these operations step by step up to bars of enormous size, made of good tempered steel, in which the magnetic force is least likely to be destroyed. We only have to observe that to rub large bars, we must join several pairs together, whose weight is at least twice that of one large bar. But it is always better to go by degrees, and to rub each size of bar with others that aren't much smaller, where it is enough to join two pairs together. When we are forced to join many pairs together, the ends we rub with will be too broad, and the magnetic matter passing through them will get in its own way as it tries to run along the bar being rubbed. This is all the more so because it enters the bar perpendicularly, when it needs to take a horizontal direction there.

To make this change of direction easier, it is good for the magnetic matter to be led there through a small space, and to already have a direction close to the one it must take inside the bar being touched. I believe we could manage this in the following way.

Figure 46 shows five pairs, MM and NN, joined together, though not in the shape of a pair of compasses. At the top there is a bar of soft iron CD to maintain the vortex. At the bottom I don't rub directly with the ends of the bars. Instead, on each side I set these ends into a foot of soft iron, fastening them in with a few screws O. Each foot curves downward, AB, so that the direction of the magnetic matter, which flows freely through these feet, is already very close to horizontal, and in the bar being rubbed, EF, it doesn't have to change direction much. With the help of these feet, I have no doubt that the bar EF will receive a much greater magnetic force than if we rubbed it directly with the ends of the bars, whose thickness and vertical direction naturally work against the formation of magnetic channels in the bar EF. With this method, too, we can bring the ends of the feet, A and B, closer together or move them apart as we like.

Finally, I must not fail to point out that when these bars lose some of their magnetic force over time, we can easily restore it by the same operations.

Letter 186: Making Horseshoe Artificial Magnets

_5 December 1761_.

Anyone who wants to do experiments on magnetism needs a large supply of such magnetic bars, from the smallest to the largest. Each of them can be regarded as a separate magnet, with its two poles, one northern and one southern.

Your Highness will find it very remarkable that, starting from the weakest magnetic force we are given, whether it comes from a wretched natural magnet or from a few pairs of fireplace tongs that have picked up a little magnetism over time, we can increase that force more and more, until we have made the largest steel bars with the highest degree of magnetic force they are capable of. It would be superfluous to add that by this method we can make the best magnetic needles, not only much larger than the usual ones, but also made of steel tempered to the highest degree, which makes them longer lasting. I still have something to say about making artificial magnets, which for the most part have the shape of a horseshoe, as Your Highness will remember having seen.

These artificial magnets do the same work as natural ones on every occasion, and they give us, besides, the advantage of having stronger ones, by making them large enough. They are made of well-tempered steel, and the horseshoe shape seems the best suited to maintaining the vortex. After the workman has made such a piece, we give it magnetic force, and the greatest force it is capable of, by means of the magnetic bars whose construction I have explained. It is easy to see that the larger such a magnet is, the larger the bars we must use, and that is the main reason we must have bars of every kind.

To magnetize such a horseshoe HIG (Figure 47), which must be made of well-tempered steel, we lay on the table a pair of magnetic bars AC and BD, with their soft-iron supports applied on both sides. The figure shows only one of these, EF, since the other was taken away as the feet of the horseshoe were put in place, as you can see in the figure. In this state, the magnetic matter passing through the bars will strive to pass through the horseshoe. But because of the hardness of tempered steel, it won't be enough to line up the pores there and open a path for itself. So we must use the same means we use to magnetize bars. We take a pair of compasses made from another pair of magnetic bars and pass it over the horseshoe in the same way, turning the legs of the compasses to suit the poles of the horseshoe. In this way we will open the magnetic channels in it, and the subtle matter of the bars, in passing through them, will form the magnetic vortex. In this operation we must take care that the legs of the compasses, as they pass over the horseshoe, don't touch the ends A and B of the bars. That would disturb the current of magnetic matter, which would then pass straight from the bars into the legs of the compasses, or else the vortices of the bars and of the compasses would disturb each other.

By this operation the horseshoe will gain great magnetic force, since a very copious magnetic current runs through it. So now all that remains is to detach it from the bars without disturbing the current. If we tore it away roughly, the magnetic vortex would be destroyed, and our artificial magnet would keep very little force. The nature of magnetism shows us why this is so.

Since the magnetic channels last only while the magnetic matter is actually flowing through them, we conclude that the smallest particles, whose pores make up these channels, are held in a forced state. That state lasts only as long as the force of the vortex acts on them. As soon as the force stops, these particles, by their elasticity, turn a little away from their position, and the magnetic channels are suddenly broken and destroyed. We see this very clearly in soft iron, whose pores line up promptly when a magnetic vortex comes near, but keep almost no magnetic force once we move away from it. This proves well enough that the pores of iron move easily, but that at the same time they have a springiness that changes their position at once when the force ceases. Only after a very long time do some pores settle into the position that the magnetic force gave them, and this happens mostly in iron bars that have been exposed to the earth's vortex for a long time. Steel does have pores that are less flexible and hold better in the state they were forced into. Still, they are subject to some disturbance as soon as the force stops acting on them, though the harder the steel, the less of it. That is also the reason why artificial magnets must be made of very well-tempered steel. If they were made of iron, they would indeed gain a very great force at first, when applied to the magnetic bars, but at the very moment we detached them, all their force would vanish suddenly. So we must take precautions when detaching magnets of well-tempered steel from the bars. For this purpose, before separating them, we lay on them their supports, made of very soft iron, along the line MN in Figure 48. We take care that the support doesn't touch the bars at all, which would spoil everything and force us to start the operations over. Then a good part of the magnetic matter that circulates in the magnet GHI will take its road through the support and form a separate vortex, which will also last after the separation.

Next we slowly push the support along the legs of the magnet to the ends, as you can see in the figure I cited, and in that state we leave it to rest for some time, so that the vortex grows steadier and steadier. We also load the support with a weight P, which can be increased every day. And it is easy to see that the support must be fitted so that it touches the feet of the magnet perfectly.

Letter 187: On Dioptrics, Telescopes, and Microscopes

_8 December 1761_.

I believe the marvels of dioptrics will be a subject worthy of Your Highness's attention. Dioptrics gives us two kinds of instruments made of glasses, which serve to strengthen our sight so that we can discover objects that would escape the naked eye.

There are two cases in which our sight needs help. The first is when objects are too far away for us to see them distinctly. The heavenly bodies are like this, and the most important discoveries about them have been made with the help of these dioptric instruments. Your Highness will remember very well, for example, what I had the honor of telling you about the satellites of Jupiter, which lead us to the discovery of longitude. They are visible only with the help of good telescopes, and the satellites of Saturn call for still better ones.

The same is true, on the surface of the earth, of very distant objects, which we can see and examine exactly only with the help of telescopes, which show them to us just as if we were seeing them close up. These telescopes, or dioptric instruments, which we use to look at very distant objects, are also called telescopes and observing glasses.

The other case in which our sight needs help is when objects, though fairly near us, are too small for us to make out their parts. If we wanted, for example, to discover all the parts of the leg of a fly or of some other, smaller insect, or if we wanted to examine the smallest particles of our own bodies, such as the tiniest fibers of our muscles and nerves, we couldn't succeed without the help of certain instruments called microscopes, which show us small objects just as if they were a hundred, or even a thousand, times larger.

These, then, are the two kinds of instruments, telescopes and microscopes, by which dioptrics makes up for the weakness of our sight. These instruments were invented only a few centuries ago, and only since then have the most important discoveries been made, both in astronomy, with the help of telescopes and glasses, and in natural philosophy, with the help of microscopes.

All these marvelous effects are produced only by a certain shape that we give to pieces of glass, and by a happy combination of two or more of these glasses, which we call lenses. Dioptrics is the science that contains the principles of them, and Your Highness will also remember that it deals mainly with the path that rays of light take when they pass through transparent media of different kinds, when they pass, for example, from air into glass or water, and back again from glass or water into air.

As long as rays travel in the same medium, such as air, they continue on their way in straight lines LA, LB, LC, LD (Figure 49), drawn from the luminous point L from which the rays set out. When they meet an eye somewhere, as at C, they enter it and paint an image there of the object they came from. In this case the vision is called simple, or natural, and it shows us objects as they really are. The science that explains the principles of this vision is called optics.

But when the rays, before entering the eye, are reflected from a well-polished surface, as in a mirror, the vision is no longer natural, since in this case we see objects otherwise than they really are, and in a different place. The science that explains the foundations of this vision, which is produced by reflected rays, is called catoptrics. It also gives us instruments suited to extending the reach of our sight, and Your Highness knows the kinds of instruments that, by means of one or two mirrors, do us the same service as glasses made of lenses. These instruments fitted with mirrors are what we call telescopes. But to distinguish them from ordinary glasses, which are made only of lenses, it would be better to call them catoptric, reflecting or reflection telescopes. That would at least be more exact, because the name telescope was in use even before the discovery of instruments with mirrors, and then it meant the same thing as a spyglass.

I now propose to speak to Your Highness only about dioptric instruments, of which we have two kinds, as I have already had the honor of remarking, namely telescopes, or spyglasses, and microscopes. For both we use glasses formed in several different ways. I am going to explain the various kinds, among which there are first three main ones, according to the shape given to the surface of the glass.

The first shape is the plane, when the surface of a glass is flat, like that of an ordinary mirror. If we take, for example, a piece of mirror and remove the quicksilver attached to its back surface, we get a glass whose two surfaces are flat and which has the same thickness everywhere.

The second shape we can give to the surface of a glass is the convex. Then the glass is raised higher in the middle than toward the edges.

The third shape, finally, is the concave. Then the glass is sunk deeper in the middle than toward the edges.

From these three different shapes that can be given to the surface of a glass arise the following six kinds of glasses:

	I. The plano-plane glass is one whose two surfaces are flat.
	II. The plano-convex glass has one surface flat and the other convex.
	III. The plano-concave glass has one surface flat and the other concave.
	IV. The convexo-convex glass is one whose two surfaces are convex.
	V. The convexo-concave glass has one surface convex and the other concave.
	VI. The concavo-concave glass, finally, has both surfaces concave.

Figure 50 shows, under these numbers, the cross-sections of these glasses or lenses.

Letter 188: On the Curvature of Lenses

_12 December 1761_.

From what I've just said about the convex and concave faces of lenses, Your Highness easily understands that there can be lenses in an infinite number of varieties, since both the convexity and the concavity can be greater or less. Flat surfaces come in only one kind, because a surface can be flat in only one way. But a convex surface can be regarded as part of a sphere, and according to whether the radius or diameter of that sphere is greater or less, the convexity will be different. Or, since we draw lenses on paper as arcs of circles, according to whether those circles are larger or smaller, there results an infinity of lenses, in the convexity as well as the concavity of their surfaces.

As for the way glasses are shaped and polished, every possible care is taken to make their figure exactly circular or spherical. For this purpose we use metal basins, which are turned on a lathe to a spherical surface both inside and outside.

Let AEBDFC (Figure 51) be the cross-section of such a basin. It will have two faces, AEB and CFD, each of which can have its own radius. When we rub a piece of glass on the concave part AEB of this basin, the glass becomes convex. But if we rub it on the convex part CFD, it becomes concave. First we use sand to rub the glass against the basin until it has taken on its shape, and then we use a fine earth for the final polish.

To know the true shape of the faces of a lens, we only have to measure the radius of the face of the basin on which the lens was formed. For the true measure of the convexity or concavity of surfaces is the radius of the circle or sphere that fits them, and of which they form a part.

So when I say that the radius of the convex face AEB (Figure 52) is three inches, it should be understood that AEB is an arc of a circle drawn with a radius of three inches, the other face AB being flat.

To set before Your Highness's eyes even better the difference between convexities when their radii are greater or smaller, I will draw here several figures of different convexity: two inches, one inch, half an inch, a third of an inch, a fifth of an inch, a sixth of an inch, an eighth of an inch (Figure 53).

From this we see that the smaller the radius, the more the surface is curved, or different from a flat one. The greater the radius, on the other hand, the closer the surface comes to a flat one, or the arc of a circle to a straight line. If I made the radius greater still, in the end we would hardly see the curvature at all. We can barely notice it in the arc MN (Figure 53), whose radius is 6 inches, or half a foot. And if the radius were ten or a hundred times greater still, the curvature would become entirely imperceptible to the eye.

In dioptrics, however, things are not like this. I will have the honor of pointing out to Your Highness later on that even if the radius were a hundred or a thousand feet, so that we couldn't notice the curvature, its effect would nonetheless still be very noticeable. In fact, the radius would have to be infinitely great for the face to become perfectly flat. From this Your Highness can conclude that a flat face can be regarded as a convex face whose radius is infinitely great, or equally as a concave face with an infinitely great radius. This is the case where convexity and concavity merge, so that the flat face is the middle ground that separates convexity from concavity.

But the smaller the radii are, the more noticeable, or greater, the convexities and concavities become. That is why we say, conversely, that a convexity or concavity is greater the smaller its radius is, since the radius is its measure.

However great the variety may be that we can find among lenses or glasses, according to their two surfaces, which are flat, or convex, or concave, and these again in an infinity of different ways, we can nevertheless arrange them, with regard to the effect that results in dioptrics, into three main classes, as follows.

The first class includes glasses that are equally thick everywhere. Either their two faces are flat and parallel to each other (Figure 54), or one is convex and the other concave, but concentric, that is, drawn from the same center, so that the thickness stays the same everywhere (Figure 55). About these glasses it should be noted that they change nothing in how the objects we see through them appear. It is as if there were nothing between our eyes and the objects. For this reason, too, these glasses are of no use in dioptrics. It isn't that the rays entering such glasses suffer no refraction. It is that the refraction on entering is perfectly straightened out again on leaving, so that the rays, after passing through the glass, take up again the same route they held before entering. So it is the glasses of the other two classes that, because of their effect, are the main subject of dioptrics.

The second class of glasses holds those that are thicker in the middle than at the edges (Figure 56): I. plano-convex; II. convexo-convex; III. convexo-concave, or meniscus.

The effect is the same as long as the excess of the middle's thickness over the edges' thickness keeps the same proportion to the size of the glass. All the glasses of this class are usually called convex, since convexity dominates in them, although one of their faces may be flat or even concave.

The third class contains glasses that are thicker at the edges than in the middle (Figure 57): I. plano-concave; II. concavo-concave; III. concavo-convex, or meniscus. All of these produce a similar effect, which depends on the excess of thickness at the edges over that of the middle. Since concavity prevails in all these glasses of the third class, we call them simply concave. They must be carefully distinguished from those of the second class, which are the convex ones.

It is glasses of these last two classes that I propose to discuss with Your Highness in my following letters, explaining their effects in dioptrics.

Letter 189: On the Effect of Convex Lenses

_15 December 1761_.

To explain to Your Highness the effect that both convex and concave glasses produce in how objects appear, we must distinguish two cases. In one the object is very far from the glass, and in the other it is nearer.

But before I begin this explanation, I must say a word about what we call the axis of such a glass. Since the two surfaces are represented by arcs of circles, we only have to draw a straight line through the centers of these two circles. This line is called the axis of the glass. In Figure 58, for the glass AB, the center of the arc AEB is at C and that of the arc AFB is at D, so the straight line CD is called the axis of this glass, and it's easy to see that this axis passes through the middle of the glass. It is the same if the faces of the glass are concave. And if one is flat, the axis is perpendicular to it and passes through the center of the other face.

We can see from this that the axis crosses both faces perpendicularly. So a ray of light coming in the direction of the axis suffers no refraction, since rays passing from one medium into another are broken, or refracted, only insofar as they don't enter perpendicularly.

We can also prove that all the other rays that pass through the middle O of the glass suffer no refraction either, or rather that they become parallel to their original direction again.

To understand the reason, we only have to consider that at the points E and F the two faces of the glass are parallel to each other. For the angle MEB that the ray ME makes with the arc of the circle EB, or its tangent at E, is plainly equal to the angle PFA that this same ray, extended as EFP, makes with the arc of the circle AF, or its tangent at F. Your Highness remembers that two such angles are called alternate, and that it is proved that when alternate angles are equal, the straight lines are parallel to each other. Consequently the two tangents at E and F will be parallel, and it will be just as if the ray MEFP passed through a glass whose two faces were parallel to each other. Now we saw above that rays passing through such a glass don't change their route.

After these remarks, let us consider a convex glass AB (Figure 59), whose axis is the straight line OEFP. Suppose that at a very great distance from the glass, on its axis, there is an object or luminous point O, which sends out rays in every direction. Some of them will pass through our glass AB, such as OM, OE and ON. The middle one, OE, will suffer no refraction but will continue on its way through the glass, following the direction FP. The other two rays, OM and ON, passing near the edges of the glass, will be broken both on entering and on leaving. They will come together somewhere at J on the axis and then continue on their ways in the directions JQ and JR. We can also prove that all the other rays that fall between M and N will be broken in such a way that they meet the axis at the same point J. So the rays that, without the glass in between, would have continued on their straight routes OM and ON, will after refraction follow other routes, just as if they had set out from the point J. If there were an eye somewhere at P, it would be affected in the same way as if the luminous point were actually at J, though there is nothing real there. Your Highness need only suppose for a moment that there is a real object at J, which, sending out its rays, would be seen equally well by an eye placed at P, just as the eye now sees the object at O by the rays broken by the glass. For this reason, let us say that there is at J an image of the object O, and that the glass AB represents the object O there, or nearly carries it to J. It is no longer the point O that is the object of sight. It is rather its image represented at J that is the immediate object.

Here, then, is a very considerable change that this glass produces. A very distant object O is suddenly carried to J, from where the eye must surely receive an entirely different impression than if we took away the glass and the eye saw the true object O directly. Let Your Highness take a star to be at O. Since we suppose the point O to be extremely far away, the glass will show us at J an image of this star. But it is an image that we could never touch, and which in fact has no reality, since there is nothing real at J, except that the rays that set out from the point O are gathered together at J by the refraction of the glass. We mustn't imagine, either, that the star would appear to us in the same way as if the object or star really existed at J. Indeed, a body many thousands of times larger than the earth, how could it exist at J? All our senses would be struck by it in a very different way. So we must take careful note that it is only an image represented at J, rather like the image of a star represented at the back of the eye, or like the one we see in a mirror, whose effect has nothing surprising about it.
