Letters 200–204

Letter 200: On the Magnifying Power of Microscopes

_23 January 1762_.

When several people look at the same object through a microscope, say the foot of a fly, they all agree that it looks very big. But their judgments about its true size will differ widely. One will say the foot looks as big as a horse's, another that it looks like a goat's, a third like a cat's. Yet none of them has really said anything precise, unless he adds how far away he imagines the horse's foot, or the goat's, or the cat's to be. Each of them is quietly assuming some distance without saying so. Since those distances are surely different, there's no reason to be surprised that their opinions differ, because a horse's foot seen from far off may well look no bigger than a cat's foot seen up close. So when we want to say how much a microscope magnifies objects, we have to get used to speaking more precisely, and above all to state the distance we're comparing at.

Now, to begin with, it's not a good idea to compare the appearances a microscope gives us with objects of some other kind, which we're used to seeing sometimes far off and sometimes near. The surest way of settling the matter seems to be the one that the authors who write on microscopes actually use. They compare a small object seen through the microscope with the same object seen with the naked eye at a certain distance. In their opinion, to look at such a small object well with the naked eye, you have to place it at a distance of eight inches. They take good eyes as their standard, since a nearsighted person would bring it much closer, and a farsighted person would do the opposite. But this difference doesn't affect the reasoning, as long as we fix the distance we're measuring by. And there's no reason to fix any distance other than eight inches, which all the authors who have treated this subject have accepted. So when we say that a microscope makes objects 100 times bigger, Your Highness should understand that with the help of this microscope objects look 100 times bigger than if we looked at them from a distance of 8 inches, and in this way she'll form a correct idea of what a microscope does.

In general, a microscope magnifies as many times as an object looks bigger than it would to the naked eye, without any help from the glass, at a distance of 8 inches. Your Highness will readily agree that it's already a surprising effect to see an object 100 times bigger than it looks at 8 inches. But people have pushed this much further, and there are microscopes that magnify up to 500 times, which is astonishing. You could then truly say that the leg of a fly looks bigger than that of an elephant. I even believe that microscopes could be made that would magnify 1,000 times and even 2,000 times, and these would no doubt show us any number of things that are still unknown to us.

But when we say that an object looks 100 times bigger through the microscope than when seen at a distance of 8 inches, we have to understand that the object is magnified in length, width, and depth alike, so that each of these dimensions looks 100 times bigger. So we only have to picture, at a distance of 8 inches, another object like the first but with a length 100 times greater, and a width and depth 100 times greater too, and that will be the image we see through the microscope. Now, if the length, the width, and the depth of one object are all 100 times greater than those of another, Your Highness will easily understand that its whole extent will be much more than 100 times greater. To make this perfectly clear, let's imagine two parallelograms ABCD and EFGH (Figure 75) that have the same width, but where the length of the first, AB, is 5 times the length of the other, EF. It's clear that the area, or the space contained in the first, is 5 times that of the other, since the second is contained 5 times in the first. So for the parallelogram AD to be 5 times bigger than the parallelogram EH, it's enough that its length AB is 5 times greater while the width stays the same. And if, besides that, the width were also 5 times greater, it would become 5 times bigger again, and so 5 times 5, that is, 25 times bigger. So of two similar surfaces, where one is 5 times longer and 5 times wider than the other, the first really is 25 times bigger.

If we also take the depth or height into account, the increase will be greater still. Let Your Highness imagine two rooms, one of which is 5 times longer, 5 times wider, and also 5 times higher than the other. Its capacity becomes 5 times 25 times, that is, 125 times greater. So when we say that a microscope magnifies 100 times, since this must be understood of the length, the width, and the depth or thickness, that is, of all three dimensions, the whole extent of the object is increased 100 times 100 times 100 times. Now 100 times 100 makes 10,000, and taking that 100 times more gives 1,000,000, or a million. So when a microscope magnifies 100 times, the whole extent of the object is shown a million times greater. And yet we're content to say that the microscope magnifies only 100 times. What we have to understand is that each dimension, namely the length, the width, and the depth, is shown 100 times greater. So if a microscope magnified 1,000 times, the whole extent of the object would become 1,000 times 1,000 times 1,000 times greater, which makes 1,000,000,000, or a thousand million, and that would be an astonishing effect. This remark is really necessary if we want to form a correct idea of what is said about the power of microscopes.

Letter 201: The Basic Rule for Simple Microscopes

_26 January 1762_.

Now that I've explained to Your Highness how the power of microscopes should be judged, it will be easy for me to prove the basic rule for building simple microscopes. On this occasion I should point out that there are two kinds of microscopes. Some contain just one glass, and others contain two or more. The first are called simple microscopes, and the others compound microscopes, which need separate explanations. I'll speak to Your Highness first about simple microscopes, which consist of a single convex glass, and whose effect is fixed by this rule: A simple microscope magnifies as many times as its focal distance is shorter than 8 inches. Here is the proof.

Let MN (Figure 76) be such a convex glass, whose focal distance is CO, and the object OP has to be placed at about that distance so that the eye sees it distinctly. The eye will then see this object under the angle OCP. But if the same object were looked at from a distance of 8 inches, it would appear under an angle smaller by as many times as the distance of 8 inches exceeds the distance CO. So the object will look that many times bigger than if we looked at it from a distance of 8 inches. Now, by the rule established above, a microscope magnifies as many times as it shows us objects bigger than we'd see them from a distance of 8 inches. Therefore a microscope magnifies as many times as its focal distance is smaller than 8 inches. So a glass whose focal distance is one inch magnifies exactly 8 times, and a glass whose focal distance is only half an inch will magnify 16 times. From this it's easy to say how many times each glass will magnify when its focal distance is given in fractions of an inch, according to this table:

	Focal distance of the glass, in inches: 1, ⅔, ½, ⅓, ¼, ⅙, ¹⁄₁₂, ¹⁄₂₄
	The glass magnifies: 8, 12, 16, 24, 32, 48, 96, 192 times

So a convex glass whose focal distance is a twelfth of an inch magnifies 96 times, and if the distance is a twenty-fourth of an inch, the microscope will magnify 192 times, or about 200 times. If we wanted greater effects, we'd have to make glasses with an even shorter focus. Now, I've already remarked that to make a glass with a given focal distance, we only need to make the radius of each face equal to that focal distance, so that the glass is equally convex on both sides. So I'll now set before Your Highness's eyes the drawings of a few of these glasses or microscopes.

I. The distance AO of the focus of the glass MN (Figure 77) is one inch. This microscope therefore magnifies 8 times.

II. The focal distance of the glass MN is two-thirds of an inch. This microscope magnifies 12 times.

III. The focal distance of the glass MN is half an inch. This microscope magnifies 16 times.

IV. The focal distance of this glass is a third of an inch. This microscope magnifies 24 times.

V. The focal distance of this glass is a quarter of an inch. This microscope magnifies 32 times.

VI. The focal distance of this glass is a sixth of an inch. This microscope magnifies 48 times.

VII. The focal distance of this glass is only a twelfth of an inch. This microscope magnifies 96 times.

Much smaller microscopes can be made still. Craftsmen do make them, and by this means they give us much more considerable effects. But we should notice carefully that the distance from the object to the glass gets smaller and smaller, since it has to be about equal to the focal distance of the glass. I say about equal, because each eye brings the glass a little nearer or a little farther, depending on its makeup: the nearsighted bring it closer, and the farsighted keep it farther away. From this Your Highness sees that the greater the effect, the smaller the glass or microscope becomes, and the closer the object has to be brought. This is a very great inconvenience on one side, since it's awkward to look through so small a glass, and on the other, since the object has to be fixed so near the eye. People try to remedy these inconveniences with a suitable mounting that makes the instrument easier to use. But the view of the object gets considerably blurred as soon as its distance changes even slightly. And since in the smallest glasses the object must almost touch the glass, as soon as its surface is the least bit uneven, we see the object only confusedly. For when the raised parts are at the right distance, the hollows are too far away, and so can only be seen very confusedly. This is the main reason that obliges us to give up simple microscopes when we want microscopes that magnify a great deal, and to turn to compound microscopes.

Letter 202: The Limits and Faults of Simple Microscopes

_30 January 1762_.

Your Highness has just seen how simple microscopes are to be made, so that they magnify as many times as one could wish. We only have to fix a straight line, like the one I've marked AB (Figure 78), that contains exactly eight inches of the Rhine foot, which is the one used in Germany. Then, however many times we want to magnify the object, we divide this line AB into that many equal parts, and one of them gives the focal distance of the glass we want. So if we want to magnify a hundred times, the small piece A1 is the hundredth part of the line AB. Therefore we have to make a glass whose focal distance is exactly equal to this piece A1, which at the same time gives the radius of the faces of the glass shown as number VII in Figure 77.

Your Highness sees from this that the greater the effect, the smaller the glass has to be, and so does its focal distance, which is the distance at which the object OP has to be put in front of the glass, with the eye applied behind it. And if we made the glass twice as small as I've marked it for magnifying two hundred times, the glass would become so small that we'd almost need a microscope to see the glass itself. We'd also have to come so close that we'd almost touch the glass, which is certainly a very great inconvenience, as I've already had the honor to point out. So the effect of the microscope can hardly be pushed beyond two hundred times, which isn't enough to see the smallest things nature contains. The clearest water holds tiny animalcules that, even when we see them magnified two hundred times, still look only like fleas. We would need microscopes that magnify twenty thousand times to see them as big as a rat, and we're very far from reaching that degree, even with compound microscopes.

But besides the drawbacks of simple microscopes I've just noted, when very great effects are asked of them, everyone who uses these instruments complains of another that is no less troublesome. The more you magnify objects, the darker they look. It seems as though we're seeing them by the glow of a very faint light, or even by moonlight, so that we can hardly make anything out. Your Highness won't be surprised at this when she remembers that the light of the full moon is more than two hundred thousand times weaker than that of the sun. So it's a very important matter to explain where this loss of light comes from. It's easy to see that if the rays coming from a very small object have to show it to us as though it were much bigger, this small quantity of light couldn't be enough. However well founded this reason looks, it isn't valid, and it only dazzles us about the question. For if a glass that magnifies more necessarily brings a loss of brightness with it, we should notice it in the smaller magnifications as well, even if not to so high a degree. But we can magnify up to fifty times without noticing the slightest loss of light, though the light should be fifty times weaker if the reason offered were right. So we have to look elsewhere for the cause of this phenomenon, and we even have to go back to the first principles of vision.

On this occasion, may it please Your Highness to recall what I had the honor of telling her about the use of the pupil, that is, the black hole we see in the middle of the iris of the eye. It's through this opening that rays enter the eyes, and so the bigger this opening is, the more rays enter. Here we have to consider two cases: where objects are very luminous and bright, and where they are lit by only a very faint light. In the first case the pupil contracts by itself, without our will commanding it. The Creator has given it this ability to protect the inside of the eye from too great a blaze of light, which would inevitably hurt the nerves. So whenever we're in a very brightly lit place, we see all the pupils narrow, letting into the eyes only as many rays as are needed to paint a sufficiently luminous image there. But the opposite happens when we're in a dark place. Then the pupil widens to take in light in greater quantity. It's very easy to notice this change whenever we pass from a dark place into a brightly lit one. For the subject at hand, I'll confine myself to this one point: the more rays enter the eye, the more luminous the image cast on the retina will be. And conversely, the smaller the quantity of rays that enter the eye, the fainter the image in the eye becomes, and so the darker it looks. Now it can happen that very few rays enter the eye even though the pupil is wide open. You only have to make a small hole in a piece of cardboard with a pin and look at some object through it. However brightly the sun lights the object, it will look darker the smaller the hole is, and through a hole like that you can even look at the sun. The reason is quite plain, since very few rays enter the eye. However wide open the pupil is, it's the hole in the cardboard that decides the quantity of light entering the eye, and not the pupil, which ordinarily does this job. The same thing happens in microscopes that magnify a great deal. When the glass is extremely small, only a very small quantity of rays passes through it, such as nm (Figure 79), and since this is smaller than the opening of the pupil, the object has to look that much darker. From this we see that this loss of light only occurs when the glass MN, or rather its open part, is smaller than the pupil. If it were possible to produce a great magnification by means of a larger glass, this darkening wouldn't occur, and that is the true explanation of the question we posed. But to remedy this drawback in the great effects of the microscope, people try to light the object as much as possible, so as to strengthen the few rays carried to the eye. For this purpose they light objects by the sun itself, and they also use mirrors that send the sun's brightness onto them. These are about all the circumstances we have to consider in simple microscopes, and from them Your Highness will easily judge the effect of all those she may have occasion to see.

Letter 203: On Telescopes and What They Do

_2 February 1762_.

Before explaining the construction of compound microscopes, I hope Your Highness won't mind a digression on spyglasses or telescopes. These two kinds of instruments are perfectly linked together, and each helps to explain the other.

Just as microscopes serve to examine nearby objects by showing them to us under a much greater angle than if we looked at them from a certain distance, such as 8 inches, the other kind is meant to show us very distant objects better, by showing them under a greater angle than the naked eye sees. These instruments go by several names, depending on their size as well as their purpose. The smallest are called pocket spyglasses. Other larger ones have the same name, which must be carefully distinguished from the glasses old people wear on their noses. The ones astronomers use are called tubes, and the general name for all of them is telescopes. So these are the instruments that show us very distant objects under a greater angle than they appear to the naked eye. This definition is quite exact, and contains nothing arbitrary, unlike that of microscopes, whose effect is referred to a certain arbitrary distance, commonly taken to be 8 inches.

But when we're dealing with very distant objects, whose distance is too great for our sight, the effect is referred quite naturally to that same distance, and a telescope magnifies as many times as it shows us objects under a greater angle than the naked eye. For example, the moon looks to the naked eye to be under an angle of half a degree. So a telescope magnifies 100 times when it shows us the moon under an angle of 50°, which is 100 times greater than half a degree. If it magnified 200 times, it would show us the moon under an angle of 100°, and so the moon would seem to fill more than half of the visible sky, whose whole extent is only 180°.

People commonly say that telescopes bring objects closer to us. This is a rather ambiguous way of speaking, and it allows two different meanings. One is that, when seeing through a telescope, we judge objects to be as many times nearer to us as the telescope magnifies. But I've already had the honor of pointing out to Your Highness that we can only know the distances of objects by judgment, and that this judgment can only take place for objects that aren't very far away. So when objects are as far away as we're supposing here, such a judgment about distances would be badly mistaken. The other meaning is closer to the truth, when what's meant is that telescopes show us objects as big as we would see them if we came nearer to them. For Your Highness knows that the closer we come to an object, the larger the angle under which it appears, and so this explanation comes back to the one I gave at the beginning. Still, when we look at very familiar objects, such as men at a great distance, and we see them through a spyglass under a much larger angle, we're inclined to imagine that these men are actually much nearer, since we would then really see them under a correspondingly larger angle. But when the objects are not well known, like the sun and the moon, no estimate of distance can take place. Here the case is quite different from the one I described to Your Highness, where a concave glass, worn by people with short sight, shows the images of objects at a very small distance. For example, the concave glass I use shows me the images of all distant objects at a distance of 4 inches. Yet I don't imagine at all that the sun, the moon, and the stars are so close to me. So we don't judge objects to be where their images, shown by the glasses, are located. We believe it as little as we believe that objects are in our eyes, even though their images are painted there. And Your Highness will remember well that the judgment about the true distance of objects, like the one about their true size, depends on quite particular circumstances.

The main purpose of telescopes is therefore to enlarge, or multiply, the angle under which objects appear to the naked eye. That is why telescopes are divided chiefly according to the effect they give. We say that one telescope magnifies 5 times, another 10 times, another 20 times or 30 times, and so on. On this point I note that pocket spyglasses seldom magnify beyond 10 times, but the ordinary spyglasses used for examining very distant objects on the earth magnify from 20 to 30 times, and their length goes up to 6 feet and more. An effect like that, though very considerable for objects on the earth, is still small for the heavenly bodies, which call for a much greater effect. So there are astronomical spyglasses, or tubes, that magnify from 50 times up to 100 times. It seems hard to go further, since, by the usual way of building them, the greater the effect, the longer these spyglasses become. One that is to magnify 100 times is already 30 feet long, and one of 100 feet can hardly magnify 200 times. From this Your Highness understands that the difficulty of aiming and handling such machines puts insurmountable obstacles in the way of pushing the experiment further. The famous Hevelius, an astronomer of Danzig, used tubes 200 feet long. But those instruments must have been very faulty, since today the same things are discovered with much shorter ones.

So this is, in broad outline, the description of telescopes and their various kinds. It's good to keep it in mind before entering into the details of how they're built, and how two or more glasses are combined to produce all the different effects.

Letter 204: On Pocket Spyglasses

_6 February 1762_.

We don't know for certain who deserves the credit for discovering telescopes, whether a Dutch craftsman or an Italian named Porta. Whichever it was, it was about 150 years ago that people began to make small pocket spyglasses, made of two glasses, one convex and the other concave. It seems that pure chance is all we owe such a useful discovery to. Without any plan, someone may have moved two glasses closer together or farther apart until objects appeared distinct.

The convex glass PAP (Figure 80) is pointed toward the object, and the eye is put to the concave glass QBQ. For this reason the glass PAP is called the objective, and the glass QBQ the eyepiece. These two glasses are set on the same axis AB, which is perpendicular to both glasses and passes through their middles. The focal distance of the convex glass PAP must be greater than that of the concave glass, and the glasses must be arranged so that, if AF is the focal distance of the objective PAP, the focus of the eyepiece QBQ falls on the same point F. So the interval AB between the glasses is the difference between the focal distances of the two glasses, AF being the focal distance of the objective, and BF that of the eyepiece. When the glasses are in place, people with good sight will see distant objects very well, and the objects will look as many times bigger as the line AF is longer than BF. So, taking the focal distance of the objective as 6 inches and that of the eyepiece as 1 inch, objects will be magnified 6 times, or will appear under an angle 6 times greater than to the naked eye. And in this case the interval between the glasses A and B will be 5 inches, which is also the length of the spyglass. Your Highness can feel, without my telling her, that these two glasses are fitted into a tube of the same length, though I haven't shown it in the figure.

After explaining how the two glasses must be joined together to make a good instrument, there are two things I must point out to Your Highness. One is why these glasses show us objects distinctly, and the other is why they look magnified as many times as the line AF exceeds the line BF. As for the first, we should note that a good eye sees objects best when they are so far away that the rays falling into the eye can be regarded as parallel to each other.

So let's consider a point V (Figure 81) in the object toward which the spyglass is aimed. Since we suppose it very far away, the rays that fall on the objective PQ, QA, PQ will be almost parallel to each other. And since the objective QAQ is a convex glass, it will unite them in its focus F, so that these rays, being convergent, wouldn't suit a good eye. Now, the concave glass at B has the power of making rays more divergent, or of reducing their convergence. It will refract the rays QR and QR so that they become parallel to each other. Or rather, instead of meeting at F, they'll take the path RS, RS, parallel to the axis BF. And so a good eye, which is always the standard in the construction of these instruments, receiving these parallel rays RS, RS, will see the object distinctly. The reason the rays RS, RS become exactly parallel to each other is that the concave glass has its focus, or rather its point of dispersion, at F.

Your Highness only has to remember that when parallel rays fall on a concave glass, they become divergent by refraction, so that, when continued backward, they meet in the focus. That being so, we only have to reverse the case and regard the rays SR, SR as incident on the concave glass. Then it's certain that they'll take the paths RQ, RQ, which, when continued backward, meet at the point F, where the convex and concave glasses have their common focus. Now it's a general law that, however rays are refracted in going from one place to another, they must always undergo the same refractions in returning from the second place to the first. So if the refracted rays RQ, RQ correspond to the incident rays SR, SR, then, conversely, if the rays QR, QR are the incident ones, the refracted ones will be RS and RS.

The matter may become clearer still if I say that concave glasses have the power of making parallel those rays which, without the refraction, would have gone to their foci. Or Your Highness can simply take hold of the following rules about refraction, both by convex and by concave glasses.

I. By a convex glass (Figure 82), parallel rays become convergent. Convergent rays become even more convergent (Figure 83). And divergent rays become less divergent.

II. By a concave glass, parallel rays become divergent (Figure 84). Divergent rays become even more divergent (Figure 85). And convergent rays become less convergent.

All this is founded on the nature of refraction and the shape of the glasses, and going into the details would take too long a discussion. Besides, the two rules I've just given contain the essentials. So it's sufficiently proved that when the convex glass and the concave glass are joined so that they share a focus at F, distant objects will be shown distinctly by them. For the parallelism of the rays is restored by the concave glass after the convex glass has made them convergent. Put another way, the rays from very distant objects, being almost parallel to each other, become convergent through convex glasses, and then the concave glass undoes this convergence and makes the rays parallel to each other again.
