Letters 214–218

Letter 214: Narrowing the Aperture of Glasses

_19 March 1762_.

When the diffusion space of an objective glass is so large that the blurring of the image it causes can't be tolerated, nothing is easier than to cure the fault. All we have to do is cover the glass with a circle of cardboard pierced by a hole near the center, so that the glass can pass only the rays that fall through the hole, and the rays that used to pass through the edges of the glass are shut out. Now that only the rays passing near the middle of the glass are transmitted, the smaller the hole is, the smaller the diffusion space will be. So by making the hole smaller, we can make the diffusion space as small as we like.

The result is the same as if the glass were no bigger than the hole. The part covered by the cardboard becomes useless, and it is the hole that determines the aperture of the glass. This remedy is in fact how people give objective glasses whatever aperture they think fit.

In Figure 99, PP is the objective glass, with the cardboard NN, pierced by the hole MM, placed in front of it. We now say that this hole MM is the aperture of the glass. Here the aperture MM is about half of what it would be if we took the cardboard away, and so the diffusion space is much smaller. It turns out that in this case the diffusion space is only a quarter of what it was before. A smaller hole MM, only a third of PP, would make the diffusion space 9 times smaller. So the effect of this remedy is very considerable, and if we cover even a little of the edges of a glass, the effect is very noticeable.

Suppose, then, that a telescope has the fault that objects don't look sharp enough. A row of images running together must necessarily produce confusion, so we only need to narrow the aperture of the objective glass with such a cardboard, and the confusion will vanish without fail. But we fall into another fault that is no less troublesome: the degree of brightness is reduced. Your Highness will remember that every magnification requires a certain aperture in the objective, so that as many rays are transmitted through it as we need to give us enough brightness. It is very annoying, then, that in curing one fault we expose ourselves to another. A good telescope absolutely must supply enough brightness without harming the sharpness with which it shows objects.

But might there not be a way of reducing the diffusion space of objective glasses, or even reducing it to nothing, without narrowing their aperture? That is the great question people have been working on for some time, and its solution promises the greatest progress in dioptrics. So I will have the honor of explaining to Your Highness the means that learned men have devised to reach this goal.

The focus of the rays passing through the middle of a convex glass is farther from the glass than the focus of the rays passing near the edges. People noticed that concave glasses produce the opposite effect, and this led to the question of whether a convex glass might be combined with a concave one in such a way that the diffusion space would be entirely destroyed, while the combined glass would still have the same effect as an ordinary single objective. Your Highness knows that concave glasses are measured by their focal distance just as convex ones are, with this difference: the focus of a concave glass is only imaginary and falls in front of the glass, while the focus of a convex glass is real and falls behind it. With that noted, the reasoning goes like this.

I. If behind a convex glass PAP (Figure 100) we place a concave glass QBQ with the same focal distance, the rays that the convex glass would gather at its focus will be refracted by the concave glass so that they become parallel to one another again, just as they were before passing through the convex glass.

II. In this case, then, the concave glass destroys the effect of the convex glass, and it is the same as if the rays had simply continued on their natural course without being refracted at all. For the concave glass, having its focus at the same point F, restores to parallel the rays that were about to meet at the point F.

III. If the focal distance of the concave glass were smaller than that of the convex glass, it would have the greater effect and would make the rays diverge, as in Figure 101. The parallel incident rays LM, BA, LM, passing through the two glasses, take the paths KO, BF, NO, which diverge from one another. Together, then, these two glasses produce the same effect as a certain single concave glass that would give the same divergence to the parallel incident rays. So two such glasses joined together, when the concave one has a smaller focal distance than the convex one, are equivalent to a single concave glass.

IV. But if the concave glass QQ (Figure 102) has a greater focal distance than the convex glass PP, it isn't even enough to make parallel the rays that the convex glass alone would gather at its focus F. These rays will remain convergent, but their convergence will be reduced by the concave glass, so that instead of meeting at F, the rays will meet at a more distant point O.

V. These two glasses joined together will therefore produce the same effect as a single convex glass with its focus at O, since such a glass would gather the parallel rays LM, BA, LM at the very same point. It is clear from this that two glasses, one convex and one concave, can be combined in an infinite number of ways so that their combination is equivalent to a given convex glass.

VI. Such a double objective glass can therefore be used in telescopes in place of the single one it is equivalent to, and the effect on magnification will be exactly the same. The diffusion space, however, will be quite different, and it may turn out to be either larger or smaller than that of a single objective. In the latter case the double objective will be much preferable to the single one.

VII. But there is more. It has been found that two glasses can be arranged in such a way that the diffusion space is reduced entirely to nothing, which is without doubt the most advantageous case for the perfection of telescopes. Calculation reveals these arrangements to us, but the craftsmen are not yet skillful enough to carry them out.

Letter 215: On Compound Objectives

_16 March 1762_.

A combination of two glasses like the one I have just described to Your Highness is called a compound objective. Its aim is that all the rays, both those passing through the middle of the glass and those passing near the edges, are gathered at a single point, so that only one image is formed there, with no diffusion, as happens in simple objectives. If the craftsmen succeeded in building it, we would draw the greatest advantages from it. I will give Your Highness an account of them.

First, it's evident that the picture of objects must be much sharper and better defined, since vision would no longer be troubled by that row of images that occupy the diffusion space when the objective is simple.

Second, this diffusion space is the only reason that obliges us to give simple objectives such an excessive focal distance, in order to make its troublesome effect unnoticeable. If we use compound objectives like these, we are no longer reduced to that inconvenient expedient, and we can make incomparably shorter telescopes that give the same magnification.

When we want to magnify 100 times with a simple objective, its focal distance can't be smaller than 30 feet. The length of the telescope becomes even greater because of the eyepiece, whose focal distance has to be added. A smaller objective would produce an unbearable confusion because of its larger diffusion space. Now a length of 30 feet is not only very inconvenient, but craftsmen also rarely succeed in making glasses with such a great focal distance. Your Highness will easily understand the reason, since the radius of the faces of this glass must also be 30 feet. It is very difficult to draw so large a circle exactly, and the slightest error makes all the work useless.

Such accidents are not to be feared in making compound objectives, which can be formed from smaller circles, as long as they can take the aperture the magnification requires. So to magnify 100 times, we saw that the aperture of the objective must be 3 inches. Now it would certainly be possible to build a compound objective with a focal distance of only 100 inches that would admit an aperture of more than 3 inches. Since the focal distance of the eyepiece must be 100 times smaller, it would be one inch. And since the interval between the glasses must be the sum of their focal distances, the length of the telescope would be only 101 inches, which is 8 feet 5 inches, much shorter than 30 feet.

But it seems that such a compound objective with its focus at 50 inches could just as well admit an aperture of 3 inches, and even more. So, taking an eyepiece of half an inch focal distance, we would get the same magnification of 100 times, and the length of the telescope would be cut in half, that is, to 4 feet and almost 3 inches. Such a telescope would therefore produce the same effect as an ordinary one of 30 feet, which is without doubt the greatest advantage one could wish for.

If such a compound objective succeeded, we would only have to double all the measurements to get one that admitted an aperture of 6 inches. This one could be used to magnify 200 times, with an eyepiece of half an inch focal distance, since that is the two-hundredth part of the focal distance of the objective, which in this case would be 100 inches. Now an ordinary telescope that magnifies 200 times is longer than 100 feet, while one made with a compound objective is only about 8 feet long and can be used very conveniently in practice. A telescope of 100 feet, by contrast, is a burden that is almost entirely useless.

But we could push the matter much further, and double the measurements once more, to get a compound objective with a focal distance of 200 inches, or 16 feet 8 inches, admitting an aperture of 12 inches, or a foot. Then, taking an eyepiece of half an inch focal distance, since 200 inches contain 400 half inches, we would have a telescope that magnifies 400 times and is still quite manageable at under 17 feet. If we wanted to produce the same magnification with a simple objective glass, the telescope would have to be longer than 300 feet, and such a telescope would certainly be of no use at all because of its prodigious length.

In Paris there is a telescope of 120 feet, and in London one of 130 feet. But the terrible difficulties of mounting them and pointing them almost wipe out the advantages that were hoped for. From this Your Highness will easily judge how important it would be to succeed in building the compound objectives I have been speaking of. I gave the first ideas for them several years ago, and since then the most skillful craftsmen in England and France have been working to carry them out. The thing takes many trials and great skill on the part of the workman. Although I had the instrument maker of our Academy make a few trials, not without success, the expense such an undertaking demands forced me to give it up.

But last year the Society of Sciences in London announced that a very skillful craftsman named Dollond had happily succeeded, and now his telescopes are admired everywhere. In Paris an equally skillful craftsman, named Passement, boasts of a similar success. Both of them once did me the honor of corresponding with me on this subject. But since the main task was to overcome some great obstacles in practice, which I never meddled in, it is only fair that I leave them the glory of the discovery. Only the theoretical part belongs to me, and it cost me very deep researches and the most painful calculations, which would frighten Your Highness at the mere sight of them. So I will take care not to entertain you on this thorny subject.

Letter 216: On Making Simple Objectives

_20 March 1762_.

Still, to give Your Highness some idea of the research that led me to the construction of compound objectives, I must begin with the formation of simple glasses. I note that the two faces of a glass can be formed in an infinite number of different ways. The faces are parts of circles, and those circles can be equal or unequal to each other, provided the focal distance always stays the same.

Ordinarily the two faces of a glass are given the same shape. Since the faces of glasses are represented by arcs of circles, this means making the radii of the two faces equal. Convenience in the work has no doubt recommended this shape, since the same basin (the dish on which the glass is ground) can be used to form both faces, and most workmen have only a small number of basins.

So suppose a convex glass whose two faces are both worked on the same basin, with a radius of 24 inches, so that each face is an arc of a circle with a radius of 24 inches. Such a glass is called equally convex on both sides, and it will have its focus at a distance of 24 inches, as is commonly reckoned. But the focus depends on refraction, and refraction is by no means the same in all kinds of glass. There is quite a considerable variety, depending on whether the glass is whiter or harder. So this estimate of the focus is not strictly right, and usually the focal distance of the glass is a little less than the radius of its two faces, sometimes by a tenth part, sometimes by a twelfth. The glass I have just supposed, with a radius of 24 inches on each face, will therefore have its focus at a distance of about 22 inches if it is made of the same kind of glass that mirrors are commonly made from, although even within this kind of glass there is a small variation in refraction.

Now I note that by making the two faces of the glass unequal, we can form an infinity of other glasses that all have the same focal distance. If we take the radius of one face smaller than 24 inches, we take the radius of the other face larger in a certain proportion. We can always take the radius of one face at will and, by means of a certain rule, find the radius of the other face so that the focal distance becomes the same as if each face had a radius of 24 inches. The following table offers several such glasses, all with the same focal distance.

Glasses I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX.

	First face:	24, 21, 20, 18, 16, 15, 14, 13, 12.
	Second face:	24, 28, 30, 36, 48, 60, 84, 156, infinite.

In the last form the radius of one face is only 12 inches, half of 24 inches, but the radius of the other becomes infinite. That is, this face is an arc of an infinitely large circle, and since such an arc no longer differs from a straight line, this face will be flat, and the glass plano-convex.

If we wanted to take the radius of one face smaller still, less than 12 inches, the other face would have to be made concave, and the glass would become convex-concave and then take the name meniscus. Here too are several forms of it:

Menisci X, XI, XII, XIII, XIV, XV, XVI.

	Convex face:	11, 10, 9, 8, 6, 4, 3.
	Concave face:	132, 60, 36, 24, 12, 6, 4.

So here is yet another kind of glass, the last of which is shown in Figure 103, and we now have 16 different kinds, all with their focus at the same distance, which will be about 22 inches, or a little more or less, depending on the nature of the glass.

So when the only question is the focal distance the glass should have, it makes no difference which of these forms it is worked into. But there is a very great difference in the diffusion space each kind is subject to, and this space is smaller in some than in others. When we want a simple objective glass, as is usual, it is no longer a matter of indifference which kind its shape is drawn from. The best will without doubt be the one that gives the smallest diffusion space. This fine property doesn't belong to the first kind, where the two faces are equal, but roughly to the seventh kind. It has the special advantage that when we turn toward the object its more convex face, the one with the smaller radius, the diffusion space turns out to be about half as small as if the glass were equally convex on both sides. This, then, is the most advantageous shape to give simple objective glasses, and the practical workmen agree about it.

From this it is clear that to judge the diffusion space of any glass, it isn't enough to know its focal distance. We must know its kind, that is, the radii of the one face and the other, and we must also be sure which one is turned toward the object.

After this explanation, I note that in order to find the combination of two glasses that produce no diffusion of the image, we absolutely must take into account the shape of both faces of each glass, and we have this problem to solve: what must the radii of the faces of the two glasses be, so that the diffusion space is reduced to nothing? The solution of this question demands the deepest researches of the most sublime geometry. And even after the problem is solved, the craftsman still finds many difficulties to overcome. He has to give the basins exactly the same curvature that the calculation prescribed, and that is not yet enough. While the glass is being worked on the basin to make it take on the right shape, the basin itself suffers in its turn, so the shape of the basin has to be corrected from time to time, and with the greatest precision. If any of these precautions is missed, no one can promise himself a happy success. It is also very hard to prevent the glass from taking a shape slightly different from that of the basin. From all this Your Highness will easily judge how difficult it must be to bring this important part of dioptrics to perfection.

Letter 217: A Second Source of Blurred Images

_23 March 1762_.

Your Highness has just seen how to remedy the trouble that the rays passing through the edges of a glass don't gather at the same point where those passing through its middle are gathered, so that an infinity of images arises, scattered through the diffusion space. But this is not the only trouble glasses are subject to. There is another, all the more important because it seems impossible to remedy, since its cause is not in the glass but in the nature of the rays themselves.

Your Highness will remember that there is a great variety among rays with respect to the different colors they make us feel. I compared this variety with the one we find among notes, having laid down as a principle that each color is attached to a certain number of vibrations. But even if this explanation still seems doubtful, it is always quite certain that rays of different colors also undergo different refractions in passing from one transparent medium into another. Red rays undergo the least refraction and violet rays the greatest, although the difference is almost imperceptible. All the other colors, such as orange, yellow, green and blue, lie between these two limits as far as refraction goes. We should also note that white is a mixture of all these colors, which are separated from one another by refraction.

Indeed, when (Figure 104) a white ray OP, or a ray of sunlight, falls obliquely on a piece of glass ABCD, instead of continuing on its way in the direction PQ, it is not only turned aside, but also divides into several rays. The first of them, Pr, which is turned aside the least, represents the color red, and the last, Pv, which is turned aside the most, the color violet. The dispersion rv is much smaller than the figure shows, but their divergence becomes more and more noticeable.

From this different refrangibility of rays, according to their different colors, the following phenomena arise with respect to dioptric glasses.

I. Let PP (Figure 105) be a convex glass. On its axis OR, at a very great distance, lies the object Oo, whose image formed by the glass we want to determine. Here we set aside the first irregularity, the one that concerns diffusion, or, what comes to the same thing, we consider only the rays that pass through the middle of the glass AB, just as if its edges were covered by a cardboard.

II. Now suppose that the object Oo is red, so that all its rays are also of the same nature. The glass will form somewhere an image Rr that is also red. The point R is then called the focus of the red rays, or of those that undergo the least refraction.

III. But if the object Oo is violet, since the rays of this color undergo the greatest refraction, the image Vv will be closer to the glass than the previous one, Rr. This point V is called the focus of the violet rays.

IV. If the object were tinted with some other color, intermediate between red and violet, the image would fall between the places R and V. It would still be quite sharp, and bounded by the straight line oB, drawn from the end of the object o through the middle of the glass, this rule being general for all colors.

V. But if the color of the object is not pure, as is the case in almost all bodies, or if the object Oo is white, which is a mixture of all the colors, then the different kinds of rays are separated by refraction, and each will form an image of its own. The one formed by the red rays will be at Rr, and the one formed by the violet rays at Vv, and the whole space RV will be filled with the images of the intermediate colors.

VI. Of each object Oo, then, the glass PP will form an infinity of images, arranged through the small space RV. The one farthest from the glass, Rr, is red, the nearest, Vv, is violet, and the middle ones are of the intermediate colors, in the order of the colors we see in the rainbow.

VII. Each of these images will be quite sharp in itself, and all of them are bounded by the straight line oBvr, drawn from the end of the object o through the middle of the glass B. But all of them together cannot be seen without a quite noticeable confusion.

VIII. So a diffusion space arises here too, as in the first irregularity. It differs from that one in that this one is independent of the aperture of the glass, and each image is tinted with a particular color.

IX. This diffusion space RV depends on the focal distance of the glass, so that it is always about the 28th part of it. So when the focal distance of the glass PP is 28 feet, the space RV becomes equal to a whole foot, that is, the distance between the red image Rr and the violet image Vv is one foot. If the focal distance were twice as great, or 56 feet, the space RV would be 2 feet, and so on.

X. This makes the estimate of the focal distance of a glass uncertain, since the rays of each color have their own focus. When we speak of the focus of a glass, we ought always to say which color we mean. But commonly it is understood of rays of a nature intermediate between red and violet, which corresponds to the color green.

XI. So when we say, without explaining further, that the focal distance of some glass is, for example, 56 feet, we must understand that it is the green image that falls at this distance. The red image will then fall about a foot farther away, and the violet one a foot nearer.

Here, then, is a new and quite essential circumstance that must be taken into account in dioptric instruments.

Letter 218: A Remedy Using Glass and Water

_27 March 1762_.

We must carefully distinguish this new diffusion, or multiplication of the image, which comes from the different refrangibility of the rays, in that they are of different colors, from the earlier one, which came from the aperture of the glass, and from the fact that rays passing near the edges form a different image from those passing through the middle. So this new trouble also has to be remedied in a quite different way from the first.

Your Highness will kindly remember that I proposed two means of remedying the earlier trouble. One consisted in enlarging the focal distance in order to lessen the curvature of the faces of the glass. That remedy led us to telescopes that are extremely long when a great magnification is wanted. The other remedy consisted in combining two glasses, one convex and one concave, to temper the refraction, so that all the rays transmitted by the glasses gather at the same point and the diffusion space is reduced to nothing.

But neither of these remedies gives us any help against this new trouble, caused by the different refrangibility of the rays. The first even produces the exact opposite effect, since the more we increase the focal distance of the glass, the larger the space over which the colored images are scattered becomes. Combining two or more glasses is no help either. It has been found, by experiment as well as by theory, that the images of different colors always remain separate, however large the number of glasses the rays are made to pass through, and that the difference grows greater the more the telescope has to magnify.

This circumstance frightened the great Newton so much that he despaired of remedying the fault, which he believed to be absolutely inseparable from all dioptric instruments in which vision is made by refracted rays. For that reason he decided to give up refraction entirely, and formed the plan of using mirrors in place of objective glasses, since reflection is always the same for all rays. This idea then gave us those excellent reflecting telescopes whose surprising effects are admired. I will speak of them specially another time, once I have reported everything that concerns instruments that work by refraction.

When I became convinced that it was impossible to remedy the different refrangibility of the rays by combining several glasses, I noticed that the reason lies in the law of refraction, which is the same in all kinds of glass. And I realized that if we could use other transparent materials whose refraction differed considerably from that of glass, it would be quite possible to combine such a material with glass so that all the different rays would unite to form a single image, with no diffusion space. I then followed this idea further, and I found a way to make, out of glass and water, objectives entirely free of the effect of the different refrangibility of the rays, which consequently should give as good an effect as Newton's mirrors.

Now I carried out this idea with two menisci, or convex-concave glasses (Figure 106), one of which is AACC and the other BBCC. I joined them together by their concave faces, filling with water the hollow that remained between them. The rays that enter through the glass AACC must therefore cross the water held between the two glasses before leaving through the other glass, CCBB. Each ray thus undergoes four refractions: the first on entering the glass AACC from the air, the second on passing from that glass into the water, the third on passing from the water into the other glass CCBB, and the fourth on leaving that glass into the air.

Since the four faces of these two glasses all come into play here, I found a way to determine their radii so that, whatever the color of a ray of light after undergoing these four refractions, it gathers at the same point, and the different refrangibility no longer produces different images.

At first these objectives, made of two glasses and water, fell too much into the first trouble, that the rays passing near the edges form a different focus from those passing through the middle. But after very painful research I found a way to proportion the radii of the four faces so that these compound objectives should be freed at once from the troubles of both kinds. But to do this, all the measurements prescribed by the calculation had to be carried out so exactly that the slightest error wrecked all the advantages that were expected from it, so I did not want to insist any further on building these objectives. Besides, this project would remedy only the troubles to be feared from the objective glass, and the eyepiece would still be sure to produce an equally troublesome effect, which cannot be remedied in the same way. Telescopes are also often built with several eyepieces, as I will have the honor of explaining later. So there would be little gain in stopping too scrupulously at the objective alone and neglecting the other glasses, although their effect is slight compared with that of the objective.

But however much trouble this research cost me, I must frankly admit that I now give up entirely on building such objectives made of glass and water. That is not only because they are too awkward to make, but also because I have since discovered other means, not of destroying the effect of the different refrangibility of the rays, but of making it unnoticeable. I will have the honor of speaking to Your Highness about this by the next post.
