Letters 219–223

Letter 219: A More Practical Remedy for This Defect

_30 March 1762_.

When reflecting telescopes came into fashion, people ran down refracting telescopes so thoroughly that you would have thought they deserved no fate but to be thrown out altogether. And ever since, their construction has been neglected completely, in the firm belief that any effort spent on improving them would be wasted, because the great Newton had demonstrated that the harmful effects of the different refrangibility of the rays were absolutely inseparable from the construction of telescopes.

On that view, no telescope can show us objects except with an unbearable confusion, and the greater the magnification, the worse it gets. Yet although we find telescopes that are extremely faulty in this respect, we also sometimes find very good ones, which are not at all inferior to the much-praised reflecting telescopes. This is surely a great paradox. If the fault charged against telescopes were well founded, we ought to find none that was free of it. So this exception, which experience assures us of, deserves all our attention.

The task, then, is to dig into the real reason why some telescopes show objects fairly sharply, while others are only too subject to the fault caused by the different refrangibility of the rays. I believe I have discovered the reason, and I will lay it before Your Highness in the following reflections.

I. It is quite certain that the objective lens forms an infinite number of images of each object. All of them lie spread out along the space of diffusion, and each is tinted with its own color, as I proved in my previous letter.

II. Each of these images becomes an object for the eyepiece lens, which shows each one separately in the color that belongs to it. So through the telescope the eye discovers an infinite number of images arranged in a certain order, according to the refraction of the lenses.

III. And if we use several eyepiece lenses instead of one, the same thing will always happen, and instead of one image, the telescope will present to the eye an infinite number of them, or a row of images, each of which shows the object on its own, but in a particular color.

IV. Let us therefore consider the last images that the telescope offers to the eye placed at O (Figure 107). Let Rr be the red image and Vv the violet one, with the images of the other colors lying between these two in the order of their different refrangibility. In this figure I haven't drawn the lenses of the telescope, since all that matters here is how the eye sees these images. We only need to think of the distance from the eye O to these images as very great.

V. All these images, Rr and Vv, together with the ones between them, are therefore situated on the axis of the telescope ORV, and are bounded by a certain straight line rv, which is called the terminating line of all the images.

VI. As I've drawn these images in the figure, the red image Rr is seen by the eye at O under the angle ROr, which is larger than the angle VOv, under which the violet image Vv is seen. Therefore the violet rays that enter the eye from the image Vv mix with the red ones that come from the part Rr of the red image Rr.

VII. Consequently the eye cannot see the violet image without a mixture of rays of other colors, rays that belong to different points of the object itself. So the point r of the red image is confused in the eye with the end v of the violet image, and a great confusion must arise from this.

VIII. Now, since the ray rO is not mixed with any others, the end that is seen will look red, or in other words, the image that is seen will seem bordered with red, which then mixes successively with the other colors. The object will therefore look bordered with the colors of the rainbow. This is a very common fault in telescopes, though some are less subject to it than others.

IX. If the larger image Rr were the violet one and Vv the red one, the confusion would be just as unbearable. The only difference is that the edges of the object would then look bordered with violet instead of red.

X. The confusion therefore depends on the position of the terminating line rv in relation to the line VO, and on the variety that can occur there. So the confusion will sometimes be greater and sometimes smaller.

XI. Now let us consider the case where the last images shown by the telescope are so arranged that the terminating line rv, when extended, passes exactly through the eye. Then the eye will see all the ends of the images by a single ray rvO (Figure 108). And in general, all the points that correspond to one and the same point of the object will be carried into the eye by a single ray, and so they will be shown there distinctly.

XII. Here, then, is a case in which, in spite of the variety of images, the eye can see the object distinctly, without different parts of it being confused together, as happened in the previous case. This favorable case occurs whenever the terminating line rv, extended, passes through the place of the eye O.

XIII. The arrangement of the last images Rr and Vv depends on the arrangement of the eyepiece lenses. So to free telescopes of the fault charged against them, all we need to do is arrange these lenses so that the terminating line of the last images rv passes through the eye. Telescopes where this happens will always be excellent.

Letter 220: What a Good Telescope Must Offer

_3 April 1762_.

Gathering together what I've explained so far, Your Highness will readily agree that a telescope that is excellent in every respect, and free of every fault, is a very rare and precious thing, since so many circumstances have to be taken into account, each of which has a very essential influence on the construction of good telescopes. Because the good qualities are so numerous, it will be helpful to set them all before Your Highness's eyes at once, so that none escapes our attention.

I. The first quality concerns magnification. The more a telescope magnifies objects, the more perfect it undoubtedly is, provided none of the other good qualities is missing. Magnification is judged by the number of times the diameter of objects appears larger than it does to the naked eye. Your Highness will remember that in telescopes of two lenses, this is as many times as the focal distance of the objective lens exceeds that of the eyepiece. In telescopes with several lenses the judgment is more involved.

II. The second quality of a good telescope is brightness. A telescope is very faulty whenever it shows objects dimly, as if in a fog. To avoid this, the objective lens must have a sufficient opening, whose size is set by the magnification. The craftsmen have established this rule: to magnify 300 times, the diameter of the objective's opening must be three inches, and for any other magnification, in proportion. And when the objects aren't very luminous in themselves, it's a good idea to give the objective an even larger opening than this rule calls for.

III. The third quality consists in distinctness, or sharpness, of the picture. For this, the rays that pass through the edges of the objective must come together at the same point as those that pass through the middle, or at least the aberration must not be noticeable. When we use a single-lens objective, its focal distance must exceed a certain limit, which depends on the magnification. So when we want to magnify 100 times, the focal distance of the objective must be at least 30 feet. This is why it is distinctness that forces us to make telescopes so excessively long when a very great magnification is wanted. To remedy this drawback, we can use an objective made of two lenses, and if the craftsmen succeeded in building it, we would be able to shorten telescopes very considerably for the same magnification. On this point Your Highness will kindly remember what I had the honor of saying at some length on the subject.

IV. The fourth quality also concerns the sharpness or purity of the picture, insofar as it is disturbed by the different refrangibility of rays of different colors. I have shown how this drawback can be remedied. Since it is impossible for the images formed by the different rays to be united in a single one, the lenses must be arranged in a certain way that I explained in my previous letter, namely so that the terminating line of the last images passes through the eye. Unless that happens, the telescope will have the fault of showing objects surrounded by the colors of the rainbow, and this fault vanishes when the lenses are arranged in the way I demonstrated. For this purpose we need more than two lenses, so that we have the power to arrange them as they should be. Up to now I've spoken only of telescopes made of two lenses, one the objective and the other the eyepiece, and Your Highness knows that their separation is already determined by the focal distances, so that we are no longer free to change anything about it. Fortunately, though, the terminating line I spoke of passes roughly through the place of the eye. So the rainbow-color fault is hardly noticeable, as long as the previous fault has been remedied, especially when the magnification is not very great. But at very great magnifications it is a good idea to use two eyepiece lenses to eliminate the rainbow colors entirely, because in that case the smallest faults, being magnified equally, become unbearable.

V. The fifth and last good quality of telescopes is a large apparent field, that is, the space that the telescope shows us at one time. Your Highness remembers that the small pocket spyglasses with a concave eyepiece have the fault of too small a field, which makes them unable to magnify much. The other kind, which has a convex eyepiece, is less subject to this fault. But since it shows objects upside down, the spyglasses of the first kind would still be much better if they showed us a larger field. Now this field depends on the opening of the eyepiece lens, and Your Highness readily understands that we can't enlarge this opening at will, since it is already determined by its focal distance. However, by using two or three or even more eyepiece lenses, people have found a way to make the apparent field larger. This is one more reason why several lenses are needed to build telescopes that are good in every respect. To these good qualities we could add one more, that the picture not be upside down, as it is in astronomical telescopes. But it is easy to remedy this fault, if it is one, by adding two more eyepiece lenses, as I will have the honor of explaining by the next post.

Letter 221: On Terrestrial Telescopes with Four Lenses

_6 April 1762_.

I have lingered a long time over telescopes made of two convex lenses, which are known as astronomical tubes, since they are commonly used to observe the stars.

Your Highness will easily understand why the use of these instruments, however excellent they are, is limited to the sky. The reason is that they show objects upside down, which really is a great fault when we want to look at earthly objects that we'd like to see in their natural position. Now, soon after this kind of telescope was discovered, a way was found to remedy this fault, by doubling the same telescope, so to speak. Since two lenses turn objects over, or show their images upside down, we only have to look at those same images through another telescope of two lenses, to turn them over once more, and then this second picture will show us the objects upright. This gives rise to a new kind of telescope, made of four lenses, which are called terrestrial telescopes, since they are meant for looking at earthly objects. Here is how they are built (Figure 109):

I. The four lenses A, B, C, D, set in the tube MMNN, make up the telescope in question. The first, the one turned toward the objects, is called the objective, and the other three, B, C, D, are the eyepieces. All four lenses are convex, and the eye must be placed at the end of the tube at a certain distance from the last eyepiece D. I will explain how this distance is determined later on.

II. Let us consider the effects each lens must produce when the object Oo, which we look at through the telescope, is at a very great distance. First the objective lens will form the image of this object, Pp, at the distance of its focus. The size of this image is determined by the straight line drawn from the end o through the middle of the lens A. This line isn't shown in the figure, so as not to load it with too many lines.

III. This image Pp takes the place of the object for the second lens B, which is placed so that the interval BP is equal to its focal distance. The second image is thereby carried off to infinity, as at Qq. It will be upside down like the first, Pp, and is bounded by the straight line drawn from the middle of the lens B through the end p.

IV. The interval between these first two lenses AB is therefore equal to the sum of their focal distances. If we held the eye behind the lens B, we would have an astronomical telescope, through which we would see the object Oo at Qq, and therefore upside down and magnified as many times as the distance AP exceeds the distance BP. But instead of the eye, we place the third lens C behind the lens B, at some distance. For this lens the image Qq takes the place of the object, since it actually receives the rays of this image Qq. Because that image lies at a very great distance, the lens C will form its image at its focal distance, at Rr.

V. Now, since the image Qq is upside down, this new image Rr will be upright, and bounded by the straight line that would be drawn from the end q through the middle of the lens C, which would pass through the point r. Consequently the three lenses A, B, C together show the object Oo at Rr, and this image Rr is upright.

VI. Finally, we only need to place the last lens so that the interval DR is equal to its focal distance. This lens will carry the image Rr off to infinity once more, as at Ss, whose end s will be determined by the straight line that would be drawn from the middle of the lens D through the end r. And the eye placed behind this lens will actually see the image Ss in place of the true object Oo.

VII. From this it is easy to judge how many times this telescope of four lenses must magnify objects. We only have to consider the two pairs of lenses AB and CD, each of which, taken separately, would be an astronomical telescope. The first pair of lenses A and B magnifies as many times as the focal distance of the first lens A exceeds that of the second lens B. That is also how many times the image it forms, Qq, is larger than the true object Oo.

VIII. Next, since this image Qq takes the place of the object for the other pair of lenses C and D, it will be multiplied again, as many times as the distance of the lens C exceeds that of the lens D. These two magnifications joined together give the true magnification that all four lenses produce.

IX. So if the first pair of lenses A and B magnified 10 times, and the other pair of lenses C and D 3 times, the telescope would magnify 3 times 10 times, that is, 30 times. And the opening of the objective lens A must match this magnification, following the rule I set out above.

X. From this Your Highness sees that if we take the last two lenses C and D away from a terrestrial telescope, we have an astronomical telescope, and that the two lenses C and D also form such a telescope. So a terrestrial telescope is made of two astronomical telescopes. And conversely, two astronomical telescopes joined together make a terrestrial telescope.

This construction is therefore open to an infinite number of variations, some of which are better than others, as I will have the honor of explaining later on.

Letter 222: On Arranging the Lenses in Terrestrial Telescopes

_10 April 1762_.

Your Highness has just seen how adding two more convex lenses to an astronomical telescope produces a terrestrial telescope that shows us objects upright. Now these four lenses, of which a terrestrial telescope is made, can be arranged in an infinite number of different ways, both in their distances and in their focal distances. I will explain (Figure 110) the ones that matter most.

I. As for their distances, I've already pointed out that the distance between the first two lenses A, B is the sum of their focal distances, and so is the distance between the last two lenses C, D, since each pair can be regarded as a simple telescope made of two convex lenses. But what should the distance be between the two middle lenses B, C? Is it left to our own pleasure? After all, it's certain that whether we make it larger or smaller, the magnification, which is always made up of the two magnifications each pair would produce separately, stays the same.

II. Now, if we consult experience alone, we will soon notice that when the two middle lenses are brought very close together, the apparent field almost vanishes completely, and that the same drawback appears when this distance is made very large. In both cases, when we point the telescope at any object, we discover only a very small part of it.

III. For this reason the craftsmen use this expedient: they move the last pair of lenses closer to the first or farther from it until they discover the largest field, and once they've found that position, they fix the lenses there. Now they have observed that in this most advantageous arrangement, the distance between the middle lenses B, C is always greater than the sum of the focal distances of these two lenses B and C.

IV. Your Highness will readily judge that this distance does not depend on pure chance, but takes its determination from theory, and much more exactly than from experience alone. And it is the duty of a natural philosopher to look for the cause of all the phenomena that experience uncovers for us. So I will now set out the true principles that give us the most advantageous distance BC between the two middle lenses. See Figure 111.

V. Since all the rays must be led to the eye, let us consider the path of the ray that comes from the end o of the visible object and passes through the middle A of the objective lens. For unless this ray is led into the eye, that end o will not be visible. Now this ray undergoes no refraction in the objective lens, because it passes through its middle A. So it continues its path in a straight line to the second lens, which it meets at its edge b, since it is the last ray transmitted by the lenses.

VI. This ray, being refracted by the second lens, will change its course so that it meets the axis of the lenses somewhere at n. That would happen at the focus of this lens if the ray Ab had earlier been parallel to the axis. But since it comes out of the point A, its meeting with the axis at n will be farther from the lens B than its focal distance.

VII. Now we must place the third lens C so that the ray, after crossing the axis at n, meets the lens C exactly at its edge c. From this we see that the larger the opening of this lens C, the farther back we must set it from the lens B, and the greater the distance BC becomes. But on the other hand, we must be careful not to move the lens C away any farther than that, because then the ray would escape it and would no longer be transmitted by this lens. So this circumstance is what determines the right distance between the two middle lenses BC, in agreement with experience.

VIII. The third lens C will produce a new refraction in our ray, which must lead it exactly to the edge d of the last eyepiece D. Since D is smaller than the third lens C, the line cd will converge a little toward the axis, and so it will suffer such a refraction in the last lens that it is brought together with the axis at a distance less than its focal distance. And that is precisely where the eye must be placed, to receive all the rays transmitted by the lenses and to discover the largest field there.

IX. By this means we are able to get a field whose diameter is almost twice as large as in astronomical telescopes of the same magnification. So with these four-lens telescopes we get, besides the advantage that objects are shown upright, that of a larger field as well, which is of very great consequence.

X. Finally, it is possible to find an arrangement of these four lenses such that, without giving up any of the advantages I've just spoken of, the rainbow colors vanish entirely and objects are shown with the greatest sharpness. But few craftsmen are able to reach this degree of perfection.

Letter 223: On Blackening the Inside of Telescope Tubes

_13 April 1762_.

After these investigations into the construction of telescopes, I must give Your Highness an account of some very necessary precautions. They concern neither the lenses themselves nor their arrangement, and yet they are of the greatest importance, so that if they aren't observed very carefully, the best telescope becomes quite useless. It isn't enough to arrange the lenses so that all the rays that fall on them are transmitted through them into the eye. We must also prevent stray rays from being transmitted by the telescope too, so that they don't disturb the picture. For this we must take the following precautions.

I. First, the lenses that make up a telescope must be enclosed in a tube, so that no rays other than those transmitted by the objective can reach the other lenses. For this the tube must be well closed everywhere, so that no light can get in through any crack. If by some accident the tubes should be pierced with a hole, the stray light that comes in would smother the picture of the objects.

II. It is also very important that the inside of the tube be well blackened everywhere, and even a very deep black, since we know that the color black reflects no rays, however strong the light that falls on it. Your Highness will also have already observed that the tubes of telescopes are blackened on the inside. A single reflection will show why it is necessary.

III. The objective (Figure 112) transmits not only the rays of the objects that the telescope shows us, but also those from the sides, which enter all around in great abundance. Such is the ray ha, which falls on the inside wall of the tube at i. So if the tube were white on the inside, or any other color, it would be lit up by it, and it would produce new rays of light on its own. These would not fail to pass through the other lenses and disturb the vision, mixing with the proper rays of the objects.

IV. But if the inside of the tube is dyed a very deep black, no new rays are formed there, however brightly it may be lit. This blackness is needed along the whole length of the tube, since there is no black so deep that, when lit, it doesn't produce some faint light. So even if some stray rays did pass through the second lens B, the black of the tube beyond it would easily put them out completely. There is also a shiny black, which we must be careful never to use.

V. But usually this precaution is still not enough, and we are obliged to fit the inside of the tube with one or several diaphragms pierced with a small hole, to stop the false light all the better. But we must take great care that these diaphragms do not shut out the rays of the objects that the telescope is supposed to show us (Figure 113).

VI. We have to see where the proper rays of the objects are most narrowed in the tube. That happens in the place where the images are formed in the tube, since there all the rays are brought together. Now the objective lens A forms the image at its focus, at M. So we only have to estimate the size of this image and put there a diaphragm whose hole mm is equal to it, or just a little larger. For if the hole were smaller than the image, we would lose some of the apparent field, which would be a great fault.

VII. That is what should be observed about the diaphragm in astronomical telescopes made of two convex lenses. In terrestrial telescopes there are two images formed in the tube. Besides the first one at M, formed by the objective at its focus and carried off to infinity by the second lens B, the third lens C forms another image at its focus N, which is upright, the first one being upside down. So it is at N that we should place a new diaphragm too, pierced with a hole nn the size of the image found there.

VIII. These diaphragms, together with the black of the inside of the tube, also do a very good job of making the picture sharper. But we must note that the larger the field the telescope shows, the less we can count on these diaphragms, since then the images become larger, so that the holes of the diaphragms must be so big that they can no longer stop the false rays. In that case, though, we must be all the more careful to blacken the inside of the tube well, and to make it wider, which greatly reduces the harmful effect I have just spoken of.
