Letters 224–228

Letter 224: Telescopes and the Distance of the Stars

_17 April 1762_.

I don't doubt that Your Highness is glad to be free at last of the dry theory of telescopes, which has almost no charm except that it leads to the great discoveries made with their help.

How amazing it is to see very distant objects as well as if they were a hundred times closer or more, especially when it is impossible for us to get near them, as happens with objects in the heavens! And Your Highness will readily agree that with the help of telescopes we must have discovered some truly marvelous things in the stars.

If we see the moon a hundred times closer than it really is, we can make out some very curious unevenness there, such as valleys and enormous heights, which, in their regularity, look more like structures built on purpose than like mountains. From this people draw a strong argument for the view that the moon is inhabited by reasoning creatures, although the mere contemplation of almighty power, joined to the Creator's supreme wisdom and goodness, gives us more convincing arguments.

In the same way, the most important discoveries have been made about the planets. To the naked eye they look like nothing but points of light, but seen through good telescopes they resemble the moon, and even appear much larger still.

As for the fixed stars, Your Highness will be no little surprised when I have the honor of assuring you that even through the best telescope, one that magnifies more than 200 times, these stars still look like points, and even smaller than they do to the naked eye. That is all the more surprising because it is certain that the telescope shows them to us just as we would see them if we were 200 times closer. Shouldn't we conclude from this that telescopes lose their power when it comes to the fixed stars? But that thought soon vanishes when we consider that telescopes reveal millions of little stars that would escape our eyes entirely without their help. We also see the gaps between the stars become incomparably greater, and two stars that look almost to touch each other with the naked eye need only be viewed through the telescope for us to notice a considerable distance between them, which proves well enough what the telescope does.

But what, then, is the reason that the fixed stars, seen this way, still look smaller than they do to the naked eye? To answer this question, I first observe that with the naked eye the fixed stars look larger than they should, and that this comes from a false light mixed in with them, caused by their brilliance. Indeed, when the rays that leave a star come to paint its image on the retina at the back of the eye, our nerves are struck at only a single point. But because of the brilliance of the light, the neighboring nerves are shaken as well, and they produce the same sensation we would feel if the image of the object painted on the retina were much larger. The same thing happens if we look at a very distant light at night. It also looks much larger to us, even larger than if we saw it up close, and this enlargement is caused only by a false glow. Now, the more a telescope magnifies, the more this effect must shrink, both because the rays suffer some weakening and because the true image at the back of the eye becomes larger, so that it is no longer a single point that bears the whole impression of the rays. So, however small the stars look to us through a telescope, we can say boldly that to the naked eye they would look smaller still, without the accidental false light, and smaller by as many times as the telescope magnifies.

It follows from this that since the fixed stars look like mere points even when magnified 200 times, their distance must be exorbitant. It will be very easy for Your Highness to understand how this distance can be estimated. The diameter of the sun appears to us under an angle of 32 minutes. So if the sun were 32 times farther away, it would appear under an angle of one minute, and so it would still look much larger than a star seen through the telescope, whose diameter does not exceed two seconds, or the thirtieth part of a minute. The sun would therefore have to be 30 times farther still, that is, 960 times farther away, before it looked no bigger than a fixed star observed with the help of the telescope. But the stars are 200 times farther from us than the telescope shows them, and so the sun would have to be 200 times 960, that is, 192,000 times farther away than it is, before it looked bigger than a fixed star. Consequently, if the fixed stars were bodies as large as the sun, their distances would be 192,000 times greater than the sun's. If they were even larger, their distances would have to be greater by that many times again. And even supposing them to be several times smaller, their distances would still have to be more than a thousand times greater than the sun's. Now, the distance of the sun is about 70,000,000 miles.

Your Highness will no doubt be unable to think about this prodigious distance of the fixed stars, and the whole extent of the world, without the greatest astonishment. How great must be the power of the one who created this immensity and who is its absolute master! Let us adore him with the most profound submission.

Letter 225: Why the Horizon Moon Looks Bigger

_20 April 1762_.

Your Highness has no doubt already noticed that when the moon rises or sets, it looks much larger to us than when it is high in the sky, and everyone agrees about this phenomenon. The same observation is made about the sun. This appearance has always puzzled the philosophers, and however you look at it, you run into almost insurmountable difficulties.

It would no doubt be ridiculous to conclude from it that the body of the moon really is larger when it appears on the horizon than when it is higher up. Besides the fact that such a thought would be absurd in itself, we have to consider that when the moon appears to us on the horizon, it appears to other inhabitants of the earth higher up, and so smaller. And it is certainly impossible for the same body to be, at the same time, both larger and smaller.

An almost equally ridiculous way of explaining this strange phenomenon would be to suppose that the moon is nearer to us when it appears on the horizon than when it is high up. It is certain that the same body looks larger to us the closer it is, and Your Highness knows that the farther away the same object is from us, the smaller it looks. That is precisely why the stars look so extremely small to us, even though their true size is prodigious. But however probable this idea may seem, it cannot hold. It is rather certain that the moon is even a little farther from us when it rises or sets than when it is higher up. Here is the proof.

Let the circle ABD (Figure 114) be the earth, and let the moon be at L. That being so, an inhabitant at A will see the moon in his zenith, or at the highest point of the sky. But another inhabitant at D, where the line DL just grazes the surface of the earth, will see the moon at the same moment on his horizon. So at the same moment the moon appears to the observer at A in his zenith, and to the other observer at D on his horizon. But it is clear that the second distance DL is greater than the first, AL. Consequently the moon is farther from those who see it on the horizon than from those who see it near their zenith. It follows plainly that the moon, seen on the horizon, ought to look smaller to us, since it is really farther away than when it is high up. So it is all the more astonishing that we observe exactly the opposite, and that the moon looks much larger to us when we see it near the horizon than in the middle of the sky.

So the more deeply we look into this phenomenon, the stranger we find it, and the more it deserves our attention. It is certain that the moon on the horizon ought to look smaller to us, since it is in fact farther away, and yet everyone unanimously maintains that the moon then looks considerably larger. The contradiction is plain, and it even seems to overturn all the principles established in optics, which are nevertheless as well demonstrated as those of geometry.

I think I have set out the whole embarrassment we are in on this point, so that Your Highness will better feel the importance of the true resolution of this great difficulty. First, without examining the general judgment of all people about the prodigious size of the moon on the horizon, I will stop at the main question: is it really true that the moon, when it is near the horizon, actually looks larger to us?

Your Highness knows that we have very sure means of measuring the diameters of the heavenly bodies exactly, by stating the number of degrees and minutes they occupy in the sky. Or, what comes to the same thing, by measuring (Figure 115) the angle EOF that the lines EO and FO make, drawn from the opposite edges of the moon to the eye of the observer O. This angle EOF is what we call the apparent diameter of the moon. We also have instruments very well suited to determining this angle exactly. Now, when we use them to measure the moon's diameter, first at its rising and then when it has climbed high in the sky, we do find its diameter a little smaller in the first case than in the other, just as the inequality of the distances requires. About this there is no doubt to be had. But for that very reason, our difficulty, instead of shrinking, rather grows, and we will ask all the more eagerly: why, then, does everyone judge the moon larger at its rising and setting, even though its apparent diameter is then actually smaller? And what is the reason for this general dazzlement to which all people, without exception, are subject? The astronomer, who knows perfectly well that the apparent diameter of the moon is then smaller, is fooled by it just as much as the most ignorant peasant.

Letter 226: Reflections on the Moon Puzzle

_24 April 1762_.

Your Highness would not have believed that the mere appearance of the moon was subject to so many difficulties, but I hope to smooth them all away with the following reflections.

I. First, it is not surprising that our judgment of the size of objects does not agree with the visual angle under which we see them. Everyday experience gives us plenty of proof. For example, a cat in front of me presents itself under a larger angle than an ox a hundred paces away. Yet it would never occur to me to judge the cat larger than the ox, and Your Highness will also remember that our judgment of the size of things is always very closely tied to our judgment of distance, so that if we go wrong in estimating the distance, our judgment of the size necessarily becomes false too.

II. To make this clearer, it sometimes happens that a fly passes suddenly before our eyes without our expecting it. If our gaze is fixed on distant objects, we imagine at first that the fly is very far from us. And since it appears to us under a fairly considerable angle, we take it for the first instant to be an eagle or some other large bird, which at a distance would appear to us under the same angle. So it is beyond question that our judgment of the size of objects is not governed by the visual angle under which they are seen, and that there is a very great difference between the apparent size of objects and the judged or estimated size. The first is governed by the visual angle, but the other depends on the distance at which we judge the objects to be.

III. To profit from this remark, I observe first that we should not say that we see the moon larger on the horizon than at some considerable height. That is absolutely false, and we even see it a little smaller. But to speak exactly, we must say that we judge and estimate the moon to be larger when it is on the horizon. That is true to the letter, by the unanimous agreement of everyone. This remark is enough to dissolve the contradiction reported above, and nothing prevents the moon, at its rising or setting, from being judged or estimated larger, even though it is seen under a smaller angle.

IV. So it is no longer a matter of explaining why we see the moon larger on the horizon. That would no doubt be impossible, since it really does look smaller to us, as can be proved by measuring the visual angle. All the difficulty now comes down to this question: why do we then judge or estimate the moon to be larger? Or, put another way, we have to account for this odd estimate. The thing is no longer surprising in itself, since we know a thousand cases where we judge objects to be very large even though we see them under very small angles.

V. Now it is no longer hard to answer this question. We only have to say that when the moon rises or sets, we judge it to be farther from us than when it has climbed to a certain height. Once we agree on this estimate, whatever its cause may be, it necessarily follows that we must also judge the moon larger by the same amount. For the farther away we estimate an object to be, the larger we estimate it to be, and in exactly the same ratio. As soon as I imagine, through some illusion or other, that the fly passing before my eyes is at a distance of 100 paces, I am obliged, almost in spite of myself, to judge it as many times larger as 100 paces exceed the fly's true distance from my eyes.

VI. So here we are reduced to a new question: why do we estimate the moon to be farther from us when it is on the horizon? And why is this illusion so general that nobody is exempt from it? For it is a very strange illusion to imagine that the moon is then much farther from us. It is quite true that the moon is then actually a little farther away, as I showed in my last letter, but the difference is so small that it cannot possibly be noticed. Besides, the sun, although it is 100 times farther away than the moon, does not look farther away to us, and our sight even places the fixed stars at almost the same distance.

VII. So although the moon on the horizon is in fact a little farther away, this circumstance has no part in the present question. And this universal estimate, by which everyone then judges the moon to be farther away than it really is, must rest on reasons of quite a different kind, capable of dazzling everyone. For since this estimate is undoubtedly false, the reasons that lead us to it must be very striking.

VIII. To explain this phenomenon, why we estimate the moon to be farther away when we see it on the horizon, several philosophers have maintained that the reason is that we then see many objects between us and the moon, such as towns, villages, forests and mountains. This, they say, is why the moon then looks much farther away to us. When it is high up, on the other hand, we notice no body between us and it, and so, they say, it must look nearer to us. But this explanation, however ingenious it may seem at first glance, cannot be accepted. We only have to look at the moon on the horizon through some hole that hides the objects in between, and it still looks larger to us. Besides, it is not true either that we always estimate objects to be farther away when we see several other bodies between them and us. A large hall, for example, that is completely empty ordinarily looks more spacious to us than if it is full of people, in spite of the quantity of objects we then see between us and the walls.

Letter 227: Toward the True Explanation

_27 April 1762_.

So we are still very far from the explanation of this universal illusion by which all people, without exception, judge the moon to be much larger when it appears on the horizon than when it is high up. I have already remarked that this phenomenon is all the stranger because the apparent diameter of the moon is then even a little smaller, so that we should say that we do not then see the moon larger, but that we judge it larger.

I have also observed that very often our judgment differs greatly from the sight itself. For example, we do not fail to judge a horse a hundred paces away to be larger than a dog one pace away, although the apparent size of the dog is beyond dispute greater. Or, what comes to the same thing, although the image of the dog painted at the back of the eye is larger than that of the horse. In these cases our judgment takes distance into account, and since we judge the horse to be much farther away than the dog, that is the true reason why we also judge it larger.

So it is very likely that a similar circumstance holds in the vision of the moon, and that we judge the moon on the horizon to be farther away than when it is high up. In the example of the horse, this judgment of distance was founded on the truth. Here, since it is absolutely false, it is a very strange illusion, but it must nevertheless have some foundation, since everyone agrees on it and it cannot be attributed to mere caprice. What will that foundation be? That is what I am going to discuss with Your Highness.

I. First, everyone pictures the blue of the sky as a flattened vault, whose top is much nearer to us than its bottom, where it merges with the horizon. So a man standing on a plain AB (Figure 116), which stretches as far as he can see, perceives the vault of the sky, commonly called the firmament, in the shape AEFB, where the distances CA and CB are much greater than the distance from the zenith to C.

II. This idea is also, without question, a very crude illusion, since there is nothing above us that is bounded or closed off by such a vault. Everything up there is rather void, and the extent of this void is immense, since it goes as far as the most distant fixed stars, whose distance surpasses all the power of our imagination. May Your Highness forgive me the word void, which I use to set it against the coarse earthly bodies. For in fact, near the earth it is our atmosphere that fills the space, and farther out it is that much subtler matter called the ether.

III. Yet however imaginary this vault is in itself, it is very real in our imagination, and all people, the learned as much as the simple, are equally fooled on this point. It is almost on the surface of this vault that we picture the sun and the moon along with all the stars, as if they were shining nails fixed into it. And in spite of what we know to the contrary, we cannot help giving in to this false illusion.

IV. That being so, when the moon is on the horizon, we place it in our imagination at point A or B of this imaginary vault. That is how we then estimate its distance to be all the greater, since we judge the line CA or CB to be greater than CZ. But when the moon, as it climbs, approaches the zenith, we estimate that it is coming closer to us, and if it reached the zenith, we would judge its distance to be the smallest.

V. This illusion about distance necessarily brings the other one, about size, along with it. Since the moon, placed at A, looks much farther from C than if it were in the zenith, we are in some way forced to conclude that the moon itself is that much larger, and in the same ratio in which the distance CA seems to exceed the distance CZ. Perhaps not everyone will agree closely on this ratio. One will say that the moon on the horizon looks twice as large to him, another three times, and most will settle on something between two and three. But on the fact itself, all will be united.

VI. On this occasion it will be worthwhile to set before Your Highness's eyes again the demonstration of this consequence: how the judgment of size follows necessarily from the estimate of distance.

When the moon is near the horizon, we see it under a certain angle, which we may call MCA (Figure 117), the observer being at C. And when it is high up, let NCD be the angle under which we see it. Now it is quite certain that these two angles MCA and NCD are very nearly equal to each other, the difference being imperceptible.

VII. But in the first case, since we estimate the moon to be much farther away, by placing it on the imaginary vault described above, let the line CA be this imagined distance of the moon. It follows that we estimate the diameter of the moon to be equal to the line MA. But in the other case, the distance of the moon, CD, looks much smaller to us. So, since the angle NCD is equal to MCA, the estimated size DN will also be much smaller than AM.

VIII. To leave no doubt about this, we only have to cut off the lines Cd and Cn, equal to the lines CD and CN. Since in the two triangles Cdn and CDN the angles at C are equal, the triangles themselves are equal too, and therefore the line DN will be equal to dn. But dn is visibly smaller than AM, and smaller by as many times as the distance CD is smaller than CA. So Your Highness clearly understands the reason why we estimate the moon on the horizon to be larger than near the zenith.

Letter 228: The Sky as a Flattened Vault

_1 May 1762_.

Your Highness will no doubt reproach me for having just explained one illusion by another that is no less strange. She will object that the imaginary vault of the sky is as inconceivable as the apparent enlargement of the moon and the other heavenly bodies near the horizon. This objection is only too well founded, and it is my duty to explain to Your Highness the true reason why the sky looks to us like a vault flattened at the top. I will try to do this with the following reflections.

I. To account for this imaginary vault, we are obliged to say that it comes from the fact that the heavenly objects we see near the horizon look farther away than those we see near the zenith. That is without doubt a very formal begging of the question, which logicians have the right to reject as an intolerable flaw in our reasoning. Indeed, having said above that the imaginary vault of the sky is the cause that makes the moon on the horizon look farther away than near the zenith, it would now be ridiculous to say that what makes us imagine this vault is that horizontal objects look farther away to us than vertical ones.

II. It was nevertheless not useless to speak of this imaginary vault, even though we are no further along for it. And when I have explained why heavenly objects look farther away when we see them near the horizon, Your Highness will understand at the same time the reason for this double universal illusion, of which one part is the apparent enlargement of the heavenly bodies on the horizon, and the other the flattened vault of the sky.

III. So everything comes down to explaining why heavenly objects seen on the horizon look farther away to us than when they are at some considerable height. I say now that the reason is that these objects look less bright to us. This puts a double task on me: to show why these objects shine with less brilliance toward the horizon, and then to explain how this circumstance necessarily leads to the judgment of a greater distance. I hope to complete both to Your Highness's satisfaction.

IV. First, the phenomenon itself cannot be doubted. However great the brilliance of the sun around midday, so that no one can direct his eyes at it, Your Highness knows that in the morning and evening, when the sun rises or sets, we can look at it without risk of hurting our sight. The same happens with the moon and all the stars, whose brilliance is extremely weakened in the neighborhood of the horizon. We do not even see the smallest stars when they are only a little above the horizon, while we see them quite distinctly when they have reached some considerable height.

V. This fact being sufficiently established, we have to discover the cause of this weakening of the light. It is fairly clear that we can look for it only in the nature of our atmosphere, or the air that surrounds the earth, insofar as it is not perfectly transparent. For if the air were perfectly transparent, so that all the rays were transmitted through it without suffering any loss, there is no doubt that the stars would always shine with the same brilliance, wherever in the sky they happened to be.

VI. Now the air, besides being a much coarser and less subtle matter than the ether, whose transparency is perfect, is also always loaded with foreign particles that rise into it from the earth, such as exhalations and vapors, and that harm its transparency. So if some ray meets such a particle, it is intercepted by it and almost extinguished. It is also evident that the more the air is loaded with these particles, which are obstacles to the passage of light, the more the rays must be lost in it. And Your Highness knows that a very thick fog strips the air of almost all its transparency, so that often we can no longer make out objects at a distance of three paces.

VII. Let the points marked in Figure 118 represent such specks scattered through the air, whose number is sometimes greater, sometimes smaller, according to whether the air is more or less clear. It is evident, then, that many of the rays that cross this space must be lost, and that the loss will be greater the longer the path they have to travel through this air. So we see that in a fog distant objects become invisible, while those very close to the eye are still seen. The reason is that the rays from the former meet more of the specks in their way, which stop them.

VIII. From this we must conclude that the longer the path the rays of the heavenly bodies have to make in the atmosphere to reach our eyes, the greater their loss or weakening must become. Your Highness will no longer have the slightest doubt about this. So it remains simply to prove that the rays of the stars we see near our horizon have a much longer path to travel in our atmosphere than when they are nearer our zenith. From this Your Highness will understand the true reason why the heavenly bodies near the horizon, at their rising and setting, look much less bright. That will be the subject of my next letter.
