Letters 229–234

Letter 229: On the Dimming of Starlight

_4 May 1762_.

The light of stars near the horizon is weakened a great deal, because their rays have a much longer road to travel through our lower atmosphere than when the stars are high in the sky. And that is the reason we judge them, at the horizon, to be farther from us and larger than when they are up high.

What I have just claimed, that the rays of stars at the horizon have a longer path to travel through our atmosphere, may strike Your Highness as quite a paradox, since the atmosphere extends to the same height everywhere. So wherever a star may be, its rays must always pass through the atmosphere's full height before they reach our eyes. But I hope the following reflections will clear up every doubt.

I. First we need to form a right idea of the atmosphere that surrounds the earth. For this purpose, let the inner circle ABCD (Figure 119) represent the earth itself, and let the outer dotted circle abcd mark the edge of the atmosphere. We should notice that everywhere, as the air rises above the earth's surface, it becomes thinner and more rarefied, until at last it fades imperceptibly into the ether that fills all the heavenly spaces.

II. The coarsest air, the air most loaded with the tiny particles that put out rays of light, is found everywhere down near the earth's surface. From there, going up, it grows steadily more rare and so less harmful to light, and at the height of one German mile it is already so thin that it can no longer cause any noticeable loss of light. So we can fix the distance between the inner circle and the outer one at about one mile, while the earth's own half-diameter contains about 860 of them. The height of the atmosphere is therefore a very small thing compared with the size of the globe of the earth.

III. Now let's consider a spectator at A (Figure 120) on the earth's surface. If we draw the line GZ from the center of the earth G through A, it will point to our spectator's zenith. The line AS, which is perpendicular to it and touches the earth, will be the horizontal line for the spectator. Consequently a star at Z will be seen at the zenith, the top of the sky, while a star at S will appear on the horizon, at its rising or setting. Nothing stops us from regarding both stars as infinitely far from the earth, though I couldn't show that in the figure.

IV. Now Your Highness has only to glance at the figure to see that the rays coming from S have a much longer trip to make through the atmosphere than those of the star Z, before they reach the spectator at A. The rays of the star Z only have to cross the height of the atmosphere, Aa, which is about one mile, whereas the rays of the star S must travel the whole way Ah, which is plainly much longer. And if the figure could match the truth better, so that the ray GA were 860 times longer than the height Aa, you would see that the distance Ah exceeds 40 miles.

V. It is also worth noticing that the rays of the star Z have only a very small space to travel through the lower atmosphere, which is the one most loaded with vapors, whereas the rays of the star S have a very considerable trip to make through this lower part of the atmosphere, and are obliged almost to crawl, so to speak, along the surface of the earth. From this it is quite natural to conclude that the rays of the star at Z suffer almost no weakening, while those of the star S must be almost put out by the long trip they have to make through the coarse air.

VI. So it is beyond dispute that the stars we see at the horizon must appear with their brilliance greatly weakened. Now Your Highness will very easily understand why we can fix our eyes on the rising or setting sun without being hurt by it, whereas at noon, when the sun is high, its brilliance is unbearable to us. That was the first point I had set out to demonstrate. All that remains is to prove the other one, namely that the same weakening of light almost forces us to imagine that the heavenly bodies are then much farther from us than if we saw them in their full brilliance.

VII. The reason has to be sought in the earthly objects we see every day, and whose distances we form a judgment about. For the same reason that rays suffer some weakening when they pass through the air, it is clear that the farther an object is from us, the more of its brightness it loses, that is, the darker it looks to us. So a mountain far away looks very dark to us. But if we come near enough, we easily make out the trees on it, which is impossible from a great distance.

VIII. This observation is so general, and never fools us with earthly objects, that from our earliest youth it has given us a fundamental principle: we judge all objects to be farther away the more the rays coming from them have been weakened. So it is by virtue of this principle that we judge the moon, at its rising or setting, to be much farther from us than when it has already reached a considerable height, and for the same reason we also judge it larger, in proportion. I flatter myself that Your Highness will find these reasons perfectly well founded, and this odd phenomenon as fully cleared up as it can be.

Letter 230: How Painters Use Illusions of Distance

_8 May 1762_.

The principle of our imagination by which I have just explained that quite strange phenomenon, which makes us judge the moon much larger near the horizon than in the middle of the sky, that principle, I say, is so deeply rooted in our minds that it is the source of a thousand other illusions, of which I will content myself with putting a few before Your Highness.

From our youth, we feel ourselves drawn, as if in spite of ourselves, to judge objects to be farther away the more their brilliance is weakened, and on the other hand, very bright objects appear nearer to us than they really are. This illusion no doubt comes only from an ill-regulated imagination, which very often leads us astray. Nevertheless it is so natural to us, and at the same time so universal, that no one is able to protect himself from it, although the error it throws us into is often very plain, as I had the honor of pointing out to Your Highness with regard to the moon. But we are equally fooled on a great many other occasions, of which I will develop a few.

I. It is a well-known illusion that at night the fire of a blaze seems much nearer than it actually is. The reason is quite clear: the fire shines with very great brilliance, and by the established principle of our imagination, we always judge it nearer than it is.

II. In the same way, a large hall whose walls are well whitewashed always looks smaller to us. Your Highness knows that white is the brightest color. So we judge the walls of the hall to be too close to us, and as a result the apparent size of the hall is reduced.

III. Now in a hall whose walls are covered with black cloth, as is the custom in times of deep mourning, we experience exactly the opposite effect. Such a room then seems much more spacious to us than it really is. Black is no doubt the darkest color, since it sends almost no light back into our eyes, and for that reason the black walls seem to us much farther away than they actually are. So if the walls of a room are covered with black cloth, it will look larger, and if, on the contrary, they are whitewashed well, the room will look smaller.

IV. But it is painters who know best how to profit from this illusion, so natural and so common to all men. Your Highness knows that a single picture shows us objects of which some appear extremely far away while others seem quite near, and that is where a skillful painter's greatest resource lies. It is certainly very surprising that, although we know for certain that all the figures in a picture are painted on the same surface, and so at about an equal distance from our eyes, we are fooled all the same, and judge some to be far off and others to be close. This illusion is commonly credited to a clever mixture of light and shadow, which no doubt gives painters the greatest help. But Your Highness has only to look at such a picture to see that the objects that are supposed to look very far away are painted very faintly and rather indistinctly. When we turn our eyes to objects that are very far away, we make out people, for example, in a rough way, but without being able to distinguish their eyes, nose, or mouth, and the painter shows these objects according to that appearance. As for the ones we are supposed to judge very near, the painter gives them the liveliest colors and takes the trouble to paint every small detail carefully. If they are people, we can make out the slightest lines of the face, the folds of the clothing, and so on. Such a figure seems, so to speak, to step out of the picture, while others seem to sink into it and recede far away.

V. So the whole art of painting is founded on nothing but this illusion. If we were in the habit of judging according to the truth, this whole art could no longer exist, any more than if we were blind. The painter could put all his skill into the mixing of colors, and we would say: here on this panel is a red spot, there a blue one, here a black stroke, there some whitish lines. It is all on the same surface, and nowhere is there any depth or any relief, so no real object can be represented this way. We could then look at it only as we look at writing on paper, and we might tire ourselves out to no purpose trying to guess the meaning of all these variously colored spots. In such a state of perfection, wouldn't we also be greatly to be pitied, deprived of the pleasures that an art so amusing and so instructive gives us every day?

Letter 231: On the Sky's Blue

_11 May 1762_.

Your Highness has just understood the cause of the illusion by which the moon, like the sun, looks much larger at the horizon than at a considerable height. It is because we then judge these bodies to be farther from us, and the reason for that judgment rests on the fact that their light then suffers a considerable weakening from the long trip it has to make through the atmosphere, in the low region that is the most loaded with vapors and other exhalations that lessen its transparency. That is what all the reflections I have had the honor to put before Your Highness on this subject come down to.

This quality of the air, which lessens its transparency, might be regarded as a defect at first glance. But if we consider its consequences, we find that, far from being a defect, it is rather something in which we should recognize the infinite wisdom and goodness of the Creator. To begin with, it is to this impurity of the air that we owe the marvelous and delightful spectacle the blue of the sky offers us. For the opaque particles that stop the rays of light are lit up by them, and then send back to us their own rays, produced on their surface by a violent trembling, just as happens in all opaque bodies. The number of vibrations they receive is such that it shows us the most beautiful blue. This circumstance deserves to be developed clearly.

I. First I observe that these particles are extremely small and very far apart from one another, besides being very fine and almost entirely transparent. That is why each one separately cannot be perceived at all, and unless a very great number of these particles send their rays into our eyes at once, and almost in the same direction, we cannot be affected by them. So the rays of many of them must come together before they can stir up a sensation.

II. From this it follows clearly that those of these particles that are near us escape our senses, since they have to be regarded as points thinly scattered through the mass of air.

But those that are very far from the eye, like the points a, b, c (Figure 121), unite their rays in the eye, almost in the same direction, and the rays become strong enough to strike our sight, especially when we consider that similar particles farther away, e, f, g, h, as well as others nearer, join in producing this effect.

III. The blue color we see in the sky when it is clear is therefore nothing other than the result of all these particles scattered through the atmosphere, and chiefly of those that are very far from us. So we can well say that all these particles are blue by nature, but an extremely faint blue, which becomes deep enough to notice only when they are in very great numbers and join their rays together in the same direction.

IV. Art can produce a similar effect. We only have to dissolve a small amount of indigo in a large amount of water. If we let this water fall in drops, we don't notice the slightest tint in it, and if we pour some into a small cup, we will see only a very faint bluish color. But if we fill a large vessel with it and look at it from a distance, we see a very deep blue. The same experiment can be done with other colors too. That is how Burgundy wine in a very small quantity looks barely reddish, and yet if we look at a large flask filled with it, the red color will look quite dark.

V. All water, when a large and deep basin is filled with it, always seems to have a certain color, although a small quantity is perfectly clear and limpid. Usually this color is more or less greenish, which leads people to say that the ultimate particles of water are greenish, but of an extremely faint color, so that we have to look at a large volume of it before we notice, since only then do the rays of many particles join together to produce the same effect.

VI. Since this observation makes it probable that the ultimate particles of water are greenish, one could maintain that the same reason for which the sea, or the water of a lake or a pond, looks green to us is the reason the sky looks blue to us. For it is more likely that all the particles of the air have a slight tint of blue, so faint that it becomes visible only when we look at an immense mass, like the whole extent of the atmosphere, than that this color should be credited to the vapors that float in the air and do not belong to it.

VII. In fact, the purer the air is and the freer of exhalations, the more brilliant the sky's blue is, which shows well enough that the reason must be sought in the air's own particles. Other foreign matters that mix with the air, like the exhalations, are on the contrary harmful to this beautiful blue, and only change its brilliance greatly. When such vapors load the air too heavily, they cause fogs here below and rob us entirely of the sight of the blue color. If they are higher up, as usually happens, they form clouds that often cover the whole sky and show us a quite different color from the blue of pure air. So this is a new quality of the air, besides its thinness, fluidity, and elasticity, which I have already had the honor of describing to Your Highness: namely, that the ultimate particles that make up the air are bluish by nature.

Letter 232: If the Air Were Perfectly Transparent

_16 May 1762_.

On this tint of the air around us, without which we would not enjoy the beautiful spectacle of the sky's blue, I further remark that we would be very unfortunate if the air were perfectly transparent and stripped of these bluish particles. So we should rather recognize and admire in this the infinite goodness and wisdom of the Creator.

To convince Your Highness fully, let's suppose the air is entirely transparent and like the ether, which, as we know, lets all the rays of the stars through without stopping any, and contains no particles of the kind that are themselves lit up by the rays, since such a particle could not be lit up without intercepting some of the rays that fall on it. If the air were in such a state, all the sun's rays would pass through it freely, and no light would be sent back into our eyes. We would receive no other rays than those that come directly from the sun. Consequently the whole sky, except the place where the sun is, would look entirely dark to us. And instead of this beautiful, brilliant blue, if we looked up we would find nothing but a very deep black and the darkest night.

Figure 122 represents the sun, and the point O is a spectator whose eye would receive no rays from above except those of the sun, so that all the brightness would be shut up in the small angle EOF. Turning his gaze toward another region of the sky, such as M, he would receive no ray from it, and it would be just as if he were looking into a completely dark place. Now any place that sends no rays of light is black. I leave aside here the stars that fill the sky. For if the eye is directed toward M, nothing prevents the rays of the stars in that region from entering the eye, and these rays would even have all the more force because they would suffer no weakening from the atmosphere, as I have just supposed it. So we would see all the stars in broad daylight just as in the darkest night. But we must remember that all this broad daylight would be reduced to the small angle EOF alone, the whole rest of the sky being as dark as night.

Yet very near the sun the stars would be invisible to us, and we would not see, for example, the star N. For in looking at it our eye would receive the sun's rays at the same time, and would be struck so sharply by them that the faint light of the star could stir up no sensation there. I am not speaking of the impossibility of keeping the eye open when trying to look toward N. That is too plain to need explaining.

But by holding up an opaque body against the sun to intercept its rays, we would be sure to see the star N, however close to the sun it might be. Your Highness will easily understand what a sad state we would then find ourselves in. This neighborhood of the greatest brilliance and the darkest gloom would hurt our sight so badly that we would soon become blind. We can judge this from the discomfort we feel when we pass suddenly from a dark place into a very bright one.

So it is this great inconvenience that the nature of the air remedies, insofar as it contains particles that are at least slightly opaque and able to be lit up. Then, as soon as the sun rises above the horizon, and even a little before, the whole atmosphere is lit by it and shows us this beautiful blue I have had the honor of speaking to Your Highness about. Wherever we direct our eyes, they receive a quantity of rays produced in the same particles. So when we look toward M, we see a very great brightness there, or rather this brilliant blue of the sky.

This same brightness is what keeps us from seeing the stars during the day, and the reason is evident. This brightness exceeds that of the stars many times over, and a lesser light vanishes next to a much greater one. For the nerves of the retina at the back of the eye, already struck by a very strong light, can no longer be sensitive to the faint impression of the stars.

Your Highness has only to remember that the light of the full moon is already more than 300,000 times less than that of the sun, to be convinced that the brightness that comes to us from the stars alone is nothing compared with the sun's. Yet the sky's brightness alone during the day is already so brilliant that, even when the sun is covered, it still surpasses that of the full moon by several thousand times.

Your Highness will already have noticed that even at night, when the moon is full, the stars look much less brilliant, and that only the largest can be seen, especially in the moon's neighborhood. So a greater light always smothers a weaker one.

It is also a very great advantage that our atmosphere begins to be lit by the sun even before it rises, because that prepares us to bear its vivid brilliance afterward, which would be unbearable to us if the change from night to day were sudden. The time during which the atmosphere is lit before sunrise, and still keeps some brightness after sunset, is called twilight. Since this is a subject of some importance, I propose to talk about it with Your Highness at greater length. That is how one topic in natural philosophy leads to another.

Letter 233: Refraction, Twilight, and Apparent Sunrise

_18 May 1762_.

To explain the cause of twilight, that is, of this brightness of the sky both before sunrise and after sunset, Your Highness has only to recall what I have already had the honor of telling her about the horizon and the atmosphere.

Let the circle AOBD (Figure 123) represent the earth, and the dotted circle the atmosphere. Let's consider a place O on the earth, and through it draw a straight line HOI that touches the earth at O. This line HI will represent the horizon, which separates the part of the sky that is visible to us from the part that is invisible. So as soon as the sun reaches this line, it appears on the horizon, either rising or setting, and the whole atmosphere is then lit by it. But suppose that the sun, before rising, is still below the earth at S, from where the ray STR, grazing the earth at T, can reach the point of the atmosphere lying on our horizon. The opaque particles found there will already be lit by it, and consequently will become visible to us. So, some time before sunrise, the atmosphere AoR above our horizon begins to be lit at R, and as the sun approaches the horizon, a greater part of it will be lit, until it becomes entirely luminous.

This consideration leads me to another phenomenon, no less interesting and very closely linked to it: the atmosphere also produces this effect, by which we see the sun as well as the other stars some time before they rise above our horizon, and again some time after they set. The reason for this phenomenon is the refraction that the rays suffer in passing from the pure ether into the coarse air that makes up our atmosphere. I will now give the explanation.

I. First, rays of light continue on their way in a straight line only as long as they move in a transparent medium of the same nature. As soon as they pass from one medium into another, they are turned aside from their straight path and their road becomes, as it were, broken. This is what is called refraction, which I had the honor of discussing with Your Highness for quite a long time, when I explained how rays passing from air into glass, and likewise the other way, suffer a refraction.

II. Now since the ether and the air are also two different media, when a ray passes from the ether into the air, it must necessarily undergo some refraction.

So let the arc of this circle AMB (Figure 124) be the top edge of our atmosphere. If a ray of light MS from the ether falls on it at M, it will not continue on its way along the same straight line MN. Instead, on entering the air, it will take another route MR, a little different from MN, and the angle NMR is called the angle of refraction, or simply the refraction.

III. I have already remarked that this refraction is greater the more obliquely the ray SM falls on the surface of the atmosphere, that is, the smaller or more acute the angle BMS is. For if the ray SM fell perpendicularly on the surface of the atmosphere, so that the angle BMS was a right angle, there would be no refraction at all, but the ray would continue on its way along the same straight line. This rule is general for all refractions, whatever the nature of the two media the rays pass through.

IV. Let the arc of a circle AOB (Figure 125) represent the earth's surface, and let the arc EMF mark the edge of the atmosphere. If we draw at O the line OMV touching the earth's surface at O, it will be horizontal. Now suppose the sun is still below the horizon at S, so that it would still be invisible to us, since none of its rays could reach us in a straight line, and the ray SM, continued in a straight line, would pass above us at N. But since it falls on the atmosphere at M, and very obliquely, the angle FMS being very small, it will suffer a fairly considerable refraction there. Instead of passing through N, it may arrive exactly at O, so that the sun is already visible to us even though it is actually still below the horizon, or, what comes to the same thing, below the horizontal line OMV.

V. However, because the ray MO that enters our eyes is horizontal, in our judgment we place the sun in the same direction, and imagine that it is at V, that is, on the horizon, although it is actually below the horizon. Conversely, too, whenever we see the sun or any other star on the horizon, we must judge that it is actually below it, by the angle SMV, which astronomers have observed to be about half a degree, or more exactly 32 minutes.

VI. So in the morning we already see the sun before it reaches our horizon, when it is still depressed below the horizon by an angle of 32 minutes. In the evening it stays in view longer than its true setting, since we still see it until it has gone down to an angle of 32 minutes. The true rising or setting of the sun is when it is actually on the horizon. But when it begins to appear in the morning, or to disappear in the evening, that is the apparent rising or setting.

VII. This refraction of the atmosphere, which makes the apparent rising of the sun come before its true rising, gives us the advantage of enjoying longer days than we would have without this effect of the atmosphere. So there is the explanation of a very important phenomenon.

Letter 234: Apparent Height and the Table of Refractions

_May 1762_.

Your Highness has just understood a very singular effect of our atmosphere, by which we see the sun and all the other heavenly bodies on the horizon when they are actually still sunk below it, and would be absolutely invisible to us without the refraction of the atmosphere. It is also for the same reason that the sun, like all the stars, always appears higher above the horizon than it actually is. That is why we must carefully distinguish the apparent height of a star from its true height, at which it would appear if there were no atmosphere. I will set this in its full light.

I. Let the arc AOB (Figure 126) be a part of the earth's surface, and O the place where we are. Through it draw a straight line HOR touching the earth's surface, and this line HOR will show us the true horizon. Or else raise at O, vertically, the straight line OZ, which is the same as a thread hung up with a weight on it. This line is here called vertical, and the point of the sky Z where it ends bears the name zenith. Now this line OZ is perpendicular to the horizontal HOR, so that when one is known, the other can easily be determined.

II. That being done, suppose a star at S (Figure 127). If there were no atmosphere, the ray SMO would pass in a straight line to the eye at O, and we would see the star in the same direction OMS in which it actually lies, or in other words we would see it in its true place. Then we measure the angle SOR that the ray SO makes with the horizon OR, and this angle is called the height of the star, or its elevation above the horizon. Or else we measure the angle SOZ that the ray SO makes with the vertical line OZ, directed toward the zenith. And since the angle ZOR is a right angle, or 90 degrees, we have only to subtract the angle SOZ from 90 degrees to get the angle SOR, which gives the true height of the star.

III. Now let's take account of the atmosphere, which I suppose to be bounded by the arc HDNMR. I notice first of all that the earlier ray of the star, SM, on entering the atmosphere at M, does not continue on its way to the eye at O. Because of refraction, it takes another course, such as MP, and therefore does not enter our eyes. So if the star sent only this single ray SM toward the earth, it would be absolutely invisible to us. But we must remember that every luminous point shoots out its rays in all directions, and all of space is filled with them.

IV. Among all the other rays there will therefore be some one, such as SN, which up above, in the atmosphere at N, is broken or refracted in such a way that its continuation NO passes precisely to the eye O. The refracted ray NO is therefore not in a straight line with the ray SM. And if we continue NO toward s, the continuation Ns makes an angle with the ray NS, namely the angle SNs, which is the same one that is called the refraction, and which is greater the more acute the angle SNR is, the angle at which the ray SN enters the atmosphere, as I remarked in the preceding letter.

V. Consequently it is now the ray NO that paints the image of the star S in our eyes and makes it visible to us. And since this ray comes to us in the direction NO, just as if the star were there, we also judge the star to be located in the direction NO, or in its continuation somewhere at s. This place s being different from the true place S, we call s the apparent place of the star, which must be carefully distinguished from the true place S, where we would see the star if there were no atmosphere.

VI. Now, since we see the star by the ray NO, the angle NOR that this ray NO makes with the horizon is the apparent height of the star. When we measure the angle NOR with instruments made for this operation, we say we have found the apparent height of the star, the true height being, as we have just seen, the angle ROS.

VII. From this it is evident that the apparent height RON is greater than the true height ROM, so that the stars look higher above the horizon to us than they actually are, and this happens for the same reason that the stars already appear on the horizon when they are still below it. Now the amount by which the apparent height exceeds the true one is the angle MON, which does not differ from the angle SNs that is called the refraction. For although the angle SNs, being the exterior angle of the triangle SNO, is equal to the two opposite interior angles SON and OSN taken together, we must consider that because of the terrible distance of the stars, the lines OS and NS are parallel, and consequently the angle OSN vanishes. So the angle SON is almost equal to the angle of refraction SNs.

VIII. Having found the apparent height of a star, we must therefore subtract the refraction from it to get its true height, which cannot be known in any way other than this. For this purpose astronomers have taken great pains to discover exactly the refraction that must be subtracted from each apparent height, or the amount by which the apparent place of the star must be lowered further to get its true one.

IX. After a long series of observations, they finally drew up a table called the table of refraction, which marks for each apparent height the refraction, or the angle that must be subtracted from it. So when the apparent height is zero, or when the star appears on the horizon, the refraction is 32 minutes, by which the star must be lowered below the horizon. But if the star appears raised above the horizon by even a little, the refraction becomes much smaller. At the height of 15 degrees the refraction is only 4 minutes. At the height of 40 degrees it is only one minute. And for greater heights the refraction grows smaller and smaller, until it vanishes entirely at the height of 90 degrees.

X. That happens when a star is seen in the zenith itself, for then its height is 90 degrees and the true height is the same as the apparent one. In other words, we can be sure that a star we see in the zenith is actually there, and that the refraction of the atmosphere does not change its place, as it does in all other positions.
